


 RELATIONS OF THE WORLD, AND THE RELIGIONS OBSERVED IN ALL AGES AND PLACES DISCOVERED, FROM  THE CREATION VNTO THIS PRESENT. Of the first beginnings of the World, and Religion: and of the Regions and Religions of BABYLONIA, ASSYRIA, SYRIA, PHOENICIA,  and PALESTINA. THE FIRST BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of GOD, one in Nature,(...) Gal. 4.8. Deus vnus est (...), trinus (...), Zan. de 3. ^l. p. 4. l. 1. cap. 3. three in Persons, the FATHER, SONNE, and HOLY GHOST.
 THEHomer, Virgil, Ouid, etc. Poets were wont to lay the Foundations and First Beginnings of their Poeticall Fabrikes, with invocation of their gods and Muses: although those workes were sutable to such worke-men, who according to their names were Makers, of those both Poems and gods. I, as farre short of their learning, as beyond them in the scope of my desires, would so farre imitate their manner, in this matter which I intend; that although I enuy not to some their foolish  claime of that Poeticall (not Propheticall) inheritance, to make my Maker: and my matter as in a Historie (not a Poeme) must be made to my hands: Yet in a Historie of Religion, which hath or should haue GOD to be the Alpha and Omega;Apoc. 1.8. the Efficient, from whom; the End, to whom it proceedeth: the Matter of whom, the Forme by whom and whose direction, it entreateth; I could not but make a Religion to begin this discourse of Religion at him; this being the way, which all men take, to come to him. First therefore, I beseech him, that is the First and Last, the Eternall Father, in the name of his Beloued and Onely Sonne, by the light of his Holy and  All seeing Spirit, to guide mee in this Perambulation of the World, so to take view of the Times, Places, and Customes therein, as may testifie my religious bond to him, whose I am, and whom I serue: and the seruice I owe vnto his Church, if at least this my Mite may be seruiceable
 to the least of the least therein; that as he is in himselfe the Beginning and Ending, so he would be, in some measure, of this Worke the Author and Finisher; that in the beholding this Mappe of so infinitely diuersified Superstitions, we may be more thankefull for, and more zealous of, that true and onely Religion, which Christ by his Bloud hath procured, by his Word reuealed, by his Spirit sealed; and will reward eternally in the Heauens. And hereto let all Christian Readers say with me Amen, to him which isApoc. 3.14. Amen, that Witnesse faithfull and true, that forsaking all the by-wayes which this Labyrinth exhibiteth, we may receiue his Witnesse as faithfull and true Disciples, that follow the Lambe whithersoeuer hee goeth, and will not heare the voice of strangers.2. Cor. 12.11.
In the next place, I hold it not vnfit briefly to expresse somewhat of him, which indeed and throughly can neuer be expressed. For the wisest of the Prophets hath said of him and  to him, that the1. King. 8.27. Heauens and Heauens of Heauens, are not able to containe him: and the chiefe, or at least he which was not inferiour to the chiefe of the Apostles, as rauished with such a height, and swallowed in such a depth, cryed,Rom. 11.33. O Altitudo, O the deepnesse of the riches, both of the wisdome and knowledge of God! how vnsearchable are his iudgements, and his wayes past finding out? As for my selfe, I may most fitly borrow the words of AGVR,Prou. 30.2. Verse 3, 4. Verse 5. Surely I am more foolish than any man, and haue not the vnderstanding of a man in me: For I haue not learned wisdome, nor attayned to the knowledge of holy things. Yea, indeed, Who hath ascended vp to Heauen, and descended? Who hath gathered the Winde in his fist? Who hath bound the Waters in a Garment? Who hath established all the ends of the World? What is his name, and what is his Sonnes name, if thou canst tell? Tell this Mysterie, we cannot. And yet so farre as  he hath told vs by his Word and Workes, we may. Of the one the next words testifie: Euery word of God is pure: Of the other else-where,Psal. 19.1. The Heauens declare the glory ofRom. 1.20. God: and, The inuisible things of him, that is, his eternall Power and God-head, are seene by the Creation of the World being considered in his workes.Acts 14.17. God hath not (therefore) left himselfe without witnesse, who besides the testimonie of Nature, written in our hearts, hath added those of the Scripture and of the Creature, that this three-fold Cord might not be easily broken, and by the mouth of two or three Witnesses, we might learne plainly that he is, and in some measure what hee is.
That there is a GOD: Heauen and Earth, Angels and Deuils, Man and Beast, Reason and Sense, Greeke and Barbarian, Science in the most, in the rest conscience (as a thousand Witnesses)  all that wee see, and which wee see not, say and proclaime, that all may see, and in manner palpably feele his present Deitie; inActs 17.28. whom wee liue, mooue, and haue our beeing.D. Kings Lect. in Ion. 4. (...). Hiero. ille Cicer. Nat. Deor. lib. 1. Nomen quia dat notitiam. Deus est nomen suum, and nomen eius ipse est: Drus. pret. lib. 1. This is a common notion, and impression, sealed vp in the minde of euery man: a remnant of integritie after the fall of Adam, a substance or blessing in the dead Elme, sparkles of fire raked vp vnder the ashes, which cannot dye whiles the soule liueth. What a one hee is; is not so deeply ingrauen in Nature whose Owlish eyes are dazeled with the brightnesse of this light: But when here we might renue the question: What is his name, and what is his Sonnes name? hee himselfe answereth in Scripture by attributing to himselfe such names, whereby we may know him as the Creator from all Creatures, as the true GOD from all false gods: and so farre as is meete and necessary to ou^ saluation. Hee then that dwelleth in  light inaccessible, whom no man hath seene, nor can see1. Io. 3.2. as he is, in this our infancie, hath manifested himselfe vnto vs,1. Co. 13.12. as through a Glasse darkely, that wee may with Moses haue some glancingExod. 34.6. view of his hinder parts.
These Names and diuine Attributes I meane, not with large explications here to expresse, as not so fitting my abilitie or purpose, and being by othersDionys. de Diuinis nomin. P. Galatin. de Arcanis. l. 3. Zanchius de Nat. Dei. l. 1. ^ullinger. de Origine erroris, lib. 1. Ar. Montanus. learnedly done already: Yet, to say a little, where the tongues of Men and Angels cannot say enough; the Scripture attributeth, or He in Scripture attributeth to Himselfe, Names, in regard both of Author and Obiect, Diuine, sometimes (as they terme it) in theAs true, wise, liuing, etc. concret; sometimes in theAs truth, wisdome, life, etc. abstract; the the first signifying his Perfect subsistence; the other his Supersubsisting perfection; those more  fitted to our capacitie; these to his diuinitie: who eternally and essentially is, whatsoeuer hee is said to be, or in himselfe to haue. And, as lines infinitely differing in their Circumference, are one in the Centre, and the Sunne-beames dispersed through the World, are in the Sunne but one; and the same neither beames nor lines, but farre more excellent in that indiuisible and most perfect Vnitie: so, and more then so, all perfections of the creatures, are in the Creator more defecated and perfect; yea, one perfection and superexcellent Excellencie; and thisIn which sense, rismegist. affi^^eth, Deus nihil est omnium, Deus est omnia: Deus nomen nullum habet: Deus habet omne nomen, Vid. Mars. Ficin. in Dionys. de D. N. Dionysius also cals him, Vnitas vnitatis omnis vnifica, super essentialis essentia, Intellectus nequaquam intelligibilis, etc. Empedocles described him a Sphere, whose Centre is euery where, the Circumference no where, Sphinx. Heidfeldi. one himselfe, euery way infinite and incomprehensible; nothing beeing in him either by participation, or as a qualitie, or as a naturall facultie, or as a mutable passion, or in such sort simply, as we (whose vnderstandings are limited in their finite bounds, and for that cause receiuing in a finite measure, conceiuing in a finite manner) doe or can comprehend. Who can take  vp the Ocean in a spoone? and yet these are both finite, and hold neerer proporrion then the great Creator, and the greatest of creatures. Yet is this glimpse of this bright shining
 Sunne comfortable thorow this chinke and Key-hole of our bodily prison, and euen the taste of these Delicacies, more then sweet and delectable.
Some of these names are attributed to him in regard of his beeingNomina (...) apud Heb. tria sunt, (...) Drus. Tetragram. cap. 1. in it selfe considered, as Iehouah, Iah, Eheie: and some in regard of the persons which all haue that one beeing, and euery of which haue all that being, whichHook. Eccles. Polit. lib. 5. Iustin. resp. ad Orthod. quaest. 137. (...). Exemplum producit, Adami, Euae, Sethi, eandem essentiam hobentium humanam, existendi autem modum diuersum, a terra, costa, semine. in it selfe is individually one: and their seuerall manners of hauing it; is that which is called their personall proprietie and incommunicable. Such a name (say some) is ElohimDrusius taxeth Zanch. for intitling his worke, De 3. Elohim, as improperly, saith he, as De tribus dijs. applyed to the Father, Sonne, and Holy-Ghost, in signification Mightie, in forme plurall. Some of these names are such as are communicated to creatures also, but with this difference, that those which in the creature are borrowed, imperfect,  accidentall; are in him Nature, Perfection, Substance. Some are absolutely considered as hee is GOD blessed for euer; some relatiuely with respect vnto his creatures. Some againeEnuntiatio de Creatore per verba negatiua est vera, per affirmatiua autem partim in aequiuocatione, partim in imperfectione. R. Moses Moreh. lib. 1. 57. affirmationes periculosae. are negatiuely spoken, others affirmatiuely: some properly, others by a figure. But this is indeed a thorny way,De Deo etiam vera loqui periculosum. Arnob. in Psal. 91. August. de Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 3. of which we may say with Augustine, Nothing is missed more dangerously, nothing sought more laboriously, nothing found more profitably. Euen the Angelicall Seraphins had theirEsa. 6.2. sixe wings, whereof two serued to execute their prompt obedience; two couered their feet, because of mans weaknesse not able to comprehend their glorie; and yet they themselues thus glorious, with two other wings couered their face, as not able to endure the brightnesse of a greater glorie. Let vs then be wise, but toRom. 12 3. (...). sobrietie. Let vs goe to the Lambe to vnclaspe this sealed Booke. For in him all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge are  hid. Let vs so know as we may be knowne, and soPhil. 3.10. comprehend as we may rather bee comprehended. Let vs feare, loue, beleeue, and serue him: and then GOD willPsal. 25.9. teach the humble his way, andIoh. 7.17. and 17.3. They which will doe his will, shall know of his doctrine. This is our way to eternall life, thus to know him, and whom he hath sent, Iesus Christ: if namely we so learneEphes. 4.21. Christ, as the Truth is in Iesus, if we1. Cor. 3.18. become fooles that we may be wise, and putting off the old man, be renued in the spirit of our minds, and put on the new man which after GOD is shapen in righteousnesse and true holinesse. Otherwise, we1. Cor. 8.2. know nothing as we ought to know; otherwise, we know nothing more, nor so much as the Deuils know.Prou. 1.7. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of this wisedome. And for this cause hath he called himselfe, and proclaimed those his Names,Exod. 34.6. IEHOVA, Iehoua, strong, mercifull, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and truth, etc. and  the like in other places; not that we may know to know, (a foolish curiositie) but that hauing such light, we may beleeue and walke in the light, that we may be children of the light. Iehoua (if we may so name it) the most essentiall (and after the Iewish tradition, ineffable)Of this name Iehoua, see Drutij Tetragram. Ar. Montan. ante Naturae histor. pag. 37. and Pet. Galat. lib. 2. Drusius thinkes that Galatinus was the first Author of this pronuntiation Iehoua; Castalion writeth it Ioua: the most both Iewes and Christians before forbare to name it: The Masscrites ascribed to it no points of it owne, but of Adonai, and when Adonai goeth before or after it of Elohim. It is holden, that onely the High-Priest, and that in the Temple, and on the day of Expiation might pronounce it, which to a priuate man, the Iewes esteemed the losse of eternall life. Steuchus thinketh that none can interpret it, and Paulus Burgensis, that none can translate it. The Chaldaens, Arabians, Graecians, Latines, and the New Testament it selfe, vse instead thereof, The Lord. Montanus readeth it Iehueh; and affirmeth that it was knowne both to the common Israelites, and to the neighbouring Nations, etc. but see themselues: I name it after the moderne vse for distinction. Zanchy and Gyraldus obserue, that the name of God in all Nations is Tetragrammaton of foure letters. In Dutch and English, they therefore double the last consonant, and learned Master Selden interpreteth the Pythagorian oath, (...), by Tetragrammaton, de D. Syris. Vid. R. Mos. lib. 1. cap. 60. P. Ric. ad praec. aff. 20. Reuchlin de verbo mirif. lib 2. name of GOD, is not therefore onely reuealed vnto vs, that we may know him in himselfe and of himselfe to beeHeb. 13.8. Yesterday, to day, and the sameApoc. 1.8. for euer, which is, which was, which is to come: but also as the Creator, of whom, in whom, and for whom are all things: and as the Redeemer, which is knowne by his Name Iehoua (as himselfeExod. 6.3. interpreteth it) by giuing a reall being, and accomplishment to his promises. In which one name (as in others of like signification) is expressed the Simplicitie, Immutabilitie, Infinitenesse, Blessednesse, Eternitie, Life, Perfection, and other Attributes of GOD. When he calleth himselfe Strong, therein is declared  his almighty power, whether we vnderstand it actually in producing and preseruing all things in Heauen and earth; or absolutely, whereby he is able to doe euen those things, which in his wisedome he doth not; whereby he is able to doe all things which eitherQuae contradictionem implicant sub diuina omnipotentia non continentur. Non pro defectu potentiae, sed quia non possunt habere rat^onem patibilis vel possibilis. Conuenientius dicitur, quod ea non possunt fieri, quam ^uod Deus non possit facere. Ap. 1. q. 25. art. 3. and d. in themselues (as implying contradiction) or with him (as imperfections) are not impossible, both those kinds not excluding, but concluding the power of GOD, which because he is Almightie,2. Tim 2.12. cannot lie or denie himselfe.
What should I speake of his Wisedome, whereby all things are open in his sight, both himselfe, and his creatures, past, present, or to come, and that not as past or future, but in one, eternall, perfect, certaine, immediate, act of knowledge, which in regard of second causes are necessary or contingent, or in effect but meerely possible, and neuer actually subsisting? Truth is


 in him as a roote, from whence it is first in the being; next in the vnderstanding; thirdly, in the writing or saying of the creature. True he is in himselfe, in his workes ordinary, and extraordinary, and in his Word reuealed by the Prophets and Apostles. What should I adde of his goodnesse, grace, loue, Mercie, Iustice, and other his Attributes and names not yet mentioned? as Adonai, which signifieth the dominion of GOD due to him, by Creation, by purchase, by mutuall couenant: Saddai, which signifieth his All-sufficiencie, and others. Yea in one Chapter^al l. 2 c. (...) Petrus Galatinus rehearseth threescore and twelue names of GOD out of the Rabbines workes, multiplyed and diuersified in tenne sorts, which make in all seuen hundred and twenty names. To dilate of these at large would aske so many large Commentaries, and yet euen then should we still find this GOD incomprehensible; of whom we may, in respect  of our capacitie, rather say what he is not, then what he is; whose goodnesse is not to bee distinguished by qualitie, or his greatnesse discerned by quantitie, or his eternitie measured by ^ime, or his presence bounded by place:(...) of whom all things are to bee conceiued,^^^c^uid e^^^ (...) ^u^eris, vim al qua^ ipsius m^gis and v^rt^tem, quam ip^um expl ca^eris. Quid enim dignum de en aut dicas, aut sentias, qui omn bus and sermonibus and sensibus maior est? Tertul. de Trin p 598. Quatuor a Deo remouenda, Corpor^itas, mutabilitas, priuat^o, and assimilatio ad Creaturas. R. Mos. Moreh. l. 1. 54. and 57. tanquam de Rege diceretur hab^nte milli^^ mille tal^nt ^a^ri, quod haberet centum talenta argenti. beyond whatsoeuer we can conceiue.
The Persons which communicate in this Diuine Nature, are threeD^u^ vn^s in Tr^nitate, tr^nus in vi^itate. Arnob. in Psal. 145.: This is their owne witnesse of themselues; There are three which beare record in Heauen, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. This mystery was manifested in theMat. 3. baptisme of Christ, and in our Baptisme in the name of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost. The Angels vnto this glorious TrinitieEsay 6. Zanch. de 3. Elohim haec fuse. sing their Holy, Holy, Holy: the Scripture it selfe applying that which there may be interpreted of the Father, both to the Sonne, Ioh. 12.41. and to the Spirit, Act.  28.25. These with other places doe also signifie their personall distinction. The Creation was not onely the Fathers worke, but also of the other Persons, as appeareth by that Nowne plurall, ioyned to a Verbe singular, in the first word of Moses, and other like plurall appellations, Es. 44.24. and Es. 54.5. 2. Sam. 7.23. and many such places. The Apostles apply the couenant, worship, and workes of GOD mentioned in the Old Testament, To the Sonne, and Holy Ghost in the New, neither can the one be the Sonne, or the other the Spirit of GOD, naturally and in proper manner of speech, but they must also subsist in the same Nature with the Father, which being infinite, spirituall, immutable, can be but one, which must wholly, or not at all, be communicated. In a word, the equalitie, the names, the properties, the works, the worship peculiar to GOD, are applyed to the Sonne and Holy Ghost, equally with the Father.  Which they that list, may learne in such as especially treat of this subiect: where this mysterie of the Trinitie is auerred against all Heretikes, Iewes, and Infidels: Yea, by someMorn. de ver, C.R. F. Patric. P. Gal. l. 12 alijque ^l^r^mi. also, out of their owne authentike Authors, whether they receiue Scriptures, Rabbins, Philosophers, or any other. I intend onely to anoint the doore-posts of this house with this Discourse, that I may make a fitter entry thereinto, leauing the fuller handling of this mysterie, to such as purposely frame their whole Edifice with large Common-places hereof; which yet alway must be more certainely receiued by Faith, then conceiued by reason: according to that of IVSTIN MARTYR, Vnitas in Trinitate intelligitur, and Trinitas in Vnitate noscitur: id vero quomodo fiat, nec alios scrutari velim, nec ipse mihi possumIustin (...). satisfacere. Thinke of(...). Nazian. one, a threefold light will dazell thee; distinguish into three, and an infinite Vnitie will  swallow thee. Vnus, and si dici debet, Vnissimus, saithBern. ad Eugeni. Bernard.
Hauing thus with trembling hand written of that dreadfull Mysterie of the Trinitie, of which we may say, Cum dicitur, Non dicitur: It is not told with telling, nor can be described by description; The next to be considered are the Works of GOD, which are either inward and immanent, or outward and transient. The inward are eternall and vnchangeable, indeed no other but himselfe, although accounted and called workes, in regard of their effects in the World, and of our conceiuing. ForD. Abbot. par. ^. Defen. pag. 9. Zanc^. de N.D. lib. 5. cap. 1. all the proprieties of GOD are infinite, as they are immanent in himselfe, yet in their transitiue and forren effects are stinted and limitted to the modell and state of the Creature, wherein the same effects are wrought. Such an immanent worke we conceiue, and name thatTreleat. Zanch. de Na. D. l. 5. c. 1. 2. Decree of GOD touching the Creation of the World,  with his prouident disposing all and euery part thereof, according to the Counsel of his own will, and especially touching the reasonable creatures, Angels and Men, in respect of their eternall state in Saluation or Damnation. The outward works of GOD are, in regard of Nature, Creation and Prouidence: in regard of Grace, Redemption and Saluation, in the fulnesse of time performed by our Emanuel, GOD manifested in the flesh, true GOD and perfect Man, in the Vnitie of one Person, without(...). confusion, conuersion, or separation.1. Ioh. 5.20. This is verie GOD and life eternall, IESVS CHRIST, the Sonne of GOD, our Lord, which was conceiued by the HOLY GHOST, borne of the Virgin MARY, suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, who was crucified, dead and buried; descended into Hell: rose againe the third day; he ascended into Heauen; where he sitteth at the right hand of GOD the Father Almightie,  from whence he shall come to iudge the quicke and dead. And to such as are sonnes,Gal. 4.6. GOD
 doth also send the Spirit of his Sonne, to renue and sanctifie them as children of the Father, members of the Sonne, Temples of the Spirit, that they, euen all the Elect, may be one holy Catholike Church, enioying the vnspeakeable priuiledges and heauenly prerogatiues of the Communion of Saints, the Forgiuenesse of Sinnes, the Resurrection of the Body, and Euerlasting Life. Euen so, come LORD IESVS.


CHAP. II. Of the creation of the World.

THey which would without danger behold the Eclipse of the Sunne, vse not to fixe their eyes directly vpon that bright eye of the World, (although by this case darkned) but in water behold the same with more case and lesse perill. How much fitter is it likewise for our tender eyes in beholding the light of that Light,Iam. 1.17. The Father of lights,1. Joh. 1.5. Qui scrutatur Maiestatem, opprimetur a gloria. in whom is no darknesse, to diuert our eyes from that brightnesse of glory, and behold him (as wee can) in his workes? The first of which in execution, was the creation of the World, plainly described by Moses, in the booke of Genesis, both for the Author, matter, manner, and other circumstances; Reason it selfe thus farre subscribing, as appeareth in her Schollers, (the most of the Heathens  and Philosophers in all ages) That this World was made by a greater then the World. In prouing this, or illustrating the other, a large field of discourse might be ministred: neither doe I know any thing, wherein a man may more improue the reuenewes of his learning, or make greater shew with a little, decking and pruning himselfe, like Aesops Iay,Ne si sorte suas repetitum venerit ^lim, Grex auium plumas, etc. or Horace his Chough, with borrowed feathers; than in this matter of the Creation, written of (after their manner) by so many, Iewes, Ethnickes, Heretikes, and Orthodoxe Christians. For my part it shall be sufficient to write a little, setting downe so much of the substance of this subiect, as may make more plaine way, and easier introduction, into our ensuing History: leauing such as are more studious of this knowledge, to those which haue purposely handled this argument, with Commentaries vpon Moses Text: of which, besides many moderne Writers  (some of which haue almost oppressed the Presse with their huge Volumes) there are diuers of the Primitiue, middle, and decayed times of the Church: a cloud indeed of Authors, both for their number, and the varietie of their opinions, the most of them couering, rather then discouering that Truth (which can bee but one) and more to beleeued in their confuting others, then prouing their owne assertions. Their store through this disagreeing is become a sore, and burthen, whiles we must consult with many, and dare promise to our selues no surer footing: yet cleauing as fast as we can to the letter, imploring the assistance of the Creators Spirit, let vs draw as neere as we may to the sense of Moses words, the beginning whereof is,Gen. 1.1. In the beginning GOD created the Heauen and the Earth. Wherein (to omit the endlesse and diuers interpretations of others, obtruding allegoricall, anagogicall, mysticall senses  on the letter) is expressed the Author of this worke to be GOD, Elohim; which word, as is said, is of the plurall number, insinuating the holy Trinitie; the Father as the Fountaine of all goodnesse, the Sonne as the Wisdome of the Father, the holy Ghost as the power of the Father and the Sonne, concurring in this worke. The action is creating or making ofNothing but Nothing had the Lord Almighty, Wherof, wherewith, whereby to build this Citie. Du Bart. E nulla vel prima vel secunda materia, quae omni fact^oni, fabr^cationi, generationi, opificio, artificio, subijcitur Creatio fit etiam citra omne temporis momentum, quippe a virtute infinita. Iul. Scal Ex. 6. Hebraei statuunt discrimen inter Creare, formare and facere, 1. ex nihilo facere, 2. enti Cre^to formam inducere, 3. membra singula ordinare: quae tamen indiscriminatim ponuntur. Es. 43.7. Oecolamp. in G. nothing, to which is required a power supernaturall and infinite. The Time was the(...). Basil. hom. 1. in principio temporis, id est, simul cum tempore. Eadem Ioan. Philoponus in Hexam. ap. Photium 240. (...), etc. Tempus non tam mensura metus quam (...) permanentia and duratio corporum rerumque corporearam: aliorum est ^on (...) quasi (...). Hermes sic suum instituit ordinem, Deus, aeon, mundus, tempus generatio. Deus aeona facit, aeon mundum, mundus Tempus, and tempus generationem. Thomas ait, simul cum tempore. Quatuor enim ponuntur simul creata, s. coelum Empyreum, materea corporalis, quae nomine terrae intelligitur, Tempus and Naturae Angelica. Sum. p. 1. q. 47. art. 1. Fagius vertit, Quum Deus principio coelum and terram creauit, erat terra inanis and vacua. Nam simpliciter (ait) hoc voluit Moses non statim ab initio expolitum fuisse mundum, vt hodie cernitur, sed inane coeli and terrae chaos fuisse creatum. beginning of time, when as before there had neither been Time, nor any other Creature.
The worke is called Heauen and Earth; whichMerula and Pererius interpretationem hanc Chrysostomo tribuunt. some interpret all this bodily world heere propounded in the summe, and after distinguished in parcells, according to the sixe dayes seuerall workes. Some vnderstand thereby theCaluin. in Gen. Mu^ster, Lu^her, Artopaeus and Fag. ap. Marlorat. R. Nathmanni intelligit per coelum and terrae materiam tenuissimani and impalpabilem diuerse tamen naturae, ita vt coelum coelestis, terra terrestris fuerit. Iunius interpretatur extimum illum huius vniuersitatis ambitum, cum super coe^esti^us incolis ill^us and spiritualibus formis atque intelligentijs, tum materiam illam primam ex qua terra ac res omnes coelestes ac terrestres factae sunt. De triplici Coelo vid. Ar. M^ntan. Nature obseruat. First matter; which othersTheodoret, Beda, Strabus, Alcuinus, Lyra, and plerique scholastici. apply only to the word Earth, expounding Heauen to be that, which is called Empyreum, including also the  spirituall and super-celestiall inhabitants. Againe, others, whom I willingly follow,Zanch. de oper. Dei pers 1. l. 1. c. 2. Burgens. Polanus, Bucanus, etc. Paul. Merula Cosmogr. part. 1. l. 1. Perer. in Gen. interprets by Heauen, the heauenly bodies then made: and after perfected with light and motion; by Earth, the element of the Earth. extend

 the word Heauen to a larger signification, therein comprehending those three Heauens, which the Seriptures mention: (one whereof is this lower, where the birds of the Heauen doe flye, reaching from the Earth to the Sphere of the Moone: the second, the visible Planets and fixed Starres, with the first Moueable: the third, called the Heauen of Heauens, the third Heauen and Paradise of GOD) together with all the Host of them. By Earth, they vnderstand this Globe, consisting of Sea and Land, with all the creatures therein. The first Verse they hold to be a generall proposition of the Creation of all Creatures,Col. 1.16. visible and inuisible, perfected inGen. 2.1 Exod. 20.11. Iob 38.7. sixe dayes; as many places of Scripture testifie: which as concerning the visible, Moses handleth after particularly, largely, and plainly, contenting himselfe with briefe mention of those inuisible creatures, bothGen. 32.1. good andGen. 3.1. bad, as occasion is offered in the following  parts of his Historie. In the present,Pet. Martyr. in Gen: he omitteth the particular description of their Creation, lest some (as Iewes and Heretikes haue done) should take occasion to attribute the Creation to Angels, as assistants: or should, by the excellencie of that Nature, depainted in due colours, be carryed to worshipping of Angels: a superstition which men haue embraced, towards the visible creatures, farre in feriour both to Angels and themselues.
Moses proceedeth therefore to the description of the first matter, and the creatures thereof framed and formed. For touching those inuisible creatures, both the Angels and their heauenly habitation, howsoeuer they are circumscribed, and haue their proper and most perfect substance, yet according to the interpretation of Diuine,Zach. de operib. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4. their nature differeth from that of other creatures, celestiall or terrestriall, as not being made of that first matter, whereof these  consist. Let vs therefore labour rather to be like the Angels in grace, that we may be like vnto them in glory, than prie too curiously into theirAs Dionys. and those which Tritemius mentioneth, de Intelligent. coelest. which number 7. Orifiel, Anael, Zachariel. Raphael, Samael, Gabriel, Michael, all which in course and succession gouerne the world. Each 354. years and 4. months, etc. Nature (to our vnderstandings in manner supernaturall) and endeauour more, in heeding the way which leadeth to that Heauen of the Blessed, than busie our wits too busily in describing or describing it. Onely thus much wee may obserue thereof, that it is beyond all reach of our obseruation: in regard of substance not subiect to corruption, alteration, passion, motion: in quantitie,Ioh. 14.2. many dwelling places, most spacious and ample; in quality, a Paradise, faire, shining, delightsome, wherein no euill can be present or imminent; no good thing absent; a meere transcendent, which eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, nor the heart of man can conceiue. Where theApoc. 21.3. Tabernacle of GOD shall be with men, and he dwell with them, and shall be1. Cor. 15.28. all in all vnto them; where the pure in heart shall  see him, and euen our bodily eyes shall behold that most glorious of creatures, the Sunne of righteousnesse, and Sonne of GOD, Christ Iesus.
Embracing these things with Hope, let vs returne to Moses his description of the sensible World: who sheweth, that that Heauen and Earth, which now wee see, were in the beginning, or first degree of their being, an Earth without forme and void, a darkned depth and waters: a matter of no matter, and a forme without forme; a rude and indigested Chaos, or confusion of matters, rather to beHebr. 11.3. beleeued than comprehended of vs. This is the second naturall beginning. For, after the expressing of the matter, followeth that which Philosophers call a second natural Principle,Arist Phys. l 1. Iun. praef. in Gen. Priuation, the want of that forme, of which this matter was capable, which is accidentally a naturall principle, required in regard of generation, not of constitution,  heere described by that part next vs, Earth, which was without forme, as is said, and void. This was the internall constitution: the externall was, darknesse vpon the face of the deepe.By darknesse and deep, Philoponus vnderst^ndeth the Aire and Water ap. Phot. 240 Which Deepe compriseth both the Earth before mentioned, and the visible Heauens also, called a D^pth, as to our capacitie infinite, and pliant to the Almightie hand of the Creator: called also Waters,Gibbins on Genes. not becaus^ (...) was perfect waters, which was yet confused, but because of a certaine resemblance (...) only in the vniformity thereof, but also of that want of stability, whereby it could not abide together, but as the Spirit of GOD moued vpon these waters, to sustaine them; andHier. l. trad. Hebr. Trem. and Iun. Basil. hom. 2. ex Ephrem. Syro. as the Hen sitteth on her egges to cherish and quicken, as Hierome interpreteth the word, so to maintaine, and by his mightie power to bring the same into this naturall order. Heere therefore is the third beginning or Principle in Nature, That  forme, which the Spirit of God, the third person in Trinitie, (not ayre or wind, asMerc. de Fab. mundi, and ante eum Tertul. ad Hermog. Theod. q. 8. in Gen. Caietan. de Angelis interpretatur R. Mos. ben. Maim. Mor. Neb. l. 1. c. 39. is of that mind: but l. 2. c. 31. he findeth the foure elements in these foure words heere mentioned: Earth, Spirit, Dee^e, and Darknesse. some conceiue, being things which yet were not themselues formed) by that action framed it vnto, and after more particularly effected.
This interpretation of the Spirit mouing vpon the Waters, agreeth with that opinion which some attribute to the Stoikes. That all things are procreated and gouerned by one Spirit, Which Democritus called the soule of the world, Hermes and Zoroaster, and Apollo Delphicus callPatricius numbreth the linkes of this chaine, in this order: Calor qui in t rra aqua, mist^s est, ab aereo pendet, hic a coelesti, is a sole and astris: hic vero ab Empyreo: Empyreus a luminis calore: hic ab animario: hic ab intellectuali: hic a vitali primario: hic quoque a primario essentiali: hic itidem ab ideali, qui in Deo habitat and a Deo patre est deriuatus. Pancos. l. 5. The int^rpretation of this mystical^ Phylosophie yee may borrow of himselfe in his Panaug. Panarc. Pamsyc. Pancos. more agreeing with Zoroaster, Hermes, and some Platonikes, then the Scriptures, which shew that all things were immediatly created in the beginning by God. Fire, the maker, quickner, and preseruer of all things; and Virgill most elegantly and diuinely singeth, seeming to paraphrase on Moses words:


Virg. Aeneid, l. 6. on which words Seruius commenteth, Deus est quidam diuinus spiritus, qui per 4. infusus elementa gignit vniuersa^Principio Coelum, ac Terras, camposque liquentesLucentemque globum Lunae Titaniaque astra,Spiritus intus alit: totamque infusa per artusMe^s agitan molem and magno se corpore miscet.
That is,
Heauen first, and Earth, and Watrie plaines,Bright Moone, of Starres those twinckling traines,The Spirit inly cherisheth, Loues, moues, great body nourisheth;Through all infus'd this All containes.
The first creature which receiued naturall forme was the light, of which GOD said, Let there be light; a lightsome and delightsome subiect of our Discourse, especially hauing lately passed such a confused and darke Chaos. But here (I know not how) that which then lightned the deformed matter of the vnformed World, hath hidden it selfe: someVatab. and Marlorat. in Gen. interpreting this of the Sunne, which they will haue then created; someBas. hex. hom. 6. Greg. Naz. orat. 43. and Nicetas in eum. of an immateriall qualitie, after receiued into the Sunne and Starres; someZanch. Hugo Lumbard. Tostatus, etc. of a cloud formed of the waters, circularly moued, and successiuely lightning either Hemisphere, of which afterwards the Sunne was compact;  from which theyMerul. p. 1. l. 1 c. 4. differ not much, which thinke it the matter of the Sunne, then more diffused and imperfect, as the waters also were earthie, and the Earth fluible, till GOD by a second worke perfected and parted them. And (to let passe them which apply it to Angels or men) othersDamas. de f. orth l. 2 c. 7. Hugo Annot. in Gen. Gr. Nyssen. Iunius, etc. vnderstand it of the fiery Element, the essentiall property of which is to enlighten. Yet are we not here passed all difficulties, whiles someVid. Plutar. de Plac. Philos. l. 2. Patrit. Panang l. 7. and Panc^s. l. 15. and 22. (perhaps not vniustly) would perswade the world that Fire, as it is ordinarily in schooles vnderstood of a sublunary element, is with worse then Promethean theft stolne out of Heauen where it is visible, and imprisoned in this their Elementarie World: whereas Anaxagoras, Thales, Anaximenes, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Plato, Parmenides, Orpheus, Hermes, Zoroaster, Philo, and others, the fathers of the Chaldean, Aegyptian, Iewish, and Graecian Learning, account the(...), cu^us partes condensatae, stellae, aether autem dictus ab (...) to burne, Stoicorum opinionem vid. Aug. de Ciu. Dei l. 8. c. 5. The Sunne saith Philo, is (...), and Zanch. Sol. heb. (...) q. d. ibi ignis: and another, Coelum ig is influens (...) quasi (...) i^ est ignis and aqua Heauens and heauenly  bodies to be Ethereall fire, to which our sense also will easily subscribe. And Patricius affirmeth that Ocellus Lucanus, one of Pythagoras his Schollers, was first Author of that former opinion, from whom Aristotle borrowed it, if it bee not stealth rather, whiles hee concealeth his name. DiuersCa^ian. de sub l. 1. Merula Cos. l. 3. c. 2. Io. Pic. Mirand. de element. c. 3. Tycho Brahe de Cometa 1577. c. vlt. and Kepler de stel. No. c. 19. Valla Fracastorius, Marpurg. Scultetus, etc. Deo Hebr. Dial. 2. Ignis negat antiquis notum elementum, and scite interpretatur Poetarum illud Coeli patrem Aetherem, matrem esse diem vel lucem. late Philosophers also seeme to haue conspired to burne vp that fiery Element, or rather to aduance it aboue this sublunary Region into the Aethereal Throne. Let the Philosophers determine this when they doe other doubts: in meane while let vs, if you please, vnderstand this Light of the Fire, whether Aethereall or Elementarie, or both, or neither, as in diuers respects it may bee. For neither was this Light then (as it seemeth) locally separated from that confused masse, and by expansion (which was the second dayes Worke) eleuated into her naturall place: and after that; it possessed the Sunne, Moone and  Starres, saith our sense, which thence receiueth Light, and there in the Aethereall Region seeth new Starres and superlunarie Comets, compact of Aetherall substance (as the most diligentTych. Bra. l. 1. de N. S^. and 2. de Comet. Kepler. and Bariholinus 4. numerant nouas stellas. vid. and Clau. in Sac. Iosc. and Casman. Ouranograp. and Cosmop. Hipparchi stellam. N. ap. Plin. etc. Obseruers haue recorded) both procreated and perishing: so that that which before was neither Aethereall nor Elementarie, whiles there was neither Aether nor Element perfected, after became Aethereall-Elementarie, as beeing happily the matter of the Sunne and Starres of old, and of these laterSuch as the new Stars. Fire is one of the foure Elements of the World, but not placed beneath the Moone. Patrit. Pancos. l. 1. and 4. hath foure infinite eternall (impious) Elements, Space, Light, Heate, and Moysture. appearances; and also filling the Aethereall World in the higher and lower Regions thereof, both aboue and beneath the Moone, with the Light here mentioned, and that vigorous heat, which as an affect or an effect thereof, procreateth, recreateth and conserueth the creatures of this inferiour World. No maruell, if the Philosophers are still dazeled and darkened in this light, not yet agreeing whether it bee a substance  or qualitie, corporeall or incorporeall; when the Father of Lights himselfe thus conuinceth vs of darknesse; Where is the wayIob 38.19. Lucis Encom. (saith he) where light dwelleth? And, By what way is the light parted? And if we cannot conceiue that which is so euidently seene, and without which nothing is seene and euident: how inaccessible is that Light, wherein the Light of this light dwelleth? Euen this light is more then admirable;Vid. M. Ficin. to. 1. de lum. and Patrit. Panaug. Leonem Heb. 3. dial. de Amore. De luce s^c Cabalistae, Lux in patre luminum vera lux: in filio, splender illu strans: in S. S. ardens fulgor; in Angelis splendens intelligentia and gaudium: in homine ratio: in Coelestibus splend^r visibilis: in igne vitalis vigor: in perspicuis corporibus color: in opacis vis generans: in centro calor exaestuans. Archang. in Cabal. dog. life of the Earth, ornament of the

 Heauens, beautie and smile of the World, eye to our Eyes, ioy of our Hearts: most common, pure and perfect of visible creatures; first borne of this World, and endowed with a double portion of earthly and heauenly Inheritance, shining in both; which contayneth, sustayneth, gathereth seuereth, purgeth, perfecteth, renueth, and preserueth all things; repelling dread, expelling sorrow,Iob 38.13. Shaking the wicked out of the Earth, and lifting vp the hearts of the godly to looke for a greater and more glorious light; greatest instrument of Nature, resemblance of Grace, Type of Glorie, and bright Glasse of the Creators brightnesse.
This Light GOD made by his Word, not vttered with sound of syllables, nor that which in the beginning (and therefore before the beginning) was with GOD, and was GOD: but by his powerfullVerbum Dei voluntas est, opus Dei natura est. Amb Hex. 1. c. 9. Verbum hoc significat imperiu^, decretum and voluntatem Dei efficacem. Perer. effecting (calling things that were not, as though they were) and by his  calling or willing causing them to be, therebyGibbins in Gen. signifying his will as plainly, and effecting it as easily as a word is to a man. That vncreated superessentiall light, the eternall Trinitie, commanded this light to bee, and approued it as good, both in it selfe and to the future Creatures: and separated the same from darknesse (which seemes aSic Basil. hox. hom. 2. and alij: ab Patritius Panaug. l. 4. Distinguit cor pora in lucida and opaca hac serie: a lucido corpore radij, hinc lumen; inde splendor, isthinc nitor: quibus opponit simili ordine corpus opacum tenebras, obscurationem, vmbram, vmbrationem, adumbrationem, etc. and tenebrae, ait, habent actionem, actie a viribus, vires ab essentia, etc. meere priuation and absence of light) disposing them to succeed each other in the Hemisphere; which by what motion or reuolution it was effected the three first dayes, who can determine? Fond it is to reason, a facto ad fieri, from the present order of constitution, to the Principles of that institution of the Creatures, whiles they were yet in making, as Simplicius, and other Philosophers (may I terme them; or Atheists?) haue absurdly done in this and other parts of the Creation. And this was the first dayes Worke.  

THE SECOND DAYES WORKE.
IN the second, GOD said, Let there bee a Firmament. The word Rakiah translated Firmament, signifiethIunius, Pagnine, etc. Fagius habet eo modo quo ^ulaea expanduntur, vel quo argentum malleo diducitur. Sic Mercer in Gen. expansum or expansionem, a stretching out; designing that vast and wide space, wherein are the watery clouds here mentioned, and those lights which follow in the fourteenth Verse, by him placed in expanso: howsoeuer someIun. Merula. Io. Pic. Mirand. vnderstand it only of the Ayre. The separating the waters vnder this Firmament from the waters aboue the Firmament,  someBas. and Amb. in Hex Du Ba^t. Muscul. in Gen. Th. Aquin. Beda Lumbard, and Scholastici. interprete of waters aboue the Heauens, to refresh their exceeding heat, or of I know not what Chrystaline Heauen: some of spirituall substances, whom Basil confuteth, Origen (after his wont) Allegorically. Most probable it seemeth, that Moses intendeth the separation of those waters here below, in their Elementarie Seat, from those aboue vs in the clouds; to which Dauid alluding, saith: HeePsal. 104.2, 3 hath stretched out the Heauens like a Curten, and laid the beames of his Chambers in the waters. This separating of the waters is caused in the Ayrie Region, by the Aethereall, in which those forces are placed, which thus exhale and captiuate these waters. That matter before endued with lightning qualitie, was now in this second day (as it seemeth) attenuated and extended aboue and beyond that myrie heape of Earthywaters; and both the Aether and Aire formed of theSic Plato Plotinus vide in eos Ficin. 4. elementa statuunt (non sublunaria) sed ipsius Mundi vniuersi. Coelum esse i^nem; in stellis vna est quaedam te^ra Coelestis, in reliquo coelo aer vel aqua coelestis, etc. de materia Coeli consule. Zanch. and Casman. Ouranog. and Zabarel. same first matter, and not of a fift Essence, which  some haue deuised to establish the Heauens Eternitie, both Twins of the Philosophers braines. And wherein doe not these differ from each other touching the Celestiall Nature, Roundnesse, Motion, Number, Measure, and other difficulties, most of which are by somePatrit. Pan. cos. lib. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. denyed? Diuersitie of motions caused the Ancients toVide de his Christ. Clau. in Sac. Bosc. Keckerman. Syst. Astron. Magini Theor. etc. number eight Orbes; Ptolemie on that ground numbred nine; Alphonsus and Tebitius ten; Copernicus finding another motion, reuiued the opinion of Aristarchus Samius, of the Earths mouing, etc. Others which therein dissent from him, yet in respect of that fourth motion haue added an eleuenth Orbe, which the Diuines make vp euen twelue by their Empyreall immoueable Heauen. And many deny this assertion of Orbes, supposing them to haue beene supposed rather forIlli (orbes) reuera in Coelo non insunt, sed docendi and intelligendi gratiae roponuntur. Tycho Br. l. 2. p. 180. sic Keckerman, Bartholimus, alij. instructions sake then for any reall being. And Moses here saith expansum, as Dauid also calleth it a Curtaine,  which in such diuersitie of Orbes should rather haue beene spoken in the plurall number. The Sidereus NunciusGal. Gal. Sid. Nun. of Galilaeus Galilaeus, tels vs of foure new Planets, Iupiters attendants, obserued by the helpe of his Glasse, which would multiply the number of Orbes further. A better Glasse, or neerer sight and site might perhaps find more Orbes, and thus should we runne in Orbem, in a Circular endlesse Maze of Opinions. But I will not dispute this q^estion, or take it away by auerringP. Ricij de An. Coeli. Bodin. Th^at. Nat. l 5. Patric. Ficinus Platonici. R. Mos. Ben. Maimon. the Starres animated, or else moued byArist. etc. R. Mos. l. 3. interprets Ezekiels Vision. 1. the wheeles to be the Heauens, and the Beasts Angels. Intelligentiae. A learned Ignorance shall better content me, and for these varieties of motions, I will withInest syderibus ratio, sed Dei est illa, etc. Lact. l. 2. 5. Lactantius, ascribe them to GOD, the Architect of Nature, and Co-worker

 therewith by wayes Naturall, but best knowne to himselfe. Neither list I to dance after their Pipe, which ascribe a Musicall harmonie.The Pythagor. R. Mos. Cic. Som. Scip. to the Heauens.


THE THIRD DAYES WORKE.
ANd thus were the Aethereall and Ayrie parts of the World formed: in the Third Day followeth the perfecting of the two lowest Elements, Water and Earth, which as yet were confused, vntill that mightie Word of GOD did thus both diuorce and marry them, compounding of them both this one: Globe, which he called, Dry Land and Seas. I call it a  Globe with the Scriptures,Pro. 8.31. Es. 40.22. and the best Philosophers,Plat. Aristot. Stoici. Cic de N. D. l. 2. Manil. Astron. l. 1. Record, etc. for which respect Numa built the Temple of Vesta round. Neither yet is it absolutely round and a perfect Spheare, but (...) rather,S. lib. ^. (...). Strabo affirmeth, hauing (saithIos. Scal. in Manil. l. 1. Scaliger) (...), depressed Vallies, extended Plaines, swelling Hillockes, high-mounting Mountaines, long courses of Riuers, and other varieties of Nature and Art, which all in so huge a masse rather beautifie the roundnesse, then take it away. The Eclipse of the Moone later seeneIn Drakes Voyage about the World, an Eclipse seene here, Septem. the sixteenth, b fore one in the morning, was seene by them in the Magellane straights. Sept. 15. at six in the euening. in the East then in the West, the round shaddow of the Earth, which darkeneth it, the rising of the Sunne and Starres, sooner in theThe Portugals ^ayling to China East, h^ue their d^y twelue houres sooner then we: the Spaniards to Manilla West, twelue houres later. So that both meeting there together, differ a day in reckoning: Ones Tuesday is the others Wednesday. East then West, the vnequall eleuation of the Pole, and the Northerne Constellations appearing to vs, the Southerne continually depressed: all these obseruing due proportions, according to the difference of places and Countries; yea, the  compassing of the Earth by many Mariners, argue the round compasse thereof, against PatritiusPat. Pancos. l. 25. 26, 31. his difformitie, or that deformitie which otherVid. Plut. de plac. ph. l. 3. Philosophers haue ascribed thereto. The equalitie or inequalitie of dayes according to the neerenesse or farrenesse from the Equinoctiall, holding proportion as well by Sea as Land (as doth also the eleuation of the Pole) and not being longer whereAs at Saint Miguel and Panama, where the South Sea extendeth to the Philippinae. a quarter of the World is Sea, then if it were all Earth, doe confute the pretended difformititie by Hils, Dales, Waters, comparedEratost. thought the highest Hill to bee but tenne Furlongs; Cleomedes 15. which holdeth proportion (in their iust Diameters) to the Earth, but of one to 3818. sayth R. Hues de Globis. with the Diameter of this Globe, is not so much as the inequalicie in an Apple, or a carued Bowle, or quilted Ball, which yet we call round. And this diuersitie serueth not onely for ornament, but for more largenesse of Habitation, varietie of Ayre and Earth, and for pleasure and profit. Thus doth this Globe swell out to our vse, for which it enlargeth it selfe: and seemeth  large to vs, being in respect of the Vniuerse lesse then little. How much thereof is couered with waters? How much not at all discouered? How much desart and desolate? And now many millions are they, which share the rest of this little among them? And yet how many thousands glorie of the greatnesse of their possessions? All this Globe is demonstrableBy the like magnitudes of Starres in all places, by the shadowes, Horizon, etc. Ambros. Hex. 4.6. to be but a point, and in comparison nothing, to that wide wide Canopie of Heauen; a mans possession but a point, and as nothing to the Earth a man of possessions, but a point, and in a manner, nothing to his possessions; and (as SocratesAelian. v. hist. lib. 3. 28. Horum agrorum possessione te effers, qui nulla pars sunt terrae? said sometimes to Alcibiades) few can shew their Lands in an vniuersall Map, where a whole Region occupieth a small roome: and yet how couetous, how proud is dust and ashes of dust and earth, not withstanding the little we haue while we liue, and that lesse which shall haue and possesse vs in a  Prison of three Cubits being dead? Well did oneHall. Arte of Medit. compare this our grosser and drossier World to an Ant-hill, and men the Inhabitants to so many Pismires, in the varietie of their diuersified studies, toyling and turmoyling themselues therein. Scipio seemed ashamed of the RomaneSem. Scip. Plin. lib. 2. Haec est materia gloriae nostrae, haec sedes hic tumultuatur humanum genus, etc. quota terrarum parte gaudeat? vel cum ad mensuram auaritiae suae propagauerit, quam tandem portionem eius defunctus obtineat? Empire, as seeming but a point of the Earth, which it selfe was but a point. And yet how readie are many to sell Heauen for Earth? That largenesse and continuance beyond all names of time and place, for this momentany possession of almost nothing, although they haue Hell and Deuill and all in the bargaine? Let this morall obseruation entertaine our Reader, perhaps tyred in these rigid Disputes: and now let vs returne to the naturall disposition and constitution of this Globe, in which the Earth was couered with varietie of Plants and Fruits, which had beene before couered with slimy waters.
 God commanded, and the Waters which yet oppressed, and by their effusion and confusion did tyrannize, rather then orderly subdue, and gouerne this inferiour myrie masse, were partly receiued into competent channels, and there also gathered on swelling heapes, where, though they menace a returne of the old Chaos, both by their noyse and waues, yet hath GOD stablished his Commandement vpon it, and set barres and doores, and said, Hitherto shalt thou come and no further, and here shall it stay thy proud waues. Otherwise, The Deepes which then couered it as a Garment, would now stand aboue the Mountaines. At his rebuke they flee, who with fetters of sand (to shew his power in weaknesse, with a Miracle in Nature) chaineth vp this inraged

 Tyrant, that the Creatures might haue a meet place of Habitation. Thus did not only the dry Land appeare, but by the same hand was enriched with Herbes and Trees, enabled in their mortall condition, to remayne immortall in their kinde. And here beginneth Moses to declare the Creation of compound bodies; hitherto busied in the Elements.


THE FOVRTH DAYES WORKE.
NOw when ehe Lord had made both Plants, Trees, and Light, without the influence, yea, before the being of the Sunne, Moone, or Starres, he now framed those fiery Balls, and glorious Lights, whereby the Heauens are beautified, the Ayre enlightned, the Seas ruled,  and the Earth made fruitfull. Thus he did the fourth day,A Iew at Rome asked a Philosopher, the reason, why the Sunne shined euery Wednesday: The Philosopher obseruing it true, but not assigning a cause, the Iew said, It was, because the Sunne thus honored in his Birth-day. Isaac Leuita. after those other things created, lest some foolish Naturalist should binde his mightie hand in Natures bands, seeing these Lights now become the chiefe Officers in Natures Court. That shining before dispersed, was vnited in these bodies, whether by refraction of those former beames, by these solid Globes, or by gathering that fiery substance into them, or by both, or by other meanes, I leaue to others coniectures.Plut. de Plac. Phil. l. 2. Barthol. de Stellis, pag. 6. Many are the Dreames of Philosophers, some esteeming them Fire; some Earth, others Clouds, and others Stones, fired: Heraclides, and the Pythagoreans deemed each starre a World. They are commonly holden Round, simple, lucide bodies, the most compact and condensateBarthol. denyeth them to be of the same substance, pag. 101. and so doth R. Mos. Moreh. lib. 2. cap. 20. parts of their Orbs, or of that Aethereall Region, of, and in which they are: bright flames, not of this our fire which deuoureth and consumeth (for the whole  Ocean would not serue the Sunne alone for a Draught, nor the Earth with all her store for a Breake-fast) but quickning and nourishing. Let vs a little consider of their Greatnesse, Swiftnesse, Number, Influence.
For the first, Ptolomey measured the Sunnes greatnesse 1663/^. times as much as the whole Terrestriall Globe: Copernicus, whom ScaligerScal. Opusc. in Epist. calleth Alterum aeui nostri Ptolomeum) 162. Tycho BraheDe his vid. Tych. Br. de N. St. pag. 465. Pythag. ap. P^ot. 100. Clauium in sac. B. Albumasar. introduc. Alfragan. diff. 19. and d. 140. The Moone is holden by Ptolomeus 39. times lesse then the Earth, by Copernicus 43. by Tycho 42. Albategnius and Alfraganus haue added their opinions of the rest, therefore diuiding them into sixe rankes or formes of differing magnitudes: wherein as they somewhat differ from each other, so much more from Tycho Brahe, that Learned Dane, whose costs and100000. Dolers in Praefat. Alphonsus spent on his Tables 400000. Ducats: or after Turquets storie more. paines, in this Science are admirable. But Salomon (wiser then they all) had  fore-told,Prou. 25. that the Heauens in height, and the Earth in deepnesse, and the Kings heart, none can search out: that is, exactly and absolutely, as appeareth in the differing opinions, both of the EarthsClauius 7. numerat. Circuit and Diameter, and of the Altitude of the Heauens, and consequently of the quantitie of the Starres, which must presuppose the former. They agree not in the order of the Planets, nor how many Semi-diameters of the Earth the Heauen is eleuated, which after Ptolomeys Hypotheses are 20000. after Tychos reckoning 14000. Hence it is, that the quantitie and the swiftnesse42398437 1/^. miles in one houre, after Ptol. his Hypoth. as Patric. reckoneth, so that a Bird of like swiftnesse might compasse the Earth 1884. times vnder the Line in an houres space. Hee to salue this incredibilitie, deuiseth a motion both of the Earth, and of the Starres, one from the East, the other from the West. is much more after the former, then after this later opinion, which doth better salue the incrediblenesse thereof, then fayning a Giant-like labour (as RamusRam. Math. Schol. lib. 11. calleth it) of the Earths continuall rolling.
The numberBarthol. de Stell. of Starres, some haue reckoned 1600. others 1022. and Tycho Brahe more. The Iewes out of their Cabalists reckon 290160. Galileus his Glasse hath made them innumerable,  in descrying infinite numbers; otherwise not visible to vs, and especially the Galaxia full of them. Yea, God himselfe propounds it to Abraham,Gen. 15.5. (whom Iosephus cals a great Astronomer) as a thing impossible to number them. It is his owne Royall Prerogatiue,Psal. 147. Es. 40. He counteth the number of the Starres, and bringeth out their Armies by number, and calleth them all by their names. The end why GOD placed them in the Firmament, Moses expresseth, To separate the Day from the Night, and to be for signes and for seasons, and for dayes, and for yeares, and for lights in the Firmament of the Heauen, to giue light vpon the Earth. Their influence and effects are in ScriptureHos. 2.11. Iud. 5. Iob 38. Sic. Zan. de Op. and Arias Mont. Stellas Chochabim vocari ait, id est, virtutis receptacula. A. M. de Nat. mentioned: neither can any iustly deny the same in the Elements and Elementary bodies: the Stoicall Fate, the Chaldean, Iewish, and Arabian Fancies, are now disclaymed euen by thoseHen. a Lindhout. S. Ch. Heyden. vide Taisneir Ranzou. etc. fraus est, non ars, etc. Viues de Cor. art. l. 5. Learned, which maintayne in our dayes Iudiciall  Astrologie, or commend the same. Neither can it agree with Christian Religion, to subiect the will of Man to any externall naturall force, nor with reason in matters contingent, and casuall to make them naturall Arbiters: nor will I easily beleeue that particular euents can be fore-told from generall causes, especially in the affaires and fortunes of men. Where the numbers, substances, faculties, actions of these stars are weakly or not at al known vnto vs (as hath beene shewed) it is like as to say, how many and what kind of Chickens a Hen will hatch, when wee see not all, nor scarce know any of the Egges vnder her. The

 swiftnesse of the Heauens Wheele,Nig. Figulus, in the swift motion of a wheele, made two blots, which then seemed neere, but at the standing of the wheele were farre asunder. which euen in the moment of obseruing, is past obseruing, the vanitie of our Oracle-Almanacks, which commonly speake doubtfully or falsely of the weather; the infinitenesse almost of causes concurring, which are diuersly qualified, the weakenesse of thoseThe twelue Houses, one for the Soule, another for Children, Fortune, Death, etc. Vid. Alcabit. Hali, Io. de Saxonia, etc. foundations, on which this Art is grounded; the force of hereditarie qualities descended from Parents, of custome and education in forming mens manners; the disagreements of the Astrologers among themselues, the new from the old, and all from the Truth, as Experience in all ages hath shewed: And lastly, the prohibition of the same by Scripture Fathers, Councels, Lawes; yea, the learnedest of the Chaldeans, and other Astronomers themselues, (as EusebiusEuseb. de praep. l. 6. c. 8. R. Mos. in Ep. ad Iud. Marsil. Contrarie, saith Scal. to good manners, Philosophy, Geometry, Christianitie: they ascribe Christian Religion to Mercurie, and Albumasar foretold it should continue but 1460. yeeres, Abi. Iudaeus, of the co^ming of their Messias, A. D. 1464. Arnaldus of Antichrist A D. 1345. In 1179. they all, Arabians, Iewes, and Christians, foretold almost a dissolution of the World by tempests to happen in 1186. with lye and all, etc. reciteth of Bardanes, and Rob. Moses ben Maimon hauing  read all the Arabians workes hereof, answereth the Iewish Astrologers) are strong arguments against the Starre-gazers predictions. But let Picus Mirandula his twelue Bookes against Astrologie, and Ioseph Scaligers Preface before Manilius be well weighed of such as dote on, or doubt of this Genethliacall ridiculous vanitie, if notPlot. En. 2. l. 2. and Mar. Fic. Merula. Fulc. Antiprog, etc. impious villany, as those Authors and othersEx his veteres Hyginus, Manil. and ex Arato German. Caes. Cicero, Auienus, etc. prooue it, not by the errors of some Chiefetaines and Champions onely, but of the Arte it selfe, and the whole Senate of Iewish, Saracenical, and Christian Astrologers together, hatching a lye. The signes and constellations which Astronomers obserue in and on each side the Zodiakes, would be too prolixe in this discourse already tedious: as likewise those alterations which some haue obserued in some starres.
But those two great Lights, (t^e two eyes of the Heauens) the greater light to rule the day,  and the lesse to rule the night, (which is called great,Non tam aliorum comparatione magna, quam suo munere. Ambros. hex. l. 4 c. 6. vid Nazianz Orat. 34. not so much for the quantitie wherein it is lesse then many starres, as for the operation and seeming to the sense) doe command mine eyes to take more speciall view of their beauties. How willing could I be (like Phaton) to mount the Chariot of the Sunne? which commeth forth as a Bridegroome out of his Chamber, and reioyceth like a mightie man to runne his race; King of Starres enthronized in the mids of the Planets, heart of the World, eye of the Heauens, brightest gemme of this goodly Ring, father of dayes, yeeres, seasons, meteors; Lord of light, fountaine of heate, which seeth all things, and by whom all things see, which lendeth light to the starres, and life to the World; high Steward of Natures Kingdome, and liueliest visibleFor the beautie and operation; and the Sunne, the beame (radius vnus est) and light so resemble the Trinitie. Arr. Mont. de Nat. p. 182. Image of the liuing inuisible God.
And dazled with this greater light, I would reflect mine eyes to that reflexion of this  light in the sober, siluer countenance of the silent Moone; which (whether it haue any natiue shining, though weake, as Zanchius and Bartholinus hold; or whether it bee an aethereall earthDe his vid. Patric. Pancos. Saliger Exer. 62. Gal. Gal. Plut. de plac. with Mountaines and Vallies, and other not elementary Elements, compact of the dregs of the aethereal parts; or whatsoeuer else reason, fancie, or phrensie haue imagined thereof) is Queene of the Night, attended with the continuall dances of twinckling starres, Mother of Moneths, Lady of Seas andSoli caloris and illustrationis Lunae humectandi dilatandi, atque spirandi vis, Arr. Mont. Haec solis and ali^rum planetarum fetum suscipiens, Mundo sibi vicino edit, a Mercurio accipit vim humores commiscentem, a Venere geniturae conuenientem, a Marte ^obur and impetum, a Ioue noturalem spiritum, and rerum omnium fomentum, a Saturno compaginem and stabilitatem, a sole (qui omnimodam virtutem continet) foeturam and lumen, etc. Archang. in Cabalist. dogmata Io. Pici. Vid. Leon. Heb. de Amore Dial. 3. moysture, constant image of the Worlds inconstancie, which it neuer seeth twice with the same face; and truest modell of humane frailtie, shining with a borrowed light, and eclipsed with euery interposition of the earth. But I am not Endymion, nor so much in Lunaes fauour, as to be lulled asleepe in her lap, there to learne these mysteries of Nature, and the secrets of that happy marriage between these celestial twinnes.  And it is high time for me to descend from these measures of time; the lampes of the World, and to behold the neerer works of GOD before our feet in the ayre and waters, which GOD on the fift day created. But the principall rarities to be obserued in these creatures, we shall disperse in our scattered discourses through this Worke, as occasion shall bee offered; as likewise touching the beasts both Wilde and Tame, and the creeping things created the sixth day. Thus was the Ayre, Water, and Earth, furnished with their proper inhabitants.

Ouid. Metam. l. 1.Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae,
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset.
Natus homo est.

 After he had thus prouided his cheere, he sought him out a guest, and hauing built and furnished his house, his next care was for a fit Inhabitant. Of this, Moses addeth, Furthermore God said, Let Vs make Man. But this will aske a longer discourse. In the meane time wee haue this testimonie of Moses of the Creation of the World, whose sense, if I haue missed or misted in these many words, I craue pardon. And although this testimonie might suffice a Christian, which must liue byFaith is the euidence of things not seene. Vbi vides, non est fides. faith, and not by sight: yet to preuent cauillers, we haue otherPhilo de F. M. and ^. Meir. in Talmud. trac. Sanbed.

 witnesses both of reason and authority, That this World had a Beginning, and that the Builder and Maker thereof, was GOD. For doth not Nature both within and without vs, in the admirable frame of this lesse or that greater World, in the Notions of the one, and the Motions of the other, in the wise and mighty order and ordering of both, lead men vnto a higher and more excellentNatura naturans. Nature, which, of hisSo Hermes, (...). goodnesse, we call GOD? When we behold the whole World, or any part of it, in the Elements such agreement, in such disagreement: in the Heauenly motions such constancie, in such varietie: in these compound bodies, Being, Liuing, Sense, Reason; as diuers degrees, diuersly communicated to so many formes and rankes of Creatures: We can no more ascribe these things to chance, than a Printers Case of Letters could by chance fall into the right Composition of the Bible which he Printeth;  or of Homers Iliads (to vseCic. de Nat. Deor. Tullies similitude:) neither can any ascribe the Creation to the Creature, with better reason, then if by some shipwracke, being cast on a desolate Iland, and finding houses, but seeing no people therein, he could esteeme the Birds, or Beasts, (all the Ilanders he seeth) to be the framers of these buildings: But thou mayest thinke it eternall; Thou mayest as well thinke it to be GOD, Infinite, Vnchangeable, in the whole and in all the parts. Doth not the Land by seasons, the Sea by ebbing and flowing, the Aire by succeeding changes, the Heauens by motions, all measured by Time, proclaime that they had a beginning of Time? Are not Motion and Time as neere Twinnes, as Time and Eternitie are implacable enemies? Nay, how canst thou force thy mind to conceiue an Eternitie in these things, which canst not conceiue Eternitie? which canst not but conceiue some beginning,  and first terme or point, from whence the motion of this Wheele began? And yet how should we know this first turning of the Worlds wheele, whose hearts within vs mooue, be we vnwitting or vnwilling, the beginning whereof thou canst not know, and yet canst not but know that it had a begginning, and together with thy body shall haue an ending? How little a while is it, that the bestS^ Lucret. l. 5. Cur supra bellum Thebenum and funera Troiae, Non alias alij quoque res recinere Poetae? --recensque Natura est mundi, n^que pridem exordia cepit. Deus nunquam u^inus solus qua^ cum solus. Totus cum Deo mundus, non pluris est, quam Deus solus. Lux sane solis radios ese emiitit, neque tamen ipsa lu^ minor euadit: Ignis promit de se calorem, nan tamen minorem quam prius, imo eundem in se retinet. Pat. Panarch. l. 8. Stories in euery Nation, shew the cradle and child-hood thereof? Their later receiued Letters, Arts, Ciuilitie? But what then, say they, did GOD before he made the World? I answer, that thou shouldest rather thinke Diuinely of Man, then Humanely of GOD, and bring thy selfe to be fashioned after his Image, then frame him after thine. This foolish question some answer according to the foolishnesse thereof, saying; He made Hell for such curious Inquisitors.Confess. l. 11. cap. 12. and 13. Aliud est videre, aliud ridere, saith Augustine. Labentius  responderim nescio quod nescio. Quae tempora fuissent, quae abs te condita non essent? Nec tu tempora tempore praecedis, sed celsitudine semper praesentis aeternitatis, etc.Tert. aduers. Prax. Before all things were, GOD onely was, and he vnto himselfe was in stead of the World, Place, Time, and all things, hauing all goodnesse in himselfe: the holy TrinitieProu. 8.30. delighting and reioycing together. To communicate therefore (not to encrease, or receiue) his goodlinesse, he created the World,Plin l. 2. c 4. quem GraeciPythagoras is reported the first which called it (...). Merul^. (...) (saith Plinie) nomine ornamenti appellant, nos a perfecta absolutaque elegantia Mundum. But for this matter, it is also of the wisest and most learned in all Ages confessed, as their testimonies alleadged by Iustin Martyr, Lactantius, and other Ancients, and especially byDe Veritate C. R. Mutius Pansa de Osc. Ethnicae and Christ. Philos. Viu. de Veritate Christianae fidei. Philip Morney, doe plainely manifest. To him therefore, to Viues, and others, which haue vndertaken this taske, by reason, and by humane authoritie, to conuince the gaine-sayers of our faith, let such resort, as would be more fully resolued in these curious doubts. As  for all suchOf the opinions of Philosophers, touching the originall of the World, see Merula Cos. p. 1. l. 1. strange and phantasticall or phreneticall opinions of Heretikes, or Philosophers, which haue otherwise related of this mysterie of the Creation, then Moses, they need not confuting, and for relating these opinions we shall find fitter place afterwards. I will here adde this saying of Viues, to such vnnaturall Naturalists, as vpon slight and seeming naturall reasons, call these things into question.De veritate fidei, l. 1. c. 10. Quam stultum est, de mundi creatione ex legibus huius Naturae statuere, cum creatio illa naturam antecesserit? Tum enim natura est condita quando and mundus, nec aliud est natura quam quod Deus iussit, alioqui minister esset Deus naturae, non Dominus. Hence was Aristotles Eternitie, Plinies Deitie ascribed to the World, Democritus, Leucippus, and Epicurus, their Atomi, the Stoikes Aeterna materia, PLATO'S Deus, exemplar and materia,  asHex. l. 1. c. 1. Idem and Apuleius lib. de dogmate Platonis. Initia rerum tria arbitrabatur Plato, Deum and materiam rerumque format quas idaeas idem vocat, in absolutas informes, etc. Ambrose tearmeth them, or asPlotinus Enn. 1. lib. 2. vnum or bonum, Mens, Anima, the Platonikes Trinitie. others, vnum or bonum, Mens and Anima, (a Trinitie without perfect Vnitie) the Manichees two beginnings, and an endlesse world of errors about the Worlds beginning, because they measured all by Naturall axiomes.In Euseb. Chron. Graec. Scalig. Orpheus, as Theophilus the Chronographer cited by Cedrenus, alleadgeth him, hath his Trinitie of (...) and (...), and (...): to which he ascribeth the Worlds Creation: but the Poets dreames are infinite, which might make and marre their Poetical Worlds at pleasure.





CHAP. III. Of Man, considered in his first state wherein hee was created: and of Paradise, the place of his habitation.
HItherto we haue spoken of the framing of this mightie Fabrike, the Creation of the visible World, leauing that Inuisible to the Spirituall Inhabitants, which thereMat. 18.10. alway behold the face of the Heauenly Father, as not daring to pry too farre into such Mysteries, aduancing our selues in those things which wee neuer saw.Col. 2.18. Rashly puft vp with a fleshly minde. This whereof we treat they  need not, as finding all sufficience in their All-sufficient Creator: The inferiour Creatures (which hither to haue beene described) know it not, but contentBernard sup. Cant. Serm. 5. themselues with themselues, in enioying their naturall being, mouing, sense. Onely man, in regard of his body, needeth it, and by the reasonable power of his soule can discerne and vse it. Man therefore was last created, as the end of the rest,Algazel. Ap. Paul. Ric. de Coelesti agric. lib. 1. Homo est vniuersi orbis epitome, and abbreuiata mundi Tabella. an Epitome and Mappe of the World, a compendious little other World, consisting of a visible and inuisible, heauenly and earthly, mortall and immortall Nature, the knot and bond of bodily and spirituall, superiour and inferiour substances, resembling both theO Homo audacis Naturae miraculum, omnium miraculorum admirationem vincens, etc. Audendum est dicere Hominem Deum terrenum esse, Deum vero Celestem. Hominem immortalem. Trismeg. Pimand. Dicitur homo (...), quia omnes mundi virtutes continet; nam sunt in mundo dij, quatuor elementa, bruta, plantae: habet homo rationem mouendi, crescendi vim, etc. Aristides ap. Phot. 249. vid. etiam Leon. Hebr. dial. 3. de Amore, Fr. Georg. etc. worke and the worke-man: the last in execution, but first in intention, to whom all these Creatures should serue, as meanes and prouocations of his seruice to his and their Creator.
 Man may be considered, in regard of this life, or of that which is to come: of this life, in respect of Nature or Grace: and this Nature also sustayneth a two-fold consideration, of integritie and corruption: ForEccles. 7. vlt. GOD made man righteous, but they sought to themselues many inuentions. His first puritie in his Creation, his fall from thence by sinne, his endeuour to recouer his former innocency by future glory, eyeher in the by-wayes of Superstition, which Nature (a blind guide) leadeth him into, through so many false Religions; or by the true, n^w, and liuing way, which GOD alone can set him, and doth conduct him in, is the subiect of our tedious taske; the first two more briefly propounded: the two last historically and largely related.
 In that first state, his Author and Maker was Iehoua Elohim, GOD in the pluralitie of Persons, and vnitie of Essence; the Father, by the Sonne, in the power of the Spirit: wherevnto he did not only vse his powerfull Word as before, saying; Let there be Man, but a consultation, Let vs make Man: not that he needed counsaile, butQuia rationalis creatura, quasi cum consilio facta videretur, Iunisius (vel, vt alij, Beda) in Genes. Philo attributeth it to the helpe of others, in making a Creature, not only partaker of diuine vertues, but of vice also, which he could not deriue from his Creator: not obseruing what Salomon saith (as is before) Eccles. 7. vlt. that hee in this Creature did shew his counsell and wisdome most apparantly. The Father, as first in order, speaketh vnto the Sonne and Holy Ghost, and the Sonne and Holy Ghost in an vnspeakeable manner speake and decree with the Father; andSocr. l. 2. c. 25. the whole Trinitie consult and agree together, to make Man: whichCyril. Alex. cont. Iun. l. 1. for Mans instruction, is by Moses vttered after the manner of Men. The manner of his working was also in this Creature, singular; both in regard of his body, which, as a Potter his Clay, he wrought and framed of the dust into this goodly shape;  and of his soule, which he immediately breathed into his nostrils.
Thus hath Man cause to glorie in his Creators care, in himselfe to bee humbled, hauing a body framed, not of solid Earth, but of the dust (the basest and lightest part of the basest and grossest Element,Psal. 62.9. So vaine a thing is man) his soule of nothing, lighter then vanitie, in the infusion created, and in the Creation infused, to be the dwellerIob 4.19. in this house of clay, and habitation of dust, yea, not a house, but a2. Cor. 5.1. Tabernacle continually in dissolution. Such is the Maker and matter of Man. The forme was his conformitie to GOD, after whose Image he was made. Christ only is in full resemblance, TheCol. 1.15. Image of the inuisible GOD, the brightnesse of his glory,Hebr. 1.3. and the ingraued forme of his Person. Man was not this Image, but made adimaginem, According to this Image, resembling his Author, but with imperfection, in that perfection of human Nature.
 This Image of GOD appeared in the soule properly; secondly, in the body (not as theEpiph^haer. 71. Anthropomorphite Heretikes, andPapists picture the Trinitie, the Creation, etc. Popish Image-makers imagine, but) as the instrument of the soule, and lastly, in the whole Person. The soule in regard of the spirituall and immortall substance, resembleth him which is a Spirit, and euerlasting,Philo. Iod. de Fa. Mun. which seeth all things, remayning it selfe vnseene, and hauing a nature in manner incomprehensible, comprehendeth the natures of other things: to which some adde the resemblance of the holy Trinitie, in this, that one soule hath those three essentiall faculties of Vnderstanding, Will, and Memory, or (as others) of Vegetation, Sense, and Reason. In regard of gifts and naturall endowments, the soule in the vnderstanding part receiued a Diuine Impression, and Character, in that knowledge, whereby shee measureth the Heauens,Terram haud reliquens in Coelum attolleris, illudque metiris Trismeg. Pimand. bringeth them to the  Earth, lifteth vp the Earth to the Heauen, mounteth aboue the Heauens to behold the
 Angels, pierceth the Center of the Earth in darknesse, to discerne the infernall Regions and Legions, beneath and aboue them all, searcheth into the Diuine Nature: wherebyGen. 2. Adam was, without study, the greatest Philosopher, (who at first sight knew the nature of the beasts, the originall of the VVoman) and the greatest Diuine (except the second Adam) that euer the Earth bare. The will also, in free choice of the best things, inEphes. 4.24. righteous disposition towards man, and true holinesse towards GOD, was conformed to his will, for whose wils sake it is, and was created. The body cannot so liuely expresse the ^ertue of h^m that made it, but as it could, in that perfect constitution, (Psal. 139.14. so fearefully ^^d wonderf^lly madePronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, etc. Ouid.) and as the Organ of the soule, whose weapon it was to righteousnesse, had some shadow therefo. The whole Man in his naturall Nobility beyond, and Princely Dominion ouer  the other Creatures (that we mention not the hope of future blessednesse) sheweth after what Image Man was created, and to what he should be renued. The end whereunto GOD made Man, is GOD himselfe, who hathPro. 16.4. made all things for himselfe: the subordinate end was Mans endlesse happinesse, the way whereunto is religious obedience.
Moses addeth,Gen. 1.27. He created them Male and Female, thereby to shew, that the Woman in Oeconomicall respect is1. Cor. 11.7. the Image and glory of the Man, beeing created for the Man, and of the Man, but in relation to GOD, or the World, She, as a Creature, was also framed after the same Image. As for that monstrous conceit of the Rabbins, that the first man was an Hermaphrodite, it deserueth not confutation or mention. The order of the Womans Creation is plainly related. GODGen. 21. finding not a meete helpe for Adam, in his sleepe tooke one  of his ribs, whereof he built the Woman. This in a Mystery signified that deadly sleepe of the heauenly Adam on the Crosse, whose stripes were our healing, whose death was our life, and out of whose bleeding side was by Diuine dispensation framed his Spouse the Church. This may be part of the sense, or an application thereof,Whitak. de Script. quaest. 5. as some say, to this Mystery; or the signification rather of theHabet sacrum eloquium proprietatem quandam ab alijs Scripturis differentem, quod in ea primum per verba quae recitantur, de rebus quibuscam agitur: quae rarsum res vice verborum, ad significationem aliarum rerum proponuntur. Hugo de S. Vict. To. 1. thing it selfe here declared, then of the words, which properly and plainly set downe the Historie of a thing done, after the litterall sense to bee expounded.
According to this sense Moses expresseth the Creation, the making and marrying of the Woman. The Maker was GOD, the matter a Rib of Adam, the forme a building, the end to be a meete helpe. The Man was made of Dust, the Woman of the Man, to bee one flesh with the Man, and of a Rib, to be a helpe and supporter of him in his calling, which requireth  strength: neyther could any bone be more easily spared in the whole body, which hath not such variety of any other kind: nor could any place more designe the Woman her due place; not of the head, that she should not arrogate ru^^; not of the feet, that the husband should not reckon her as his slaue, but in a meane betweene both, and that neere the heart, in which they should (as in all Diuine and Humane Lawes else) bee fast ioyned. The building of this body of the Woman, was in regard of the Progeny, which was in that larger roome to haue the first dwelling. The soule of the Woman is to be conceiuedNe animum aduertas externo homini, integumentum est hoc. Anima sane and anima aequalis est: in velaminibus differentia est. Basil. as the soule of the Man before mentioned, immediately infused and created by GOD, herein equall to Man.
Being thus made, she is marryed by GOD himselfe vnto Adam, who brought her vnto  him, to shew the sacred authority of Marriage, and of Parents in Marriage: A mutuall consent and gratulation followeth betweene the parties, lest any should tyrannically abuse his fatherly power. And thus are two made one flesh, in regard of one originall, equall right, mutuall consent, and bodily coniunction. And thus were this goodly couple glorious in nakednesse, not so much in the ornaments of beautie, which made them to each other amiable, as of Maiestie which made them to other creatures dreadfull: the Image of GOD, clothing that nakednesse, which in vsApoc. 3.19. appeareth filthy, in the most costly clothing. GOD further blessed them both with the power of multiplication in their owne kind, and dominion ouer other kinds; and gaue them for food,Gen. 1.29. euery herbe bearing seed which is vpon all the earth, and euery tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing seed. He doth (as it were) set them in possession of the Creatures, which by a Charter of free gift he had conueyed to them, to hold of him  as Lord Paramount.
But lest any should thinke this but a niggardly and vnequall gift, whereas since the Floud more hath beene added, and that in a more vnworthinesse through mans sinne: let him consider, that since the FallGen. 3.17. Gen. 9.3. the Earth is accursed, whereby many things are hurtfull to mans nature, and in those which are wholsome, there is not such variety of kinds, such plentie in each variety, such ease in getting our plenty, or such quality in what is gotten, in the degree of goodnesse and sweetnesse to the taste and nourishment: which, had they remayned in this sickly and elder Age of the World, we should not need to enuie Cleopatra's vanitie, or Heliogabilus his superfluitie and curiositie. And had not Man sinned;Porphyrius according to the Pythagorean opinion, abhorreth the eating of liuing creatures especially because men before the floud were so long liued without such dyet: Roffinus. there should not haue needed the death of beasts to nourish his life, which without such stay should haue beene immortall:  the vse whereof was after granted, rather to supply necessitie when the Floud had weakened the Earth, then to minister a greater abundance then before it had; and least of all to satisfie the greedie and curious appetites of more then beastly men.

Liberall and bountifull was GODS allowance, which yet as man abused in eating the forbidden fruit, so whether any sinfull man did transgresse by eating the flesh of beasts, as iniquity increased, it is vncertaine. And yet it is likely, that when the Earth wasGen. 6.11. filled with crueltie, as men escaped not beastly butcherie, so beasts escaped not butcherly inhumanitie; and men that stay not now for commission to eate mans flesh, would then much lesse aske leaue to feed on beasts. Then did the godly Patriarchs liue many hundred yearesThe fathers did not eate flesh before the floud, Orig. in Gen. hom. 1. Chrysost. hom. 27. Genes. without such food, whereas now we reach not to one with this helpe, that I speake not of those, which by abuse hereof are as cruell to themselues (in shortning their dayes by surfets) as to the Creatures, making their bellies to become Warrens, Fish-pooles, Shambles, and what  not, saue what they should bee? Had not Man beene Deuillish in sinning, hee had not beene beastly in feeding, nay, the beasts had abhorred that which now they practise, both against their Lord, and their fellow-seruants.Es. 11.6. The Wolfe should haue dwelt with the Lambe, the Leopard should haue lyon with the Kid, and the Calfe, and the Lyon, and the fat Beast together, and a little Childe might leade them. And this in the time of the Floud appeared, when all of them kept the peace with each other, and dutifull allegeance to their Prince in that great Family and little moueable World, Noahs Arke.
The placeBas. hex. hom. 11. Iunil. in Gen. Pererius relateth the opinions of Bonauenture, Tostatus, Ephrem, Isidore: Also Vadianus Goropius, Beroaldus in Chronico, Iunius and others haue largely handled this question of Paradise. of Adams dwelling is expressed by MOSES; And the Lord GOD planted a Garden East-ward in Eden, and there he put the man whom hee had made, Genes. 2.8. Maruell it is to see the confusion which sinne bringeth, which appeareth not onely in the bodie,  soule, dyet, and other Prerogatiues of our first Parents; but in this place also, then a place of pleasure, a Paradise and Garden of delights: after, a place prohibited, and kept by the blade of a Sword shaken: now the place cannot bee found in Earth, but is become a common place in mens braines, to macerate and vexe them in the curious search hereof. Some doe conuert this History into an Allegory, as did the Manichees and the Originists, confuted by Methodius, asAmbrose in his long Treatise, de Paradiso, leaneth too much this way, and Philo Iudaus also. Epiphanius witnesseth.Epiphan. lib. Ancor. and contr. haeres. lib. 2. Hierome in Dan. 10. saith, that seeking for shadowes in the truth, they ouer-turne the Truth it selfe. Vmbras and imagines in veritate quaerentes, ipsam conantur euertere veritatem, vt flumina, and arbores, and Paradisum putent Allegoriae legibus se debere subruere. Such Mysticall, Mist-all, and Misse-all Interpreters are our Familists in these times, by vnseasonable and vnreasonable Allegories, raysing mysts ouer the Scripture-sense,  which thereby they misse and cannot find.De Gen. lib. 8. c. 1. and de Ciuit. Dei, l. 13. c. 21. Augustine relateth three opinions, that Allegoricall, which he confuteth: the literall, and that which followeth both the one and the other, as himselfe doth. TheAug. de haeres. Hermians and Sel^^cians are said to denie, that there was any such place: and the naked Adamites accounted their Church to be Paradise. Others are as prodigall and ascribe hereunto all the Earth, which was a Paradise, till sinne brought in a Curse. Thus holdethWolfg. Wissenburg. Praes^t. ad Dom. Nig. Gor. Bec. Becces. Ioat. Vad. de Paradiso. Likewise Hugo de S. Vict. reckoneth this opinion, totam terram futuram Paradisum, si homo non peccasset: totam factam exilium per pecca tum Annot. in Gen. Wolfgangus Wissenburg, Goropius also and Vad^anus are of like minde, That mans exile was but the alteration of their happy co^dition, that the fiery sword was the fiery Zone, A great while it went for currant, that it was a pleasant Region, by a long tract of Sea and Land, separated from our habitable World, and lifted vp to the Circle of the Moone, whereby it was out of the reach of Noahs floud, asPatric. Pan. Cos. lib. 20. truly perhaps as Patricius and others haue  found another World in the Moone, with men and beasts therein, of greater stature and longer life then here with vs. Thus hathHist. Scholast. Petrus Comestor, and Strabus, and many Trauellers in old times haue trauelled with this conceit of their Fooles Paradise, and brought forth a lie, as appeareth by their Legends.Leg. aurea. That Saint Brandon sayled thither from Ireland, is as true as that he met Iudas in the way, released from his paines, (as he was alway from Saturday to Sunday Euen-song:) or that they made fire on a fish (supposing it to bee an Iland) as that Legend telleth. It should seeme the Man in the Moone called him, and shewed him the way t^ this Paradise, or thatAnton. Diog. incredibil. de Thule. cap. 24. ap. Photium. Dinias, which (according to the Relations of Antonius Diogenes) trauelling beyond Thule, went so farre North that hee came to the Moone, which seemed a shining Earth, where he saw many strange sights, as credible as the former: or else great  Lu^^fer himselfe, who (as a later TrauellerIgnatij Concl. reporteth) hath lately bequeathed a Lieutenancie to Ignatius and his Colony of Iesuites in the New Hell, in that New-found-World of the Moone; the care of the foundation whereof he committeth to that Iebusiticall societie. But let vs descend from this Lunaticke Paradise.
Others place it Eastward, in the highest top of the Earth, where the foure Riuers, mentioned by Moses, haue their originall, whence they runne, and are swallowed vp of the Earth, and after rising in diuers places of the World, are knowne by the names of Nilus, Ganges, Tigris, Euphrates.Hugo Annot. in Gen^s. Hugo de S. Victore and Adrichomius are of this opinion; yea, the great CardinallAdric. Chron. Cai^tan. in Gen. 7. Bel. de Rom. Pont. l. 3. c. 6. and de grat. primihominis. Caretane and Bellarmine place Henoc^ and Elias in Earthly Paradise, yet liuing there vntill the time of Antichrist, which wood he cannot see (beeing in the middest  of it) for Trees. But the discouery of the World by Trauellers, (...) description thereof by Geographers, will not suffer vs to follow them (to the want of which Art, I meane Geographie, such fantasies, may be imputed) whereby also is confuted the opinion of them which place it vnder the Equinoctiall Circle, as Durandus and Bonauentura.

Phil. Melano. and Carion.Others account so much to Paradise as those foure Riuers doe water, euen the chiefe part of Afrike and Asia: and some confine it in streighter limits of Syria, Arabia and Mesopotamia, as if Adam had been so couetous as his Posteritie, or so laborious as to husband so large Countries. The false interpretation of those Riuers to bee Nilus, Ganges, etc. was the cause of this errour; theIn Esa. 23.3. and Ier. 2.18. Septuagint translating in stead of Sichor (which is Nilus) Gihon the name of one of these streames.
Moses as it were of purpose by an exact Chorography and delineation of the situation, doth meete with those errours, and with other the like, which I doe not here relate. Neither is their opinion to be followed, which drowne all altogether in the Deluge, seeing that after that time Moses wrote this. Franciscus Iunius in his readings on GenesisSee also Annot. Trem. and Iun. in Gen. 1. hath largely and  learnedly handled this matter, and added a Map also of Heden in which it stood, and the course of the Riuers with the Countries adiacent. In him the Reader may find satisfaction. He sheweth out of Curtius, Plinie, and Solimus, the miraculous fertilitie of that part of Babylonia, which Ptolomy calleth Auranitis, or Audanitis, easily declined from Heden, the name giuen by Moses, mentioned after Moses time, 2. Reg. 19.12. and Esay 37.12.
For the foure Riuers he sheweth them out of Ptolomy, Strabo, Plinie, Dion, Marcellinus, etc. to be so many diuisions of Euphrates, whereof Baharsares, or Neharsares is Gihon, that which passeth through Babylon, is for the excellencie peculiarly called Perath or Euphrates; Nehar-malca, or Basilius, Pishon; Tigris,Tygris is both the greater Riuer, and a smaller, which runneth out of Euphrates into Tygris which is here meant. Chiddekel. For the fiery sword he obserueth out of Plinie, lib. 2. c. 106. a certaine miracle of Nature in Babylonia, where the ground is seen burning  continually about the quantitie of an Acre, But this place will not serue to dispute this point. If those Riuers doe not now remaine, or haue altered either channell or names, it is no new thing in so old a a continuance of the World. It is more then probable, that herein these parts Paradise was, although now deformed by the Floud, and by Time consumed, and become a Stage of Barbarisme.


I haue here for the Readers pleasure set before his eyes Mercators Mappe or Topography of Paradise.
map of the biblical paradise
PARADISUS



Neither hath the place alone been such a pitched field of Opinions, but the fruit also which Moses expresseth to be the instrument and occasion of Adams ruine, hath set some mens teeth on edge, who tell vs what it is, as if they had lately tasted of it, a certaine signe indeede, and fruit of that once vnlawfull tasting.Gorop. Becan. Indoscythico. Goropius a man addicted to opinions, which I know not whether he did hold more strangely or strongly, though he enlargeth Paradise ouer the World, yet he maketh Adam an Indian (maruell he placeth him not in Dutchland, for that was his language, if Becanus be to be beleeued.) About the Riuer Ac^sines, bebetwixt Indus and Ganges (saith he) groweth that admirable Figge-tree, which he at large describeth out of Plinie, Theophrastus, and Strabo, whose branches spreading from the bodie,  doe bend themselues downewards to the earth, where they take hold, and with new rooting multiply themselues, like a maze or wood. One toldCar. Clus. Exoticorum. l. 1. c. 1. see l. 5. c. 12. of this Historie. Clusius that hee himselfe hath beene one of eight hundred o^ ^2 thousand men, which had hidden themselues vnder one of these trees, adding, that some of them were able to couer three thousand men.
Strange is this tree, and Becanus is with conceit hereof rauished into the pleasures of Paradise. This treeLinschoten lib. 1. cap. 58. Linschoten describeth, growing about Goa, and (to bring vs out of Goropius Paradise) saith, that it hath no fruit worth the eating: but a small kind like Oliues, which is food onely for birds. He telleth vsC. 55. To this agreeth that of Drusius Tetrag. c. 4. Apud Doctores Ehraeos si cus vocantur (...) quod ruinae causam dederint primis parentibus. Sane ficum fuisse illam arborem cuius fructu illis vesci non licebat, non malum, vt vulgus opinatur, ^ia c^edidit antiquitas. of another Indian Figge-tree, growing rather like a Reed then a Tree, a mans height, a spanne thicke, the leaues a fathome long, and three spans broad: The Arabians and Indians suppose this to be that dismall fruit. The cause of this opinion  Paludanus in his Annotations vpon Linschoten, ascribeth to the pleasantnesse of the smel and taste. Being cut in the middle, it hath certaine veines like a Crosse, whereon the Christians in Syria make many speculations. Yea the same Author telleth of a hill in the Ile of Seilan, called Adams hill, where they shew his foot-print, to prooue that hee liued there: of which reade our discourse of that Iland.Lib. 5. cap. 14. Boskhier in his Ara coeli, citeth out of Moses Barcepha, That wheate was the Tree of Knowledge of good and euill; and so doe the Saracens hold: so curious and vaine is blind Reason without a guide. And the Cabilists (saithRich. Epit. de Talmud. doct. Ricius) say, that Eues sinne was nothing but the wringing out of grapes to her husband; which yet he interpreteth allegorically.
But I thinke I haue wearied the Reader, with leading him thus vp and downe in Paradise:  small fruit, I confesse, is in this fruit, and as little pleasure in this Paradise, but that varietie happily may please some, though it be to others tedious. And for a conclusion, it is (I think) worth the noting, that M. Cartwright an eye-witnesse,The Preachers trauells. by the counsell of the Nestorian Patriark^ at Mosull or Niniuie, visited the Ile of Eden, still so called, and by them holden a part of Paradise, ten miles in circuit, and sometime walled: which if it be not part of that Garden-plot mentioned by Moses, yet it seemes is part of that Countrey sometime called Eden, in the East part whereof Paradise was planted, and not farre (according to Iunius Map) from that happy vnhappy place.


CHAP. IIII. Of the Word Religion, and of the Religion of our first Parents before the Fall.
HAuing thus made way to our History of Religions, the first (and therefore best) Religion, is in the first place to be declared. Onely somewhat may be not vnfitly spoken before of the word. Religion in it selfe is naturall, written in the hearts of all men, which will (as here we shew) rather be of a false then no Religion: but the name whereby it is so called, is by birth a forreiner, by  common vse made a free-denizon amo^g vs, descended from the Romanes, which by their Swords made way for their Words, the Authors both of the thing it selfe, and of the appellation, to a great part of this Westerne world. But as the Latines haue accustomed themselues to multiplicity and varietie of Rites, so haue they varied not a little about the Parents, (as I may say) of this child (as the Grecians sometimes about Homers birth-place) some giuing one Etymologie and deriuation of the word, and some another, that there needeth some Herald to shew the true petigree, or some Grammarian Dictator to cease the strife.
Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 3.Seruius Sulpitius (as Macrobius citeth him) calleth that Religio^, which for some holinesse is remooued and separated from vs, quasi relictam a relinquendo dictam. Seruius deserueth to be re^^nquished, and his opinion remooued and separated euen with an Anathema, if hee  would remooue and separate Religion from vs, which is the life of our life, the way to our happinesse. The like is added of Ceremonia a carendo dicta, a iust name and reason of the most of the present Romish ceremonies, whose want were their best company. Massurius Sabinus
 inNoc. At. lib. 4. cap. 9. A. Gellius hath the like words. Religio, with Tully is Cultus deorum, the worship of the gods, hereby distinguisht from Superstition, because they were, saith he, called Superstitious; that spent whole dayes in prayer and sacrifices, that their children might be Superstites, suruiuors after them: or rather as Lanctantius,Lactant. lib 4. cap. 28. Qui superstitem memoriam defunctorum colunt, aut qui parentibus suis superstites celebrant imagines corum domi, tanquam Deos penates. But they which diligently vsed and perused the things pertaining to diuine worship, and tanquam relegerent, were called Religious. Religiosi ex relegendo tanquam ex elegendo elegentes, intelligendo intelligentes.Religiosum a superstitioso ea^ distinctione discernit Varro, vt a superstitioso dicat timeri Deos, a religioso autem tautum vereri vt parentes, non vt holles timeri, Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 6 c. 6. Saint Augustine better acquainted with Religion then Cicero, commeth neerer to the name and nature thereof, deriuing itDe Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 4. a religendo, of choosing againe. Hunc eligentes, vel potius religentes, amiseramus enim negligentes, vnde and religio dicta perhibetur. This word Religens  is cited by Nigidius Figulus in Aulus Gellius; Religentem esse oportet, Religiosum nefas: Religiosus being taken in bad sense for Superstitiosus. The same Fath^^ elsewhere, in his booke de vera ReligioneIn fine. Vbi supra. acknowledgeth another originall of the word, which Lactantius before him had obserued, a religando, of fastning, as beeing the bond betweene vs and GOD. Ad Deum tendentes, saith Augustine, and ei vni religantes animas nostras, vnde religio dicta creditur. Religet ergo nos Religio vni omnipotenti Deo. Lactantius his words are; Diximus nomen religionis a vinculo pietatis esse deductum, quod hominem sibi Deus religauerit and pietate constrinxerit, quia seruire nos ei vt Domino and obsequi vt patri, necesse est. Melius ergo (quam Cicero) id nomen Lucretius interpretatus est, quia ait se religionum nodo exoluere. And according to this Etymologie is that which M. Camden saith,Remains of a greater worke. Religion in old English was called Ean-fastnesse, as the  one and onely Assurance and fast Anchor-hold of our soules health.
De vocabulo Religionis vide Lil. Gyrald. hist. d. synt. 1. Suarez. de Relig. li. 1. and Stuck^um de sacris and sacrificijs Gentium, qui Etymon dat etiam nominum, Cultus Ceremonia. Pietas, etc. Graec. Latin. Heb huc pertinentium.This is the effect of sinne and irreligion, that the name and practise of Religion is thus diuersified, else had there beene as one GOD, soone religion, and one language, wherein to giue it with iust reason, a proper name. For till men did relinquere, relinquish their first innocencie, and the Author, of whom, and in whom they held it, they needed not religere, to make a second choice, or seeke reconciliation, nor thus relegere, with such paines and vexation of spirit to enquire and practise those things which might religare, bind them surer and faster vnto God: and in these respects for seuerall causes, Religion might seeme to be deriued from all those fountaines. Thus much of the word, whereby the nature of Religion is in part declared, but more fully by the description thereof.  
Religio est, saith83. Quaest. q. 31. Augustine, quae superioris cuiusdam naturae, quam diuinam vocant, curam ceremoniamque affert. Religion is here described generally (whether false or truely) professing the inward obseruation, and ceremoniall outward worship of that which is esteemed a higher and diuine nature. The true Religion is the true rule and right way of seruing GOD. Or to speake as the case now standeth with vs:Morn. de verit. Christ. relig. cap. 20. True Religion is the right way of reconciling and reuniting man to GOD, that hee may be saued. This true way hee alone can shew vs, who is the Way and the Truth; neither can we see this Sunne, except he first see vs, and giue vs both eyes to see, and light also whereby to discerne him.
Adams happinesse before his fall.But to come to Adam, the subiect of our present discourse: His religion before his fall, was not to reunite him to GOD, from whom he had not been separated, but to vnite him faster,  and daily to knit him neerer in the experience of that which nature had ingrafted in him. For what else was his Religion, but a pure streame ofIustitiae originalis. Rom. 12.2. Originall Righteousnesse, flowing from that Image of GOD, whereunto he was created? Whereby his mind was enlightened to know the onely very GOD, and his heart was engrauen, not with the Letter, but the life and power of the Law, louing and proouing that good and acceptable and perfect will of GOD. The whole man was conformable, and endeauoured this holy practise, the body being plyant and flexible to the rule of the Soule, the Soule to the Spirit, the Spirit to the Father of Spirits, and God of all Flesh, which no lesse accepted of this obedience, and delighted (as the Father in his Child) in this new modell of himselfe. How happy was that blessed familiarity with God, societie of Angels, subiection of Creatures, enuied onely of the Deuills, because  this was so good, and they so wicked? Nature was his Schoolmaster, or if you will rather, GODS Vsher, that taught him (without learning) all the rules of Diuine Learning of Politicall, Oeconomicall, and Morall wisedome.
The whole Law was perfectly written in the fleshie Tables of his heart, besides the especiall command concerning the trees in the middest of the Garden, the one being an vniuersall and euerlasting rule of righteousnesse; the other by speciall authority appointed, as the manifestation of GODS diuine prerogatiue in commanding, and a triall of mans integritie in obeying. For the first part hereof, since it was so blurred in our hearts, it was renued by the voyce and finger of God on mount Sinai, giuen then immediately by GOD himselfe, as GOD ouer all; whereas the other parts of the Law, containing the Ceremoniall and Politicall  ordinances, were immediately giuen by the Ministerie of Moses, as to that particular Nation.

Neither know I any that make doubt of this whole Law naturally and originally communicated saue onely that some make question of the Sabbath. Howbeit, I must confesse that I see nothing in that Commandement of the Decalogue prescribed, but is Naturall and Moral: for, both the Rest is so farre Morall, as the outward acts of Diuine worship cannot be performed without suspending for a while our bodily labours: although Rest, as a figure, bee Iewish, and in it selfe is either a fruit of wearinesse or idlenesse. And that the seuenth dayes obseruation is naturall (I meane the obseruing of one day of seauen in euery weeke) appeareth both by the first order established in Nature, when GOD blessed and sanctified the seuenth day;Calu. Fagius, Pagnin, Vrsin. Hospin. Martyr. Iun. Zanc. Oecolam. Gibbins, besides Perkins, Bound, Greenham, Rogers, and others. the streame of Interpreters, especially the later, running and ioyning in this interpretation,  (the Elder beeing somewhat more then enough busied in Allegories:) by the reason in the Commandement, drawne from Gods example and Sanctification in the Creation: by the obseruation of a Sabbath, before this promulgation of the Law, Exod. 16. and by the diuision of the dayes into weekes,The heathens by the light of Nature had their weeks, as appeareth by naming the daies after the seuen Planets, and Satuday, or Saturns day was by the Gentiles sequestred from Ciuill and Martiall affaires, beeing esteemed most fit for contemplation, and deuotion, as saith Aretius Probl. de Sab. both then and before by Noah, Gen. 8.10.12. by the necessitie of a Sabbath, as well before the Law in the dayes of the Patriarkes, as in the times of Dauid or Salomon: by the perfection of the number of seuen in thePhilo saith that some Cities kept a monthly Sabbath, ^^bring the seuenth day from the new Moone. de 10. p. Scriptures; by the generall consent of all, that it is Morall to set apart some time to the Lord of times, and an orderly set time to the God of order, which men might generally agree on for their publike deuotions: which the Patriarkes practised in their Sacrifices and Assemblies: the Heathens blindly, as other things in their Feasts. Thus saith PhiloPhilo de Fab. Mundi. Clem. Strom. l. 5. and ad eund. Herumius.: This is a feast day; not of one Citie or Region,  but of the whole world, and may be properly called the generall birth-day of the world: And Clemens Alexandrinus sheweth out of Plato, Homer, Hesiod, Callimachus and Solon, that the seuenth day was not sacred alone to the Hebrewes, but to the Greekes also: and how mysticall was the number of seuen, not onely among the Iewes, but also among the Heathens, both Philosophers and Poets? as Philo,Philo de Fab. Mund. and de 10. pre Macrob. in in som. Scip. l. 1. cap. 6. Virg terque quaterque b. etc. Macrobius, and others haue related.
Hereunto agreeth the iudgement of Aquinas,Secu^da secundae. q. 122. art. 4. Praeceptum de sanctificatione Sabbathi ponitur inter praecepta Decalogi, in quantum est praeceptum morale, non in quantum est ceremoniale. The Precept of sanctifying the Sabbath, is set amongst the Precepts of the Decalogue, as it is a morall, not as a ceremoniall Precept. It hath pleased him,Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. @. 70. saith M. Hooker, as of the rest, so of Times to exact some parts by way of perpetuall homage, neuer to bee dispensed  withall, nor remitted. The Morall law requiring therefore a seuenth part throughout the age of the whole world to bee that way employed, although with vs the day bee changed, in regard of a new reuolution begun by our Sauiour Christ, yet the same proportion of time continueth which was before, because in reference to the benefite of Creation, and now much more of renouation thereunto added by him, which was Prince of the world to come, wee are bound to account the sanstification of one day in seauen, a dutie which Gods immutable Law doth exact for euer. Thus farre Hooker.
This indeed in the Sabbath was Iewish and Ceremoniall, to obserue onely that last and seuenth day of the weeke, and that as a figure, and lastly, with those appointed Ceremonies, and that manner of obseruation. Thus saith Aquinas,Vbi supra. Habere aliquod tempus deputatum  ad vacandum diuinis, cadit sub praecepto morali. Sed in quantum, etc. To haue some set time for the seruice of God is morall: but so farre this Precept is ceremoniall, as in it is determined a speciall time, in signe of the Creation of the World. Likewise it is ceremoniall, according to the Allegoricall signification; in as much as it was a signe of the Rest of Christ in the graue, which was the seuenth day. And likewise according to the morall signification, as it signifieth a ceasing from euery act of sinne, and the Rest of the mind in God. Likewise according to the Anagogicall signification, as it prefigureth the Rest of the fruition of God, which shall be in our Countrey.
To these obseruations of Thomas, we may adde that strictnesse of the obseruation, That they might not kindle a fire on the Sabbath, and such like. And howsoeuer some testimonies of the Fathers be alledged against this truth, and to prooue that the Sabbath was born at Mount  Sinai, as ofCited by Del. de Imag. l. 2. c. 7. and by others. Tertullian, Iustin Martyr, Eusebius, Cyprian, Augustine, which deny the Sabbatizing of the Patriarkes before that time, and account it typicall; Why may not we interpret them of that Sabbath of theSo Iustin reasoneth against Tryphon a Iew, and that Iewish Sabbatizing and so the rest, if their testimonies bee well weighed. Iewes, which we haue thus distinguished from the Morall Sabbath, by those former notes of difference? Broughton in his Concent alleadgeth the Concent of Rabbins, as of Ramban on Gen. 26. and Aben Ezra vpon Exod. 10. That the Fathers obserued the Sabbath before Moses. And Moses himselfe no sooner commeth to a seuenth day, but he sheweth thatGen. 2.2, 3. God rested blessed, sanctified the sume.
It resteth therefore, that a time of rest from bodily labour was sanctified vnto spirituall deuotions from the beginning of the world, and that a seuenth dayes rest began not with the Mosaicall Ceremonies in the Wildernesse (as some men will haue it) but with Adam in Paradise.  That which is morall (say some) is eternall, and must not giue place; I answer, That the Commandements are eternall, but yet subordinate. There is aMark. 12.28. and 31. first of all the Commandements, and there is a second like to this, like in qualitie, not in equalitie: and in euery Commandement
 the Soule of obedience (which is the obedience of the soule) taketh place of that body of obedience, which is performed by the body. Mercie is preferred before sacrifice, and charitie before outward worship: PaulAct. 20.9. staieth his preaching to heale Eutychus: Christ patronizethMark. 2.25. his Disciples, plucking the eares of Corne; and affirmeth, That the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath. Although therefore both rest and workes of the Sabbath giue place to such duties, which the present occasion presenteth, as more weightie and necessary to that time, yet doth it not follow, that the Sabbath is not morall, no more then the Commandement of Almes is not morall, because (asQualitas praeceptorum praesigit metam. Est v. g. mandatum, non furaberis, and est mandatum omni petenti te, da. Vtrumque quidem magnu^ quoniam vtru^que diuinum, sed de non furando, maius. Nonaeque displicent tenaces atque fures. Bern. de praecep. and dispensat. Barnard obserueth) the prohibitiue Commandement of stealing is of greater force, and more bindeth. And in a word, the Negatiue Precepts are of more force, andNegatiue Precepts bind at all times, and to all times: the Affirmatiue bind at all times, but not t^ all times: and therefore Negatiue are of more force. Perkins Ser. Causarum. more vniuersally bind then the affirmatiue. A man must hate  his Father and Mother for Christs sake, and breake the Sabbaths rest for his Neighbour in cases of necessitie. And therefore such scrupulousRefert. Tho. Rogers. fancies, as some obtrude vnder the name of the Sabbath, esteeming it a greater sinne to violate this holy Rest, then to commit Murther, cannot be defended.
Pardon this long Discourse, whereunto the longer Discourses of others haue brought me. But now me thinkes I heare thee say, And what is all this to Adams integrity? Doubtlesse, Adam had his particular calling, to till the ground: his generall calling also, to serue GOD; which as he was spiritually to performe in all things, so being a body, he was to haue time and place set apart for the bodily performance thereof. And what example could hee better follow, then of his Lord and Creator? But some obiect, This is to slacken him running, rather  then to incite and prouoke him; to bind, and not to loose him; cannot be a spurre, but a bridle to his deuotion. But they should consider, that we doe not tie Adam to the seuenth day onely; but to the seuenth especially, wherein to performe set, publique, and solemne worship. Neither did Daniel, that prayed thrice a day, or Dauid, in his seuen times, or Saint Paul, in his iniunction of praying continually, conceiue that the Sabbath would hinder men, and not rather further them in these workes. Neither was Adams state so excellent, as that he needed no helps: which wofull experience in his fall hath taught. God gaue him power to liue, yea with euerlasting life: and should not Adam therefore haue eaten, yea and haue had conuenient times for food and sleep, and other naturall necessities? How much more in this perfect, yet flexible and variable condition of his Soule, did he need meanes of establishment, although euen  in his outward calling, he did not forget, nor was forgotten? Which outward workes, though they were not irkesome and tedious, as sinne hath made them to vs, yet did they detaine his body, and somewhat distract his mind, from that full and entire seruice which the Sabbath might exact of him. Neither doe they shew any strong reason for their opinion, which hold the sanctification of the Sabbath, Genes. 2. to be set downe by way of anticipation, or as a preparatiue to the Iewish Sabbath, ordainedSethu^ Caluis. 2453. Bu^. Opmeerus, etc. 2454. 2453. yeares after.
If any shall aske, Why the same seuenth day is not still obserued of Christians; I answer, This was figuratiue, and is abolished; but a seuenth day still remaineth. Lex naturalis est, coniunctam habens ceremonialem designationem diei (saith Iunius.) The Law is naturall, hauing adioyned thereto the ceremoniall appointment of the day. But why is this day now called the Lords day?  I answer, euen therefore because it is the Lords day, not changed by the Churches Constitution Meere, as some seeme to hold: except by the Churches authority they meane Christ and his Apostles: nor descended to vs by Tradition, as the Papists maintaine, seeing the Scriptures, Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.21. Apoc. 1.10. mention the name and celebration by the constant practise of the Apostles: yea, Christ himselfe as he rose on that day, so did he vsually appeare on that day to his Apostles before his Ascension. Christ therefore and his Apostles are our Authors of this change. And the ChurchIustin. Mart. Apol. 2. in fine. Die solis omnes conuenimus publice quod is dies primus est, in quo Deus tenebras and materiaus cum mutasset, mundum effecit and quod eodem die, Ies. Christus conseruat^r noster a mortuis excitatus est. euer since hath constantly obserued it. The Fathers teach, yea the Papists themselues acknowledge this truth. So Bellarmine de Cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. saith, Ius diuinum requirebat, vt vnus dies Hebdomade dicaretur cultus diuino: non autem conueniebat vt seruaretur Sabbathum: itaque ab Apostolis in diem Dominicum versumCongerit ibi testimonia Ignati^; Tertul. Clem. Orig. Athaenas. Ambros. Hieron. Gregor. Leonis. Hilarij. est. It was  in the Primitiue Church called the Lords day, the day of Bread andChrysost. Ser. 5. de Resurrect. of Light, because of the Sacraments of the Supper and Baptisme, therein administred, called Bread and Light. And how it may be ascribed to Tradition,Bell. de verb^ Dei non scripto, lib. 4. cap. 7. Bellarmine, the great Patron of Traditions, sheweth out of Iustin Martyr, who saith, Christus haec illis (Apostolis and Discipulis) tradidit, Iustin in fine 2. Apolog. He there also reporteth, That they had their Ecclesiasticall Assemblies euery Lords day. The Rhemists,Rhemish Test. which ascribe it to Tradition in Annot. Matth. 15. acknowledge the institution thereof, in Annot. 1. Cor. 16.2. IgnatiusIgnat. ad Magnes. may be allowed Arbiter in this question of the Sabbath, who thus writeth to the Magnesians: Non Sabbatisemus, Let vs not obserue the Sabbath after the Iewish manner, as delighting in ease; For he that worketh not, let him not eate: but let euery one of vs keepe the Sabbath spiritually, not eating meat dressed the day before, and  walking set paces, etc. But let euery Christian celebrate the Lords day, consecrated to the Lords resurrection, as the Queene and Princesse of all dayes.

Now for the particular Commandement, which was giuen him as an especiall proofe of his obedience, in a thing otherwise not vnlawfull, it was the forbidding him to eate of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge. For in the middest of the Garden GOD had planted two Trees, which some callErat ei in lignis caeteris alimentum, in illo autem, Sacramentum. Aug. de Gen. ad lit. lib. 8. cap. 4. Sacraments, and were, by GODS Ordinance, signes vnto him; one of life, if he obeyed; the other of death, by disobedience. Not as the Iewes thought, and Iulian scoffed, That the Tree had power to giue sharpenesse of wit. And although some thinke signes needlesse to so excellent a creature; yet beeing mutable, subiect to temptation, and each way flexible to vertue or vice, according as he vsed his naturall power of free-will; I see not why they should deny GOD that libertie to impose, or man that necessitie to need such monitories,  and (as it were) Sacramentall instructions. For what might these Trees haue furthered him in carefulnesse, if he had considered life and death, not so much in these Trees, as in his free-wil, and obeying or disobeying his Creator.
These Trees, in regard of their signification, and euent, are called the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and euill: which was not euill or hurtfull in it selfe, but was a visible rule, whereby good and euill should be knowne, and that by reason of the Commandement annexed, which he might by this Precept see to be grounded in obeying or disobeying the authority of the Law-giuer. An easie rule, and yet too easily broken. For when as God did hereby challenge his own Soueraignty, by imposing so easie a fine, which might haue forbidden all but one (as contrariwise he allowed) and fore-signified the danger, that he might  continue his goodnesse to man, continuing in obedience; yet did man herein shew his contempt, in reiecting so easie a yoake, and so light a burthen. I will not reason whether these two Trees may properly be called Sacraments: of which (say some) the one was but for the bodily life, and better neuer to haue touched the other: this we know, that in eating of this he lost both bodily and spirituall life, which the name and institution thereof forewarned, and should haue preuented: otherwise, in eating of the other, immortalitie had been sealed both in soule and body, to him and his for euer. Srange it seemeth, that he should need no monitorie signes to preuent that, which, euen with these helps added, he did not eschew.


CHAP. V. Of the Fall of Man: and of Originall Sinne.
HItherto we haue beheld the Creation of the World, and of our first Parents, the liuely Images of the Creator and the Creature; whom we haue somewhat leisurely viewed in a naked Maiesty, delighting themselues in the enamelled walkes of their delightfull Garden. The Riuers whereof ranne to present their best offices to their new Lords, from which they were forced by the backer streames, greedy of the sight and place which they could not hold: The  Trees stouped to behold them, offering their shady mantle, and varietie of fruits, as their naturall tribute: each creature in a silent gladnesse reioyced in them, and they enioyed all mutuall comforts in the Creator, the Creatures, and in themselues. A blessed Payre, who enioyed all they desired, whiles their desire was worth the enioying: Lords of all, and of more then all, Content, which might in all they saw, see their Makers bounty; and beyond all they could see, might see themselues comprehended, where they could not comprehend, of that infinite Greatnesse and goodnesse, which they could not but loue, reuerence, admire and adore. This was then their Religion, to acknowledge with thankefulnesse, to be thankefull in obedience, to obey with cherefulnesse, the Author of all this good: to the performance whereof, they found no outward, no inward impediment, Sickenesse, Perturbation and Death (the deformed  issue of Sinne) not yet being entered into the World.
In this plight did Satan (that old Serpent) see, disdaine and enuy them. It was not enough for him, and the deuillish crue of his damned associates, for their late rebellion, to be banished Heauen, but the inferiour world must be filled with his venome, working that malice on the Creatures here, which he could not there so easily wrecke on their Creator. And because Man was here GODS Deputy and Lieutenant, as a petty God on the Earth, hee chooseth him as the fittest subiect, in whose ruine to despite his Maker. To this end he vseth not a Lion-like force, which then had been bootlesse, but a Serpentine sleight, vsing that subtill creature as the meetest instrument to his Labyrinthian proiects. Whereas by inward temptation he could not so easily preuaile, by insinuating himselfe into their minds, he windes himselfe into  this winding Beast, disposing the Serpents tongue to speake to the Woman (the weaker Vessell) singled from her husband, and by questioning doth first vndermine her. TheIt is by all affirmed, that the fall was very soon after the Creation, as appeareth by circumstances of the narration, by Satans malice, the womans virginitie, and many hold, it was the very day of their Creation. Bibliand.Broughtons Conc^nt, Praeter antiques August. Iren. Chrysost. etc. And Genebrard is exactly curious for the day and houre, if you will receiue him. Sexto die diluculo treatus f^it: hora tertia Euae copulatus: hora sexta tentatus: hora nona eiectus e Paradis^, in agrum Hebron, vna cum Eua exul pellitur, vbi and sepelitur, Genes. Chron. Woman
 (whether she had not yet experience of the Nature of the Creatures, or did admire so strange an accident, and would satisfie her curious mind in the further tryall) entertained discourse, and was presently snared. For though she held her to the Commandement, yet the threatning annexed, she did somewhat mince and extenuate. What she seemed to lessen, he feared not to annihilate, and wholly disanull, propounding not onely impunity, but aduantage, That they should be as Gods, in the enriching of their minds with further knowledge. This hee perswadeth by the equivocating in the name of the Tree (the first equiuocation we read of,Ioh. 8.14. The first sinne of our first Parents. otherwhere plainely tearmed a lye) charging GOD with falshood and malignitie.
Thus he that abode not in the Truth himselfe, but was a Man-slayer from the beginning, and the Father of Lying, which he no where else borrowed, but had of his owne, perswaded her by  his great subtiltie, first to doubt of GODS Truth in his Word (the first particular sinne that euer mans heart entertained; for the other were but occasions and inducements; disobedience and vnthankefulnesse are more generall) after that, she vnlawfully lusted after this new knowledge, bewitched with the pleasantnesse of the fruit to the taste and sight, shee tooke, and did eate, and gaue to her husband likewise. The highest power of the soule is first entrapped, the lusting and sensible faculties follow after, iustly plagued by a correspondent inward rebellion, that the sense now ruleth the appetite; and this the reason in our corrupt estate, which hence proceeded.
ThusAug. Enchir. cap. 45. Foolish and wicked is their conceit, that measure this sinne by the fruit (a Nut or Apple) that was eaten: as Pope Iulius, That said hee might bee as well angry for his Peacocke as God (whose Vicar he was) for an Apple. Bal de vit. Pont. vnbeleefe brought forth vnthankefulnesse, vnthankefulnesse, pride; from thence ambition and all that rabble of contempt of Gods Truth; beleeuing the Deuils lies, abuse of the Creatures to  wanton lust, Sacrilegious vsurping that which GOD had reserued, scandalous prouocation of her husband, with the murther bodily and ghostly of him, her selfe, and their whole posteritie for euer; and whereas, yet they had done so little seruice to GOD, they offered almost their first fruits to the Deuill, hauingPosse si vellent sed non velle vt possent. Free-will to haue resisted if they would. No maruell then if such a combination of so many sinnes in one, wrung from the iustice of GOD, such a multitude of iudgements on them and theirs, in the defacing that goodly and glorious Image of GOD; subiecting (in stead thereof) the Bodie to Sickenesse, Colde, Heate, Nakednesse, Hunger, Thirst, Stripes, Wounds, Death; the Minde to Ignorance, Doubtings, Vanitie, Phancies, Phrenzies; the Will to Vnstaiednesse, Passion, Perturbations; the Whole Man is made a slaue to Sinne within him, to the Deuill without; whence he must expect Wages sutable to his Worke, Death; Spirituall, Naturall, and Eternall:  an infinite punishment, for offending an infinite Maiesty.
Thus had they put out their light to obscure darkenesse: and if they were not presently cast into vtter darkenesse, it was GODS mercy (not their merit) which suspended the first and naturall death, to preuent that second and eternal. But spiritually the were euen already dead in sinnes, as appeared by the accusations of their conscience; whereof Moses saith,Gen. 3.7. Cognouerunt se nudos, quod exvti essent rerum diuinarum contemplatione, etc. Athan. The eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. Conscience, before Vertues keeper, was now become Hels Harbenger, then flashing lightnings in the face of their minds, to shew, that their nakednesse did now appeare filthy in GODS sight: Lightnings indeed, which could only lighten to terrifie, not enlighten with instruction and comfort: which sparke remaineth after the fire of Gods Image extinct, by the mercifull prouidence of GOD, in someSpiritus reprimens, non renouans. to bee a  bridle of Nature, least they should runne into all excesse of vilanie, and not leaue a face of the world in the world, and to be to others, by disposition and working of a higher and supernaturall Light, a preparatiue to, and a preseruatiue in that light of Life. So much the greater is their sinne, that seeke to flash out these flashings: and whereas they cannot reade the booke of Scripture, and will not reade the booke of the Creature, labour to extinguish also this Light of Nature, that with seared consciences, they may more freely in darkenesse commit the workes of darkenesse. And euen this did Adam seeke, if GOD had not brought him out of his Owles neast. For what could a Fig-leafe hide from GOD? and did they thinke the innocent Trees would conspire with them to conceale Traytors? Was there any darkenesse which was not Light to him? Or could Breeches and Trees couer their Soules, which receiued the first and  worst nakednesse; till which, Nakednesse to the body, was a Clothing of Beauty, a Liuery of Bounty, an Ensigne of Maiesty? SuchIer. 2.13. broken pits seeke they that forsake the Fountaine of liuing Waters.
And yet when GOD commeth into Iudgement, andGen. 3.8. makes the winds to vsher him vnto his priuate Sessions in Paradise; to those shiftlesse shifts they added worse, impiously accusing GOD, vncharitably charging one another, to put from themselues that blame, which thus claue faster to them. A medicine worse then the disease, or a disease in stead of a medicine, is hypocrisie, that will not see her owne sickenesse, and seekes rather to couer, then to cure; to couer by charging others, then recouer by discharging and discouering it selfe; as ifSimulata aequitas, duplex iniquitas. Hieron. equitie pretended were not iniquitie doubled. GOD proceedeth to sentence, a sentence worthy of  GOD, shewing at once his infinite iustice in the punishment of sinne, and no lesse infinite mercie, to prouide an infinite price to redeeme vs; by his infinite power bringing good out of
 euill, and by his manifold Wisedome taking that wise one in his craftinesse, who in the destruction of Man, had sought GODS dishonour. So good is it that euill should be, when this Soueraigne goodnesse purposeth to effect his good will by wicked instruments, outDeus quasdam voluntates suas vtique bonas implet per malorum hominum voluntates malas. De his qui faciunt quae non vult, facit ipse quae vult. Sicut naturam bonarum opt. Creator est, ita voluntatum malarum iustiss^ordinator, vt cum male illae vt^ntur naturis bonis, ipse bene vtatur etiam voluntatibus malis. Aug. of their darkenesse, producing his owne maruellous light: as appeared in this worke of Sathan an aduersary, intended to his despite; in, and by the promised Seede, disposed to his glory.Gen. 3.14. The Serpent hath a bodily curse in his future bodily difficulties, which still continue, for his instrumentall and bodily imployment.
TheVers. 15. old Serpent and spirituall Enemie, hath a spirituall and eternall curse, the breaking of his head by that Seede of the Woman, that should once lead Captiuitie captiue. Our Parents are  cursed, yet so, as their curse is turned into a blessing; all things working to the best: In sorrow shal be the Womans conceptions, but recompenced with the ioy which followeth (and is as it were, the Mid-wife in their trauell) because ofIoh. 16.21. fruit borne into the World; and more then recompenced, in that they are1. Tim. 1. vlt. saued by bearing of children, if they continue in the faith, and liue in holinesse with modestie. Adam is set to labour, not as before, with delight, but with paine and difficultie; the Earth also being cursed for his sake: yet by this narrow way, by this crosse-way, he is guided to Heauen; the hope whereof was giuen him before Paradise was taken from him. So true is it, that in iudgement he remembreth mercy, if we can learne to liue by faith, and not by sight.
This, that Moses telleth of the fall of Man, Experience doth in manner proclaime through the World, in the manifold effects thereof, which we daily see. For whereas the World was  made for Man, as before is shewed, who alone, in regard of his bodily and spirituall nature, can need and vse it, no creature in the world is in his kind so imperfect as man. Hee that was before as an earthly God, is now become an incarnate Deuill, and for aspiring to be like his Lord, was made a seruant of hisTerra sese supra ignem, coenu^ supra coelum attollit. Otho Heurnius Chaldaic. seruants; the noblest part in him becomming a base Officer to degrade him, Reason it selfe deiected at the feet of Sense, to be a slaue, and a very Bawd to sensuall pleasures, a very Broker for dung-hill profits. And what is this but to metamorphose man into a beast? vnlesse that some in a lower degree, liuing onely to liue, suffocatedViui homini^ Sepulchrum. with eating, drinking, sleeping, are degenerated into plants? And if he descend not lower, to become torpide and liuelesse, yet doth he participate the imperfections of those things, and that without their perfections, as if with an imperfect retrograde hee would returne into his first  elements, or in a perfected imperfection, to his first nothing. What stone so hard as mans heart is relentlesse, remorselesse to his best good? What dust more subiect to the wind, or water more flexible, then hee to temptation and sinne? But those things remaine in their nature, or naturall place: Man is a fuming smoke, a passing shadow. And yet if wee could stay at our Elements, it were somewhat better; but wee are seruants and drudges beneath all names of basenesse, vnbowelling the Earth, and our selues in the earth, for a little hardened earth, that neuer had the dignitie to see, no not to be seen of the Sunne. We seeme to rule the Skie, Winds, and Seas; indeed we aduenture our liues to their mercy, and not three fingers thicknesse doth separate vs from death, that we may bring home an idle discourse, or somewhat, almost lesse then nothing, that we call a Iewell. Once, we inuert Nature, subuert others, peruert our  selues, for those things which sometimes kill the body, and alway (except a power, with whom all things are possible, preuent) the Soule: And yet,Luc. 12.20. Thou Foole, this night may they fetch away thy Soule; and whose then shall these things bee? And whose then, and where then, shalt thou be? Thou gainest faire to loose thy selfe, to be taken with thy taking, to bee thus bad to others, that thou mayest be worse to thy selfe: and when-as (like an Asse) thou hast been laden all the dayes of thy life with those things, which euen in hauing thou wantedst, now to be more intollerably burthened, now to be in Hell, which will neuer bee satisfied in thee, whose Character was before engrauen in thy vnsatiable heart. Tell me not then of the reasonable power of our soules, whereby we resemble GOD, seeing that reason may tell thee and me, that by abusing itIgnat. ad Magnes. Epist. Pius homo numisma est a Deo cusum: impius, ad ulterinum, non a Deo sed Diabol^ effectum. we are like, andIo. 8.44. are of our Father the Deuill. That erected countenance  to be still groueling in, and poring on the Earth; that immortall soule to mind onely such things as haue not the imperfect priuiledge to be mortall; those high excellencies to bee abused to mischiefe, blaspheming, denying, forswearing GOD and all for the basest of the basest creatures! Well might this deluge of corruption mooue thatDiog. Laer. lib. 6. Cynick, in a throng of men to make search for a Man, this Man which is now left vs, beeing but the ruines, the carkasse of himselfe. Well might the Greekes call this body of ours, (...)Plato in Gorg. quasi (...), the Sepulchre of the soule; the Latines Corpus, where by reason of mans fall from his first estate, the first syllable is falne off, Cor, the heart is gone, we are Vecordes, Socordes, onely pus remaines, corruption and filthinesse; and doe not wee call it body, because both die, the soule also hereby infected, and that both deaths, internall and externall? The Spirit, the better part of man, is spirit  indeed, a puffe and vaine blast of emptinesse, animus is (...), a winde that passeth, that passeth the wind in vanitie. But what needes all this? Why are we fallen into so long and tedious discourse of our fall? Euen because some are fallen further, beyond all sense and feeling of
 their fall, and beleeued not that man was euer any other creature, then now they see; that if their goodnesse cannot, yet their wickednesse might teach them, that so perfect a World should not haue beene framed for so imperfect a wretch, now onely perfect in imperfection. Our fall must teach vs to rise, our straying to returne, our degeneration a regeneration. And therefore was not that Image of GOD wholly done out, but some remainder continued to the Posteritie, to conuince them of miserie in themselues, that so denying themselues, they might take vp their Crosse, and follow the second Adam vnto a durable happinesse.
But how (may some aske, asIul. Pelagian. Cap. August. the Pelagian did) came this misery to vs? Non peccat ille qui genuit, non peccat ille qui condidit, per quas igitur rimas inter tot praesidia innocentiae fingis peccatum ingressum? Doth it agree with diuine Iustice, that if the Fathers haue eaten sowre  Grapes, the Children-teeth should be set on edge? I answere, We are Heires of our Father, we need not seeke some secret cranie, we see an open gate,Rom. 5.12. by one man sinne entred into the World, and death by sinne. A little leaue let vs borrow to cleere this difficultie. Sinne is1. Iohn 3.4. a transgression of the Law, or a defect of conformitie to the Law, ((...)) and cannot properly be said to haue an efficient, but a deficient cause, being in it owne nature and subsistence, (...). TheAquin. 1.2. q. 75. art. 1. quaest. disp. de Malo. q. 1. 6. Dorbel. Viguer, etc. Schoole-men say, in sinne are two things to bee considered, the substance and the qualitie, essence and priuation, the act and defect, whereof that they call the Materiall, this the Formall part of sinne, beeing nothing else but a deformitie, irregularitie and vnlawfulnesse in our naturall condition and conditions, as easily to be distinguished, though not to be diuided, from the action, as lamenesse from the working  hand, or iarring in an Instrument, both from the Instrument and sound. The Sinner is termed nequam,Aquin. sum. p. 1. q. 48. art. 3. and in q. disp. de Malo. Mel: loc. Com. Nihil negatiuum est causa nihil priuatiui: quaedam sc. inclinatio creaturae ad suum illud nihil, vnde primum ortum and creatum est. Morn. de veritate, C.R. Quae sunt, ideo vocantur bona, quoniam a Deo qui est essentia ipsa exempler trahunt: haeretici veram essentiam malitiae tribuunt. Athan. cont. Gent. Malum neque ens est, propterea nec omnino est malum, neque rursus omnino non ens. Sed and ab ipso non ente alienius est, and distantius quam a bono. Si enim nihil esset, nulli noceret, etc. Dion. de D. N. vid. ad eum Ficim. and ad Plot. de Prouid. and Ramb. M.N. l. 3. cap. 11. as nequicquam naught, as not ought. Not that sinne is simply norhing, Non negatiue, sed priuatiue Nihil; nor is it a meere and pure priuation, but to bee considered with that subiect, wherein, and whereof it is such a distortion and destruction: the want of this consideration draue the Manichees to their Hereticall opinion of two beings and beginnings. Sinne was first seene in the Deuill, who voluntarily strayed from the right way, and as hee abode not in the Truth himselfe, so hee beguiled our first Parents, from whom, by the Conduit of Nature, it is conueyed to vs. I speake of Originall sinne, which is our inheritance; for actuall sinnes are our owne purchase and improuement, and yet bought with that stocke which our Parents left vs: Our first Parents are to bee considered,  not as singular persons onely, whereby they defiled themselues, but as the roote of Mankind, which had receiued Originall Righteousnesse, to keepe or to lose to them and theirs, as a perpetuall inheritance. As in the Bodie Politike, the Act of the Prince is reputed the Act of the whole; the consent of a Burgesse in Parliament bindeth the whole Citie which he representeth: andAqu. in Ro. 5. as in the naturall Bodie, the whole bodie is lyable to the guilt of that fact which the head or hand hath committed: as a root to his branches, a Fountaine to his streames, doth conuey the goodnesse or badnesse which it selfe hath receiued: So stands it betwixt vs and Adam our naturall Prince, the Burgesse of the World, the Head of this humane Bodie and Generation, the Root and Fountaine of our Humanitie. When hee sinned, hee lost to himselfe and vs that Image of GOD, or that part of the Image of GOD,  which he had receiued for himselfe and vs; not the substance, nor the faculties of bodie or soule, but the conformitie in that substance and faculties to the will of GOD, inEphes. 4.24. righteousnesse and holinesse of truth.
Not so much therefore are wee here to consider the ordinary course of Nature, whereinEzek. 18.4. the soule that sinneth, it shall dye: as the Ordinance of GOD, who appointed the first Adam, the Wel-spring of Nature, which he receiued incorrupted; the second, of Grace; that as men, we all by Generation, are of the first, and with the first,Ephes. 4.22. one old man, in whom we all sinned; of, and with the second Adam we are all one new man in the Lord, euen one bodie; one Spirit, one Seed, one Christ, in whom, and with whom, wee, as members of that Head, obeyed the Precepts, and suffered the curse of the Law.Per solum primum peccatum sublatum est bonum naturae, per alia peccata bona gratiae persona is Aquin. in Rom. 5. Other sinnes of Adam  are not our naturall, but his personall, because he could be no longer a publike person, then while he had somewhat to saue or lose for vs; all being alreadie forfeited in this first sinne. The Authour then of Originall Sinne,Col. 3.10. 1. Cor. 12. Rom. 5. is the Propagator of our Nature: his actuall sinne is originally ours, the Guilt being deriued by imputation, the Corruption by naturall generation. First, that Person corrupted Nature; after, Nature, infected our Persons. The matter of this Originall corruption, in regard of the subiect, is All and euery man, and All and euery part of all and euery man, subiect to all sinne, that if all be not as bad as any, and the best as the worst, it must be ascribed to GODS restrayning, or renewing, not vnto vnequall degrees in this originall staine. In regard of the Obiect, the matter of it is the want of originall Righteousnesse, and a contrary inclination to Euill,Gen. 6.5. The imaginations of our  hearts being onely euill continually. No Grapes can grow on these Thornes. The forme of this corruption is the deformitie of our corrupted Nature, not by infusion or imitation, but by
 default of that first instrument, by which this Nature descendeth. It is the roote of actuall sinnes: and whereas they, as fruits, are transient, this still remayneth, vntill Christ by his death destroyeth this death in vs.
But here ariseth another difficulty; How this sinne can bee deriued by Generation, seeing it is truely beleeued, that God isHeb. 12.^. Father of Spirit^, theEcc. 12.7. Gen. 2.7. Zac. 12.1. Ide^que ait Genebrard. Chron. l. 1. animam vocauit Adam Neshama, quasi min Shamaim, id est, de^ Coelis. For men of our Soules, which doth by infusion create, and by Creation infuse them^ corruptible Elements, beeing vnable to procreate an incorruptible substance, or generation to produce i^ corruption. Neither standeth it with reason, that he which communicateth ^ot the substance, should communicate the accidents; or with Iustice, that an innocent Soule should necessarily be stayned by inuoluntary  infusion into a polluted bodie.
I answere hereunto, That although the Soule be not traducted (as they terme it) and by Generation conferred; yet is it coupled to the body in that manner and order which GOD had appointed for the coniunction thereof, though man had not sinned? Neither was it the Soule alone in Adam, or the body alone, but the Person, consisting of both, which sinned: Neither can we be partakers of Natures sinne, till we be partakers of humane Nature, which is not, till the Soule and Body bee vnited. Wee are not so much therefore to looke to the concupiscence, and lust of the Parents in generation, asLib. Sent. 2. Dist. 31. Lumbard teacheth vs, but to the Person; which,Super Sent. Scotus saith, is filia Adae, and debitrix iustitiae originalis. And although the Soule be not in the seed, yet it is communicated to the Body (saith Aquinas) by a dispositiue  preparatiue power of the Seed, which disposeth and prepareth the Body to the receiuing of the Soule, where it is receiued (after theVnumquodque, recipitur secundum modum recipientis. generall rule) according to the measure and nature of that which receiueth. The Father is then a perfect Father, not because he begetteth the Soule, but because he begetteth the Person, or at least all whatsoeuer in the Person is begotten: and though he doth not beget the substance thereof; yet, as it isZanch. de Red. l. 1. c. 4. such a subsistence, he may be said to procreate it, because his generation worketh towards the Vnion of the Soule and Body; which Vnion is made by the Spirits, Animall and Vitall. AndZanch. de Operib. ^^. part. 3. these Spirits are procreated by the Seed, and consist of a middle nature, as it were betwixt bodily and spirituall: so that the production of the Soule, and incorporating thereof, may be counted in the middle way betweene Creation and Generation. And therefore this  originall corruption did not reach to Christ Iesus, although hee were true Man, because hee was the Seed of the Woman, and did not descend of Adam by generation (per seminatem rationem, tanquam a principio actiuo, saith Aquinas) but was miraculously framed in the wombe; and of the substance of the Virgin, by the power of the Holy Ghost.
Thus haue I presumed to offer my crude and rude Meditations to the wiser. World, about the deriuation of Originall sinne, which it selfe is the cause why we can no better see it, as darkenesse hideth it selfe. But the whole Citie of Mankind being here with set on fire, it behoueth euery one to be more carefull to quench it, then ouer-curiously to enquire how it came: It is sufficient, that nothing descended hereby to vs by corruption, or was made ours by imputation, which is not fully cured by Christ: who is1. Cor. 1.30. made vnto vs (both by  imputation of his actiue and passiue obedience, and by reall infusion of his Spirit) Wisdome, Righteousnesse, Sanctification, and Redemption; if wee haue faith to receiue it, and Charitie to expresse it: an absolute renewer and perfecter of the Image of God, beyond what wee had in our first Parents lost.


CHAP. VI. Of the Reliques of the Diuine Image after the Fall, whereby naturally  men addict themselues vnto some Religion: and what was the Religion of the World before the Floud.
THis sinne of our first Parents, whereby they were almost no sooner made then marr'd (being as some suppose, formed and deformed in one day; so interpreting the Psalme,Psal. 49.12. That he lodged not one ^ight in honour, but became as the beasts thatBroughton out of the Rabbines in his Concent. Pe^er. in Ge. 1.6. perish. This sinne (I say) did not wholly depriue vs of the Image of GOD, whereunto wee were created. A remainder and stumpe thereof continued, like to the stumpe of1. S^m. 5.4. Dagon, whose head and hands were cut off by his fall; or like the stumpe ofDan. 4.12. Nabuchodonosor. Tree,  whose rootes were left in the Earth, bound with wo^nd of Yron and Brasse among the grasse of the field. So was mans head and hand^ fallen off before the Arke, that his Wisdome remayning was foolishnesse with God; not sufficient to one good thought, not able either to will or to doe that
 which might please GOD. And though the stumpe remained (the substance and the faculties of Body and Soule) yet was this stumpe left in the earth, fast bound with yron and brasse, his earthly mind captiued and chained with worldly vanities and deuillish villanies. Or to vse Lumbards comparison,Lib. 2. Sent. Dist. 25. he was like the man fallenLuk. 10.30. among theeues, wounded and spoyled: wounded in his naturall parts, spoyled and robbed of the gifts of Grace, which GOD by especiall grace added to his Nature, in that first beautifying of this his Image.
In the state of Creation, Man was made able1. Statu. potuit non peccare. 2. Non potest non peccare. 3. Premitur sed non vincitur: nondum habet posse omnino non peccare. 4. Non potest peccare, Lumb. ibid. to commit no sinne; in the state of Corruption he cannot but sinne: vntill a third state of grace doe free him, not from the being, but from the raigning and imputation of sinne, whereby he is prepared to a fourth state of glory, wherein shall be no possibilitie of sinning, or necessitie of striuing against sinne. And howsoeuer in this  corrupt state of Nature, in our spirituall actions, which meerely concerne the Kingdome of Heauen, we cannot but sinne, yet hath not God left himselfe without witnesse, euen in this darkenesse to conuince vs of sinne. Such are those notions, sowne by Natures hand in euery of our hearts: according to which euidence, Conscience as a Witnesse, Patron, or Iudge within vs,Rom. 2.15. accuseth, excuseth, condemneth, or absolueth; that hereby GOD may beeRom. 3.4. iustified, and all the World inexcusibly sinnefull; and that hereby also a way may be left in GODS infinite mercy for Mans recouery. His intent wasWe must vnderstand that God though in the beginning he suffered man to fal, etc. yet vouchsafed of his goodnes so farre to vphold in him both light of vnderstanding and truth of conscience, as might serue to direct him in some sort for morall and ciuill life, for the preseruation and maintenance of societie amongst men. D. Abbot. Defen. 3. part. pag. 68. not to destroy vs vtterly, (as iustly he might, and as it befell the rebellious Angels) but by this punishment to recall vs to subiection; not to breake vs to pieces in his wrath, but by wrath to reclaime vs to mercy.
Thus Nature suggesteth, Reason conuinceth, and is conuinced. That there is a GOD: that  that GOD hath created the World (as we before haue shewed) and that for Man; that Man, to whom all things serue, is to serue GOD, who hath subiected them to him. Doth not Nature teach the Sonne to honour his Father, and the Seruant his Lord?Mal. 1.6. If he then bee our Father, where is his honour? if our Lord, where is his feare? Nature inferreth, Reason vrgeth this, and from that ground of Reason doth Scripture reason, the nature whereof in our nature is written. Euen by Reasons Principles we learne, That so perfect a hand, as made all these inferiour things in such perfection, would not haue been so imperfect in the perfectest of them all, so to haue left him in the Creation, as wee now see him in Corruption. TheMorn. de ver. Ch. R. Philosophers saw, Man was a little World, for whom the greater was made, who himselfe was made for more then the World: and that he, for whom so durable and substantiall a thing was made,  must needs be made for another then this fraile and wretched life; that is, for the euerlasting life with him; that is the Euerlasting. And that is the foundation of all Religion. For what else is Religion, but the Schoole, wherein we learne Mans dutie towards GOD, and the way to be linked most straitly to him? And what are all the Exercises of Religion, but acknowledgements of the Godhead, of the Creation of the World, of the prouident order therein, and ordering thereof, of the Soules immortalitie, of Mans fall and imperfection, of our Soueraigne and supreame good to be sought out of our selues? Of all which, Nature and Reason are witnesses, not to the learned alone, whose testimonies in this kind may easily be produced, but euen to the Vulgar and rudest Idiots; yea, whereas neither Art, nor Industry, nor ciuill Society  hath bound men as men together, yet the grounds of these things haue bound them as men, by the meere bond of humane Nature, to GOD, in some or other Religion.
GOD, Man, and Religion, are necessarily linked, as a Father, a Sonne, and Obedience, as a Lender, a Debter, and a Bond. The Wit no sooner conceiueth that there is a GOD, but the Will inferreth that he ought to be worshipped. What Philosophers, or what Politicians euer taught the Easterne and Westerne Islands, discouered in this last Age of the World, this necessitie of Religion? And yet (as followeth in this History to bee shewed) they which neuer wore clothes on their bodies, neuer furnished their mindes with Arts, neuer knewe any Law (besides Reason growne almost lawlesse) or Magistrate, but their Fathers: which, when they saw other men, could not tell whether they wereThe Indians seeing the Spaniards mounted, thought the Horse and Man to be all one: they thought them also immortal, and fallen from Heauen. heauenly Wights, or earthly Monsters, these yet wearied themselues in Superstitions; shewing it easier to put off our selues,  then to put the Principles of Religion out of our selues. Yea, among all the Lessons which Nature hath taught, this is the deepliest indented: not Arts, not Policie, nay, not Rayment, not Food, not Life it selfe esteemed so deare, and that naturally, to men, as their Religion. Hereof let this Historie ensuing be witnesse, which will shew the Reader, euery where, in manner, ouer the World, this naturall zeale of that which they esteeme Religion, beyond all things else esteemed most naturall.
Some in the guilty conscience of their owne irreligion (as Aesops Foxe, that beeing by casualtie depriued of his tayle, sought to perswade all Foxes to cut off theirs, as vnprofitable burthens) would tell vs that which theyTibi, non s^^^ ^nterdus, non noctu, D. King on Ionas. cannot tell to themselues, which they dare not tell, but (as they dare) whisper, That Religion is but a continued Custome, or a wiser Policie to  hold men in awe. But where had Custome this beginning? And what is Custome, but an vniforme manner, and continuance of outward Rites? Whereas Religion it selfe is in the
 heart, and produceth those outward ceremoniall effects thereof. In one Country men obserue one habite of attire, another in another: So likewise of dyet: and yet is it naturall to bee clothed, more naturall to eate, but naturall most of all, as is said, to obserue some kind of Religion.
The GreciansHerod. l. 3. burned their dead Parents, the Indians incombed them in their own bowels: Darius could not by great summes procure the Grecians to the Indian, or these to the Grecian custome: yet was that which mooued both, and began either Custome, one and the same principle of pietie and religious dutie, howsoeuer diuersly expressed. Yea, euen the most lasciuious, cruell, beastly, and Deuillish obseruations, were grounded vpon this one principle,  That GOD must bee serued: which seruice they measured by their owne crooked Rules, euery where disagreeing, and yet meeting in one Center, The necessitie of Religion.
As for Policie, although it is before answered; yet this may be added, That whereas men with all threatnings, promises, punishments, rewards, can scarce establish their politicall Ordinances; Religion insinuateth and establisheth it selfe: yea, taketh naturally such rooting, that all politicall Lawes and tortures cannot plucke it vp. How many MartyrsNot only the true Religion hath had Martyrs; but Iewish Turkish, Ethnike, Heretical superstitions and idolatries: Haue not our eyes seene Brownists, and Papists, euery where else ia^, and yet meete in the halter whiles one pretence of Religion hath mooued them to commotion, and disturbance of the State? and euen while we write these things, what mad Martyrs haue we had for Arianisme, and other blasphemies? hath Religion, yea, superstition yeelded? but who will lay downe his life to seale some Politicians authority? And so farre is it that Religion should be grounded on Policie, that Policie borroweth helpe of Religion. Thus did Numa father his Romane Lawes on Aegeria, and other Law-giuers on other supposed Deities, which had been a foolish argument,Petitio Principij. and vnreasonable  manner of reasoning, to perswade one obscurity by a greater, had not Nature before taught them religious awe to God, of which they made vse to this ciuill obedience of their lawes, supposed to spring from a Diuine Fountaine. Yea, the falshoods and varietie of religions are euidences of this Truth; seeing men will rather worship aCalv. Instit. l. 1. Beast, Stocke, or the basest Creature, then professe no Religion at all. TheDiagoras, Luhemerus, Theodor. Cyren. Philosophers also that are accused of Atheisme, for the most part, did not deny Religion simply, but that irreligious Religion of the Greekes in idolatrous superstition, Socrates rather swearing by a Dog, or an Oke, then acknowledging such gods. It is manifest then, that the Image of GOD was by the Fall depraued, but not vtterly extinct; among other sparkes this also being raked vp in the ruines of our decayed Nature; some science of the God-head, some conscience of Religion: although the true Religion can bee  but one, and that which GOD himselfe teacheth, as the onely true way to himselfe; all other Religions being but strayings from him, whereby men wander in the darke, and in labyrinths of error: like men drowning, that get hold on euery twig, or the foolish fish that leapeth out of the frying-pan into the fire.
Thus GOD left a sparke of that light couered vnder the ashes of it selfe; which himselfe vouchsafed to kindle into a flame, neuer since, neuer after to be extinguished. And although that rule of Diuine Iustice had denouncedGen. 2.17. morte morieris, to die, and againe to die a first and second death; yet vnasked, yea, by cauilling excuses further prouoked, hee by the promised seed erected him to the hope of a first and second resurrection; a life of Grace first, and after of Glory. The Sonne of God is promised to be made the seede of the Woman: the substantiallColos. 1.15. Image  of the inuisible GOD, to be made after the Image and similitude of a Man, to reforme and transforme him againe into the former Image and similitude of GOD; and whereas GOD had made man before after his owne Image, and lost him; he now promiseth to make himselfe after Mans Image to recouer him: euen that he, which in thePhil. 2.6. forme of GOD thought it not robbery (for it was Nature) to bee equall with GOD, should bee made nothing to make vs something, should not spare himselfe that hee might spare vs, should become partaker of our Nature, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, that hee might make vs2. Pet. 1.4. Ephes. 5.30. partakers of the Diuine Nature, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. This was that Seede of the Woman, that hath broken the Serpents head, which by death hath ouercome death, and him that had the power of Death, the Deuill: who submitted himselfe to a death in it selfe bitter, before men shamefull, and of  GOD accursed, that hee might bring vs to a life peaceable, glorious, and blessed, beyond what eye hath seene, or heart can conceiue.
This promise of this Seed, slaine from the beginning of the World, was the seed of all true Religion, the soule of Faith, the life of Hope, the well-spring of Charitie. True it is that all receiued not this promise alike: for a seed of the Serpent was fore-signified also, which should bruise the heele of the Womans seede. And this in the first seed and generation of Man soon appeared: Caine and Abel were hereof liuely examples. It appeareth that GOD had taught Adam how hee would bee worshipped, as it were ordering and ordaining him the first Priest of the World, which function he fulfilled both in instructing his Wife and Children, in prayer with and for them, and in the rites of Sacrificing. His children accordinglyGen. 4.3. in processe of  time, brought and offered their Sacrifices.
As concerning Sacrifices, some hold opinion (according to their owne practice) thatPerer. in Gen. l. 7. Potuit id Abel naturaliratione cognitum habere and tacito quodam naturae instinctu adduci, etc. Nature might teach Adam this way of seruing GOD; as if Nature were as well able to finde the
 way, as to know that she is out of the way, and were as well seene in the particular maner, as in the generall necessitie of Religion. We cannot see the Sunne without the Sunne, nor come to GOD, but by GOD, to whom1. Sam. 15 22. Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken, better then the fat of Rams. ABEL, saith the Scripture,Heb. 11.4. offered by faith, without which faith it is impossible to please GOD: but faith hath necessary relationRom. 10.17. to the Word of GOD, who otherwise will beEsay. 1.14. weary of our solemnities, and asketh, Who hath required them at our hands. These sacrifices also, besides that they were acknowledgements of their thankefulnesse, and reall confessions of their sinne and death, due to them therefore, did lead them by the hand to Christ that Lambe of GOD, that should take away the sinnes of the World, figured by these slaine beasts, confirming their faith in the promise, and their hope of the accomplishment: of which Nature could not  once haue dreamed, which hath ratherThe mysterie of our redemption by Christ is meerly supernaturall. the impression of some confused notions, that wee haue lost the way, and ought to seeke it, then either light to discerne it, or wisedome to guide vs in it.
Of sacrificing, there were from the Beginning two kinds, one called(...). Gifts, or Oblations of things without life: the other Victims (so our RhemistsRhem. Trans. Mark. 9.49. Act. 7.42. haue taught vs to English the word Victimae) slaine Sacrifices of Birds and Beasts. Againe, they were propitiatory, consecratorie, Eucharisticall, and so forth, whose kinds and rites Moses hath in his Bookes, especially in Leuiticus, so plainely declared, that I should but powre water into the Sea, or light a candle to the Sunne, to dilate much of them: these beeing the same in signification with the Leuiticall, and little (if little) differing in the manner of doing. Caine brought hisSome Rab. thinke, that Cain and Abell brought their Sacrifices to Adam, that he should offer them. Betram thinkes, that they had a certaine place designed for their sacrifices and holy things.  offering, being an Husbandman, of the fruit of the ground. Abel a Shepheard, of the fattest of his Sheepe: God respected ABEL and his offering, (the tree first, and then the fruit: the worker, and then the worke) which he signified either by voice, or byHieron. Tradit. Heb. in Gen. fire from Heauen, according to Theodotians translation,Inflammauit super. as in the Sacrifices of Aaron, Gedeon, Manoah, Dauid, Salomon, Elias: or by some other meanes, both comfortable to Abel, and enuied of Caine, who therefore slew him; thus in this member bruising the heele of that blessed seed, as a type of that which the Head himselfe should after sustaine.
Here is the first Apostasie after that first Euangelicall promise, and the first diuision of Religion, Caine beeing the first builder of theAug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. c. 5. Earthly Citie, not that which hee called after the name of his Sonne,Gen. 4.17. Roma caput Mudi. Henoch, but of that spirituall City of the Wicked, the seed of the Serpent,  which he founded in his Brothers bloud: euen as that later Compendium thereof, which called her selfe Caput mundi, the head of the World (and indeedIob. 17.6.9.16. etc. the World is vsually in Scripture applyed to that seed of the Serpent, as it is opposite to the seed of the Woman) was by Romulus her first Founder, by like example of Fratricide in the murther of Remus, dedicated (as it were) to the future mysterie of iniquitie, the seat of the Beast, and of the Whore, (by whose authoritie, Christ himselfe was slaine) drunken after with the blood of his Saints: and still breathing blood and slaughter, to euery Abel that will not communicate in her spirituall whooredomes: that will not with her offer the fruits of the ground (the Sacrifice of Caine) which neither came from heauen, nor can guide to Heauen, being earthly, sensuall, deuillish.
Caine was for this his fact conuented by that All-seeing Iustice, who both by open sentence  and inward terrors accused and accursed him, continuing his life, euen for the same cause that other Murtherers loose it, that he might liue an example (which then in that vnpeopled world by his death he could not haue been) to the future generation; brandedSome thinke this marke to be a shaking of all the body, as fearing continually. Perer. also by the Lord with some sensible marke, to exempt him, and terrifie others from that bloudy crueltie: this mercy being mixed with this iudgement, a longer time of repentance. GOD before cursedGen. 3.17. the earth for Adam, he nowGen. 4.11. cursed CAINE from the earth, to be a runnagate, and wanderer thereon. For how could he, that had so forsaken God, but be forsaken of the Earth, and of himselfe? theVi stando Vesta vocatur. Ouid. stable and mercifull earth, which before had opened her mouth to receiue his Brothers bloud, shrinking, and (as it were) grudging to support such wicked feet, and by denying him her strength, forcing him to his manifold shifts, and shiftlesse remoouing. Wretched  man, alwayes bleeding his brothers bloud; not daring to looke vp to Heauen, fearing to looke downe to Hell, the World without him threatning a miserable life, his Body branded to contempt and shame till his death, his soule become a stage of Anguish, Feare, Horrour, and other Furies the Harbingers of Hell: not able to suffer (which yet he cannot but suffer) the guilt of passed wickednesse gnawing him, the waight of present misery pressing him, the dread of a death, and a death attending him: restlesse in himselfe, hated of the World, despairing of reliefe from God: a liuely Map of the deadly and damnable state of sinne and sinners, (without Christ)1. Tim. 5.6. dead whiles they liue, moouing sepulchres, the Deuils captiues, hels heires, exiled from heauen, and vagabonds on the earth, euen on that which they call their owne land.  
Caine, more vexed with the punishment, then at the fault of his sinne, departed from the presence of the Lord, which is meant either of his iudiciall conuenting him, orCalv. in Gen. Martyr. in Gen. Chrysost. hom. 20. Cornel. Betram. de polit. Iud. c. 2. in regard of the
 visible societie of the Church, cradled yet in his Fathers houshold, where God did especially shew his present prouidence, protection and grace, who otherwise filleth the Heauen and Earth, of whom and in whom they are: from hence, as Adam before out of Paradise, so Cain was, as it were excommunicated, expelled, and out-lawed, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, whichHieron. Heb. Trad. some take to be appellatiuely spoken, as if his miserie had giuen name of Moouing vnto the place where he dwelled, or roamed rather:Antiq. l. 1. c. 2. Iosephus saith, hee built Naida, applying it to a proper place, which was either Eastward from Eden, or Eastward towards Eden from Canaan, where Adam is supposed to haue dwelt, and after with his Wife to haue beene buried at Hebron. Afterward, his posteritie beeing multiplied (his Wife, Epiphanius out of Leptogenesis calleth  Shaue,P. Comest. hist. Schol. Comestor calleth her Chalmana,Pseudo-Philo. in antiq. Bibl. Philo, Themech) he built a Citie which he called by the name of his sonnePseudo-Berosus nameth the City Oenus by Libanus. Henoch, to crosse that curse of his wandering to and fro on the earth, or to arme him against others, which his guilty conscience caused him to feare, or to be a receptacle and store-house of those spoyles, which, Iosephus saith, hee robbed from others by violence, when as the earth was barren to him. Philo (if we may so entitle that Author which hath written of the Antiquities of the Bible) ascribeth vnto him other Cities, Mauli, Leed, Tehe, Iesca, Celet, Iebbat, adding that hee liued 730. yeeres. These things may bee probable, although that Author be otherwise fabulous, considering that men did ordinarily liue many hundred yeeres in those times, and were also exceeding fruitfull, especially after that Polygamy was embraced of that Family. AndEuen I my selfe knew one W. Collin of Broxted in Essex, whose posteritie by one woman (which also suruiued him) was such, that his sonne reported to me, that there were 212. of them liuing at his funerall, and one of his daughters had aboue an hundred then of her Progenie. if that in Abrahams posterity, the seed of Iacob in  lesse then three hundred yeares was multiplyed to so600000. men of warre. great a people, it is like that the CainitesIoseph. saith that Lamech had seuenty seuen children, were no lesse populous, liuing in more freedome. Hee first (saith Iosephus) found out weights and measures, and assigned proprieties in possessions of Land, before common as the ayre and light, and was Author to lewd persons, of a lewd and vngodly life. Probable it is that the Citie was called Henoch, because the Curse suffered not the father to stay in a place, but to leaue a hasty inheritance to his Son to finish and rule it. Iabal and Iubal and Tubalcain, were inuenters of Arts: the first to dwell in Tents and keepe Cattell; the second of Musicall instruments: the third of working in Mettals, and making of Armour, which some thinke to be Vulcan, by the neerenesse of name and occupation. HisGenebrard. in Chron. Sister Naamah is accounted by some Rabbines, the first inuenter of making Linnen and Woollen, and of vocall Musique; yea,  they make her the wife of Noah also.
Thus let vs leaue this Family multiplying in numbers, in Sciences, in wickednesse, sauouring nothing diuine, or at least nothing but humane in their Diuinitie (therefore called the sonnes of menGen. 6.1.2.) and let vs looke backe to Adam, who in this wicked fruit of his body, might read continual Lectures of repentance for the sinne of his soule. Adam begat a child in his own likenesse,The Iewes fable, that none of Adams children which he had after Abel, till the birth of Seth, had the true forme of a man, and that in that 130. yeeres space he beg^t Roch^t, that is, Diuels. R. Mos. Egyp. Doc. dub. lib. 1. c. 6. He interpreteth Adams begetting a child in his owne likenesse, of that instruction wherby Seth was taught, and became a perfect man, the others beeing beasts and Rochot, which in an Allegorical sense may be truely spoken, and so perhaps was meant. that is, not in that likenesse of God, wherein he was created, but like vnto himselfe, both in humane nature, and natural corruption, his name he called Seth, of whose posteritie the whole world was by Noah re-peopled. Vnto Seth was born Enosh. Then began men, saith MOSES to call vpon the name of the Lord. This someBroughton Concent. Martyr. in Gen. interpret of the beginning of Idolatry, that men began to profane the name of the Lord: some to call the name of the Lord, that is, after Rabbi  Salomo, to apply the name of God to Images, Stars and Men: But the more likely opinion is, that when Adam had obtained a more holy posteritie, which was now multiplyed in diuers families,Luther in Gen. Tremell. Vatablus, Calu. in Gen. Perer. in Gen. l. 7. Religion which before had been a priuate In-mate in Adams houshold, was now brought into publike exercise, whereof Prayer hath alwaies been accounted a principall part, and God himselfe in both Testaments calleth his house a house of Prayer; the calues of the lips, and the ejaculations of the heart being the body and soule of Diuine worship, whereof Sacrifices were in a manner but the apparel, fashioned to that infancy of the Church. Of the names ofSome are of opinion that all those Fathers mentioned Gen. 5. were Ecclesiasticall Fathers also, and Priests for diuine worship: which function of Lordship and Priesthood vnited continued to the first borne many generations after the floud. Betram. pol. Iud. cap. 2. the posteritie of Adam, and his hundred yeeres mourning for Abel; of Seth his remoouing after Adams death to a mountaine neere Paradise, and such other things, more sauouring of fabulous vanity in the false-namedMethodij Reuel. Philo. de Antiq. Genebrard. Chron. ex Edit. Pet. Vict. Palma Caiet. Paris. An. 1600. Methodius, Philo, and others that follow them, I list not to  write. And wel might Genebrard haue spared his paines in searching for the antiquitie of Popery in this first Age of the World. Easily may we grant a Church then, truely Catholike, in the Posteritie of Seth, instructed partly by Reuelations, partly by Traditions, concerning the Creation, the fall, the good and euill Angels, the promised Seed, the Vnitie and Trinitie, punishments and repentance for sinne, publike and priuate Deuotions, and other like Articles gathered out of Moses: but for the Rabble of Rabbinicall Dreames which hee addeth herevnto, we had need of the implicite faith of some simple credulous Catholike to receiue them: as namely, Purgatory resembled in the fiery Sword at the entrance of Paradise, Free-will grounded on that which GOD speaketh to CAINE, Thou shalt rule ouer him (the prerogatiue

 of the elder Brother ouer the yonger falsly applyed to the rule of the minde ouer sinfull lusts) the choice of meates in the first Fathers abstinence from flesh, fish, and wine (as hee saith) which had not beene permitted to them, as it is to vs: Traditions, when as yet they had no Scripture: Superstitious Obsequies to the dead, because the Iewes in their office for the dead call vpon theOfficium lu. gentium, etc. interp. Genebr. Fathers which lye buried at Hebron (namely, Adam, Eue, and the rest) to open the gates of Paradise: Deuotion to Saints, because the Cherubins were set betweene Paradise and Sinners; (as if their Saints were honoured to keepe them out of Heauen) and not the bloudie Sacrifices onely in Abels offering, but that vnbloudie Sacrifice (so they stile their Masse) in the offering of Caine: (wee enuie them not their Founder) yea, he finds their Sacrifice of Orders in Gods executing the Priestly function, of Matrimony  in Adam and Eue, of Baptisme in the Breeches which they ware, of Penance because GOD said, Thou art dust, and to dust thou shalt returne, of Confirmation in those words, Shee shall breake thy head (the Truth will breake their heads for so reading it) of Vnction, in that Seth went to the Cherub which kept Paradise; and receiued of him three graines of the Tree of Life, whereof we reade in the Apocalyps, the leaues shall heale the Nations; with those graines was an Oyle made,Apoc. vlt. wherewith Adam was anoyed, and the stones put into his mouth, whence sprang the Tree whereof the Crosse of our Lord was made, hidden by Salomon in the Temple, and after in the Poole of Bethesda. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Did not Genebrard deserue anAquensis Archlepist. fuit. Archbishopicke? or if the obseruation be his, did not Petrus Victor Palma (which set him forth with such Comments) deserue the Palme and Victory  for Peters pretended Successors, which could find such antiquitie for proofe of their Catholicisme? Much good may it doe their Catholike mawes with such Dainties. Iust art thou, O Lord, and iust are thy iudgements, which because they will not beleeue thy Truth, giuest them ouer to such strong delusions, to beleeue so grosse and palpable Lyes.


CHAP. VII. Of the cause and comming of the Floud.  
THus wee haue seene in part the fulfilling of the Prophesie of the Seed of the Woman, and of that other of the Serpent, in the Posteritie of Caine and Seth. The Family of Caine is first reckoned, and their forwardnesse in humane Arts,Luke 16.8. as the children of this World are wiser in their generation, in the things of this life, which they almost onely attend, then the children of light. As for theMartyr. in Gen. ex Rab. Solom. Iewish Dreames, that Lamech was blind, and by the direction of Tubalcaine his sonne guiding his hand slew Caine, supposing it had beene a wilde beast, which when he knew, so inraged him, that he killed his sonne also, they that list may follow.
Moses reckoneth the Generations according to the first-borne in the Posteritie of Seth, as  enioying the Principalitie and Priest-hood, that so the promised Seed of the Woman (after such a World of yeares comming into the World) might iustifie the stablenesse of GODS promises, his Lineall Descent from Adam with a due Chronologie, beeing declared. After Seth, Enosh, Kenan, Mehalaleel, Iared was Henoch the seuenth from ADAM, who walked with God, whom God tooke away that he should not see death. This before the Law, and Helias in the Law, are Witnesses of the Resurrection; being miraculously taken from the Earth into Heauen, not by death, but by supernaturall changing of their bodies. That hee should bee still inBellar. tom. 1. cont. 3. l. 3. c. 6. an Earthly Paradise, and that hee and Elias should come and preach against Antichrist, and of him be slaine, is a Popish Dreame; the ScriptureHeb. 11.5. etc. saying, that HENOCH was taken away that he should not see death; of Elias, that he isLuke 7.27. Matth. 17.12. alreadie come in the person of Iohn  Baptist: the Spirit and power, or spirituall power of walking with GOD, reforming Religion, and conuerting soules, beeing communicated to many of those Ministers which haue lien slaine in the streets of that great Citie.
This his Assumption isGib. ex Rab. Akiba. Racanati, Targum. supposed to be visibly done. Hee was a Prophet, and Iude doth in his Epistle cite a testimonie of his,Perer. lib. 7. in Gen. thinketh that Iude knew of this Prophesie by Reuelation, and reuealed the same to the Church. which eyther byPerk. Resor. Cathol. Tradition went from hand to hand, as it seemeth the whole Word of GOD was deliuered before the dayes of Moses; GOD by Visions and Dreames appearing vnto the Patriarkes; or else it was written and since is lost. Some hold it was penned by some Iew vnder the name of Enoch.De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 33. Augustine thinketh that the Booke entituled Enoch was forged in his name, as other Writings vnder the names of Prophets and Apostles: and therefore calleth it Apocrypha (asEo quod earu^ Scripturarum occulla orig^ non cla^uit patribus. In his autem Apocryphis etsi inuenitur aliqua veritas, tamen propter multa falsa nulla est canonica authoritas. Hier. in Tit. c. 1. Hierome  doth also)Chrysost. Hom. in Matth. Chrysostome and Theophilact account Moses the first Pen-man of Holy Scripture. Although it seemes that Letters were in vse before the floud, ifAntiq. l. 1. c. 2. Iosephus his testimonie
 be true, who affirmeth that Adam hauing prohpecied two vniuersall destructions, one by fire, another by water, his Posteritie erected two Pillars, one of bricke, another of stone, in both which they writ their inuentions of Astronomie; that of stone was reported to remaine in his time. SomeOth^ Heurn. lib. 1. ascribe this to Seth, as also the first naming of the seuen Planets. The Science of Astronomie, they say, was much furthered by Enoch, who (saith Eupolemon) was by the Greekes called Atlas, to whom they attributed the inuention thereof.Plin. l. 7. c. 56. Plinie was of opinion that Letters were eternall.
Howsoeuer, it is more then apparant, that the Booke bearing Enochs name, is very fabulous, which, because the Tales therein professe antiquity (although they were later dreames)  I thought it not vnfit to borrow out ofNot in Euseb. Chron. pag. 244. Frag. Graec. ex l. 1. Enoch. Scaliger somewhat of that which he hath inserted in his Notes vpon Eusebius, the Greeke Copie being, as the Phrase testifieth, translated out of Hebrew, which had beene the worke of some Iew: the Antiquity appeareth, in thatTertul. de Idololat. Tertullian citeth it. The words are these:
AndA fragment of the Booke of Enoch. it came to passe when the sonnes of men were multiplyed, there were borne to them faire Daughters, and the Watch-men (so he calleth the Angels out of Dan. 4.) lusted and went astray after them; and they said one to another,This Fable arose of the false interpretation of Moses word, Gen. 6.12. The sonnes of God, etc. Let vs choose vs Wiues of the Daughters of men of the Earth. And Semixas their Prince said vnto them, I feare me you will not doe this thing, and I alone shall be debter of a great sinne. And they all answered him and said; We will all sweare with an Oath, and will Anathematise or Curse our selues not to alter this  our minde till we haue fulfilled it, and they all sware together. These came downe in the dayes of Iared to the top of the Hill Hermon. And they called the Hill Hermon, because they sware and Anathematised on it. These were the names of their Rulers, Semixas, Atarcuph, Arachiel, Chababiel, Orammante, Ramiel, Sapsich, Zakiel, Balkiel, Azalzel, Pharmaros, Samiel, etc.
These tooke them Wiues, and three Generation were borne vnto them: the first were great Gyants; the Gyants begat the Naphelim, to whom were borne Eliud; and they taught them and their Wiues Sorceries and Inchantments. Ezael taught first to make Swords and Weapons for Warre, and how to worke in Metals. He taught to make Womens Ornaments, and how to looke faire, and iewelling. And they beguiled the Saints; and much sinne was committed on the Earth. Other of them taught the vertues of Roots, Astrologie,  Diuinations, etc. After these things the Gyants beganne to eate the flesh of men, and men were diminished: and the remnant cryed to Heauen, because of their wickednesse, that they might come in remembrance before him. And the foure great Archangels Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Vriel hearing it, looked downe on the Earth from the holy places of Heauen: and beholding much bloud-shed on the Earth, and all vngodlinesse and transgression committed therein, said one to another, That the Spirits and Soules of men complaine, saying, That yee should present our Prayer to the Highest, and our destruction. And the foure Archangels entring, said to the Lord, Thou art GOD of GODS and Lord of Lords, etc. Thou seest what Ezael hath done, hee hath taught Mysteries, and reuealed to the World the things in Heauen, etc. Then the Highest said, The Holy one, The Great one  spake and sent Vriel to the sonne of Lamech, saying, Goe to Noe, tell him of the end approching, and a floud shall destroy the Earth, etc. To Raphael hee said, Goe Raphael, and binde Ezael hand and foot, and cast him into darkenesse, and open the Wildernesse in the Desart of Dodoel, and there cast him, and lay vpon him sharpe stones to the Day of Iudgement, etc. And to Gabriel, he said, Goe, Gabriel, to the Gyants, and destroy the sonnes of the Watch-men from the sonnes of men, set them one against another in warre and destruction. To Michael, he said, Goe, Michael, binde Semixa and the others with him that haue mixed themselues with the daughters of men (vntill seuentie Generations) to the hils of the Earth; vntill the day of their iudgement, till the iudgement of the World bee finished, and then they shall bee brought into(...). the confusion of fire, and vnto tryall, and vnto the Prison of the ending of the  World, and whosoeuer shall be condemned and destroyed, from hence-forth shall be cast together with them till the finishing of their Generation, etc. And the Gyants which were begotten of the Spirits and flesh, they shall call them euill Spirits on the Earth, because their dwelling is on the Earth. The Spirits that depart out of their bodies shall bee euill Spirits, because they were engendred of the Watch-men and men.
But it were tedious to recite further. The antiquity of it, and because it is not so common, and especially becauseIoseph. Antiq. l. 1. Iustin. Tertu. Athenag. Cypria^. Lactan. Euseb. Hugo de S. Vict. Strabus, Burgensis, Sulpitius Seuer. sac. hist. l. 1. Clem. Alex. ap. Photium. This Fable of Angels, etc. the Saracens also retayne, see lib. 3. c. 5. some of the Ancients and of the Papists haue beene misseled by these Dreames (refused iustly by Ierome and Augustine) interpreting the sonnes of GOD in Moses to be spoken of Angels (as their Translation did read it) haue moued me to insert those Tales. Notable is the diligence of the Purgatorie Scauengers, who in Viues notes  vpon Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, Lib. 15. cap. 23. haue in their Index Expurgatorius, set the Seale of their Office vpon a testimonie alleaged out of Eusebius de Praep. Euang. Lib. 5. cap. 4. as if they had beene Viues his owne words, to be left out in the Impression. The words, because they
 sauour of the former errour, haue Theere placed, Non ergo Deos, neque bonos damonas, Gentiles, sed perniciosos solummodo venerantur. Quam rem magis Plutarchus confirmat, dicens fabulosas de dijs rationes res quasdam significare, a daemonibus antiquissimis gestas temporibus, and ea quae de gigantibus ac de Titanibus decantantur, daemonum fuisse operationes. Vnde mihi suspici^ (saith Eusebius, but Viues is fined for it) nonnunquam incidit, ne ista illa sint, quae ante diluuium a gigantibus facta diuina Scriptura tetigit, de quibus dicitur. Cum autem vidissent Angeli Dei filias hominum, quia essent speciosae, elegerunt sibi ex illis vxores, ex quibus procreati sunt famosissimi gigantes a saeculo. Suspicabitur enim fortasse quispiam, illos and illorum spiritus esse qui ab hominibus postea dij putati sunt, pugnasque illorum, tumultus and bella esse, quae fabulose de dijs conscribebantur. LactantiusLact. l. 2. c. 15 saith, that when the World was multiplyed, GOD sent Angels to keepe  men from fraudes of the Deuill, to whom he forbade all earth contagion. These were by the Deuill insnared with women, therefore depriued of Heauen: and their Progeny of a middle nature betwixt Men and Angels, became vncleane Spirits; so that hence grew two kindes of Daemones or Deuillish Spirits; the one heauenly, the other earthly, which would now seeme to be keepers, and are destroyers of men.
The Angels are sometimes calledIob. 1.6. and 38.7. the sonnes of God: but that name is communicated to men, whoEphes. 2.3. by nature children of wrath, by faith in the naturall and onely begotten Sonne of GOD, haue this prerogatiue to bee the sonnes of GOD, and fellow-heires with CHRIST. But some of the children of the Kingdome shall bee cast out, because they haue rebelled against their Father that begot them, professing themselues to be the sonnes of GOD,  butIob. 8.44. doe the workes of their father the Deuill: and of these Hypocrites and Apostataes it is said, that louing pleasure more then GOD, they matched themselues in Caines Family: a prouocation so mightie to euill, that strong Samson and wise Solomon are witnesses, thatProu. 7.26. the strong men are slaine by this weaker sexe. This was the Serpents policie at first, Balaams policie after, Babels policie now;Sheldon in his Motiues obserueth these Marriages to b^e a great meane for propagating Poperie. and Balaams wages doe mooue many still to make such Linsey-woolsey Marriages, that theNehem. 13.24 children speake halfe Ashdod, and whilest the Father professeth one Religion, the mother another, the children become Gyants, to fight against all that is called GOD, and to make little or no profession (at least in their liues) of any Religion at all.
I denie not that then there were Gyants also in regard of bodily stature,Gib. in Gen. whom the  Scripture calleth, because they were great and fearefull, Rephaim and Emim; of their pride Hanakim, of their strength Gibborim, of their tyrannie Nephilim, of their naughtinesse Zamzummim. Such were Og and Goliah after the floud. Yea, such haue beene in all Ages: which (to omit other Ethnike Authors)De Ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 9. Augustine affirmeth, that at Vtica hee saw a mans tooth as great as an hundred of the ordinary life. Viues on that place, saith he saw one as bigge as a mans fist. Nicephorus telleth of two men in the time of Theodosius, the one not so admirable for his height, which was fiue Cubits and an hand, as the other for his smalnesse, like to a Partrich in bignesse, yet wittie and learned. Our Histories ofGiral. Camb. Hector. Boet. Camden. Brit. Arthur, little Iohn, Curcy Earle of Vlster, and one in our times, 1581. seene in London, doe shew some such here and there, now and then in the World, which Goropius in his Gigantomachia, affirmeth of his  owne sight: and euen whole Families of these monstrous men are found at this day in America, both neere to Virginia, asMap of Virginia. Captaine Smith reporteth; and especially about the Straits of Magellan,Pigasetta. neere which he found Gyants, and in the same Straits were such seene of theOliuer N^ort. and Sebastia de Weert. Hollanders ten foot in height, whereas yet other Families were but of the ordinary greatnesse. One Thomas Turner told mee, that neere the Riuer of Plate, hee saw one twelue foot high, and others whose hinder part of their head was flat, not round.Iul. Capitol. Heredianus. Authours tell of Maximinus the Romane Emperour, that he was eight foot and a finger high, whose wiues Bracelets might serue him for Rings, that he often in one day drunke an Amphora, which is almost sixe Gallons of Wine, and eate fortie pounds of flesh: Cordus saith sixtie; hee could breake a Horse legge, or strike out his teeth with a blow of his fist, etc. Which occurrents in  Nature no doubt haue giuen occasion to some of further fabling. Qui de magnis maiora loquuntur.Plin. l. 7. c. 16 We reade in Pliny of one of fortie sixe Cubits, in Crete, found by the force of an Earth-quake, breaking the hill wherein he stood, supposed to bee Orion or Otus: more credible is that he telleth of one Gabbora in Claudius time, nine foot and nine inches; and in Augustus time of another halfe a foot higher.
How soeuer the bodies of these men before the Floud were composed, certaine their minds were disposed to all monstrous inhumanitie, which hastened their destruction. This made GOD to repent that he made man vpon the Earth, not that there was any change or repentance in him, but because a change for want of repentance happened to them. In long sufferance he gaue them an hundred and twentie yeares space, in which Noah might be a Preacher  of righteousnesse; yea, the Arke it selfe, which Noah that while was prouiding, might preach to them repentance, that their teares might haue quenched his wrath, and preuented temporall
 drowning and eternall burning. Adam liued till Henochs time, a witnesse and Preacher of the promise he himselfe had receiued. Henoch himselfe is made, not a verball but a reall Preacher, whiles his sonne Methushelash, and his Nephew Lamech the father of Noah liued: that GOD might haue witnesses to conuert some and conuince others. But whiles the World becommeth worse and worse,Horat. Carm. (Aetas parentum peior auis tulit Hos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitio siorem) a deluge of sinne first, and a deluge of iudgement after, drowned the World.
For the circumstances of the Floud, Moses hath more plainly related them, then that I should here expresse them. Noah with his three sonnes and their wiues entred the Arke at  GODS appointment, to which by diuine instinct resorted both birds and beasts; of the cleane seuen, and of the vncleane two in euery kind. If any maruell at this distinction of cleane and vncleane in these times, supposing that GOD first in the Wildernesse made this partition-wall: it is answered, that GOD before this had appointed Sacrifices of beasts, which might make the difference, for which cause also there was a seuenth of euery such creature, reserued for Sacrifice after Noahs going out. Besides GOD had now purposed to adde the flesh of beasts vnto mans dyet, for which those, called by the Israelites cleane, were most fit, and most in vse: and in that respect more of such kinds were reserued, as more necessary for mans vse in food, clothing, and some of them also for labour. Otherwise no creature is vncleane in it selfe, the Hoofe and Cudde being by Nature (GODS Hand-maid) and  not by their owne vice, such as made this distinction. And after the floud GOD^ made no Law of difference, vntill the time of Moses, although each Countrey hath obserued their owne peculiar custome in this food, some lothing that which others esteeme daintie, not for Religion, but for naturall and ciuill causes. As at this day to the Tartars, Horse-flesh is royall fare; to the Arabians, Camels; to some Americans, Serpents, and other flesh to others, which our appetite more then our faith, our stomacke more then our soule, abhorreth.
Concerning the Arke, diuers doubts haue beene moued, through curiositie and vnbeliefe of some, who by diuine Iustice were in a manner depriued of sense and reason, hauing before through Deuillish wickednesse lost their conscience and Religion. ThusOrig. hom. in Genes. 2. Apelles one of Marcions Disciples, could not finde the Arke (after Moses dimension) to bee capable of foure  Elephants in so small a quantitie; Celsus contrary to him (yet agreeing in a foolish impietie and impious folly) thought so great a vessell was too great for mans handy-worke. Thus, like Samsons Foxes, their heads are diuers wayes, but they are tyed together by the tayles, agreeing in disagreeing both from Moses and themselues.
But might not reason teach Celsus, that the direction of GOD might teach a man in an hundred and twentie yeares space to frame so mighty a Fabricke^ doth not sense and experience shew buildings not much lesse both on the Sea and on the Land? And what Arithmeticke or Geometry, nay, what wit or common sense had Apelles in his Assertion? The Arke was too little (forsooth) for so many creatures and their prouision for a yeare. Wee need not seeke for shifts from helpe of the Geometricall Cubite knowne to Moses in his Egyptian  Learning, of three, sixe, or nine foot to the Cubite: as Origen andHugo de Arca Noe. lib. 1. Hugo doe nor of the sacred Cubite, imagined twice as much as the common: nor of the larger stature and Cubites of men in those youthfull times and age of the World. The length hereof three hundred Cubites, and the breadth fiftie, doe make of square measure by common Rules of Art, fifteene thousand Cubites. Three floores or roomes were therein of that quantitie, each contayning ten foot in height. As for the beasts; a floore of fifteene thousand Cubits might yeeld fifty Cubits square to three hundred seuerall kinds, many more then are knowne by relation of the most Writers, Aristotle, Plinie, Gesner, etc. which scarce reckon halfe that number, and but fortie kinds or thereabouts that would take vp any greatSuch Creatures as breed of putrifaction, and which liue in both Elements, perhaps were not in the Arke. roome. The height might yeeld commodious roomes for the fowles on Perches: and all this might one roome or floore  affoord. Iudge then whether two other roomes of equall bignesse, might not be sufficient for all other necessary employments? Besides, the roofe is not to be thought vnproportionable, fitted for so long and tempestuous stormes, and therefore not vnfitted with roome for diuers necessaries. And if any accuse me for adding this of the roofe to Moses description, I say, that so it is translated byTremel. and Iunius. some, Et in cubiti longitudinem consummato eius fectum superne, vnderstanding those words not of the window (as many doe) but of the roofe it selfe, which else is no where described, which should ouer-hang the Arke a Cubite breadth to defend it the safer from raines; as in our houses the eues and slope roofes are commodious both for roome within, and against the weather without. But if any would entertaine longer dispute about this, he may (among others that haue handled this question) resort vntoBeccesel. Antiq. Antuerp. Goropius Becanus  his Gigantomachia, whom in this point I would rather follow, then in many other his Becceselanical Paradoxes.
Noah and his Family with this their retinue being entred, the fountaines of the great deepes
 were opened, and the windowes of Heauen: the two store-houses of waters which GOD had separated in the Creation, beeing in a manner confounded againe, the Seas breaking their sandie barres, and breaking vp by secret vnderminings the priuie pores and passages in the Earth: the Cloudes conspiring with the Waters, and renuing their first league and naturall amitie, to the confusion of Nature and the World. The heauenly lights hid their faces from beholding it, and clothed themselues with blacke, as bewayling the Worlds Funerall; the Ayre is turned into a Sea, the Sea possesseth the Ayrie Region, the Earth is now no Earth, but a myrie lumpe, and all that huger World is contracted into a briefe Epitome, and small abridgement in the Arke, euen there but a few inches distant from death. Thus do allRom. 8.20. Creatures detest Sinne, which hath made them subiect to Vanitie; thus would the Elements wash  themselues cleane from it, and the committers thereof: but the Arke preuaileth ouer the preuailing waters: a figure of the Church, the remnant of the elder, and Seminarie of the new World.
Heurnius applieth the Fable of Prometheus to NoaH, lib. 1.This drowning of the World hath not beene quite drowned in the World, but besides Moses, many other Writers haue mentioned it: the time thereof being referred to that which in each Nation was accounted most ancient; as among the Thebans to Ogiges; in Thessalia, to Deucalion; among the Americans (althoughDe Fab. Mundi. Mercator thinke, that the Floud drowned not those parts, because they were not yet peopled, and because the beasts there are most-what differing kinds from these in our World) the people haue retayned the tradition hereof: Mnaseas among the Phoenicians, Berosus a Caldaean, Hieronimus Aegyptius, Nicolaus of Damascus,  the Poets Greeke and Latine, adding Fables to the Truth (which without some ground of truth they could not haue added) all mention the Floud; howsoeuer confounding the lesse and later with this first and vniuersall.
I might adde the testimonies of Eupolemus, Molon, Abidenus, Alexander Polyhistor, out of Eusebius, Iosephus, and others, Lucian in his Dea Syria, telleth the opinion of the Hierapolitans, but a little corrupted from Moses Narration, that Countrey wherein Noah liued most likely retayning firmer memorie of this Miracle: so plainly doth he attribute to his Deucalion the Arke, the resort and safe-gard of the Lions, Bores, Serpents and Beasts: the repairing of the World after this drowning thereof, which he ascribeth to periurie, crueltie, and other abominations of the former people. That Berosus which we now haue, is not so much as the  ghost, or carkasse, and scarce a few bones of the carkasse of that famous Caldaean Author, mentioned by the Ancients, but the Dreames of Annius (no new thing in this last Age) coined for the most part in his name. Some fragments of Berosus wee haued cited in other Authours that conuince this Bastard.
Among others, somewhat of the Floud hath escaped drowning: his testimonie whereof set downe in Polyhistor and Abidenus, is inEuseb. Chron. Grac. Scalig. lib. 1. and de Praepar. lib. 9. Eusebius. He affirmeth, that Saturne gaue warning to Sisuthrus of this Deluge, and willed him to prepare a great Vessell or Ship, wherein to put conuenient food, and to saue himselfe and his kindred and acquaintance; which hee builded of length fiue furlongs, of breadth two. After the retyring of the waters, hee sent out a Bird which returned: after a few dayes he sent her forth againe, which returned with  her feet bemired; and being sent the third time, came no more: with other things to like purpose,Plutar. de Animant. comparatione. which Polyhistor there, and Abidenus citeth out of Berosus. Plutarch hath also written of this Doue, sent by Deucalion out of the Arke, which returning was a signe of tempest, and flying forth of faire weather.


CHAP. VIII. Of the re-peopling of the World: and of the diuision of  Tongues and Nations.
NOwGenes. 8.1. GOD remembred Noah, saith Moses; not that GOD can forget, but that hee declared his Diuine Power, whereby Noah might know hee was not forgotten. Then did theHos. 2.21, 22. Heauens remember their wonted influence in the Elements: then did the Elements remember their naturall order: GOD made a winde to passe in Commission, and, as a common Vmpire, to end their vnnaturall strife, forcing the Waters into their ancient precincts aboue and beneath the Firmament. (Amb. l. de No. Rupert. l. 4. Ambrose interpreteth  this Winde of the HOLY GHOST. Rupertus of the Sunne. The most of a wind, which yet naturally could not be produced from that wateris masse, but by the extraordinary
 hand ofPeter. in Gen. lib. 13. God.) Then did the Earth remember first inheritance, beeing freed from the tyrannicall inuasion and vsurpation of the Waters. And what could then forget or be forgotten, when GOD remembred NOAH and all that was with him in the Arke.
And in the seuenthAn. Mund. 1656. the Floud. Moneth, the seuenteenth day of the moneth, the Arke rested vpon the Mountaines of Ararat. This fell out in the yeere from the Creation 1656. TheAfter the Sept. 2242. and after the most auncient coppies 2262. Scalig. Septuagint, and the Fathers that followed them, reckon farre otherwise: which errour of theirs differing from the Hebrew verity, AgustineDe Ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 11. and dein. ad 13. ascribes to the first Coppiers of that Translation: others to their own set purpose, that they might contend with other Nations in the challenge of Antiquitie: for that cause, and least the often halfing of ages should trouble the faithlesse,  saith Master Broughton, they faine Cainan, betwixt Arphaxad and Selah: in which account ifLuk. 3.36. Luke in his Genealogie had followed them, it is to be ascribed to them which would correct Luke by their corrupt translation of the Septuagint,Iunius. Broughton. forBeza, Annot. Luc. 3. some Copies of the Gospel haue wanted it. The place is commonly thought to be Armenia. The Sybilline Oracles (if at least we may so call those eight bookes in Greeke verse, translated into Latine by Castalion) doe placeSybil. Oracul. 1. Assurgit Phrygia mons, etc. Ararat quem nomine dicunt. Scal. Opusc. Ararat in Phrygia, and say, it is the Hill whence the Riuer Marsyas issueth. But Scaliger censureth our Sybils to be counterfeit, inuented with zeale to vp-hold the Truth by falshood; in which our later Legendaries haue followed them.
Gor. Bec. Indescythica, pag. 473.Goropius after his wont paradoxicall, holdeth it to be the Hill Paropanisus, or Paropamisus, a part of the Hill Taurus (vnproperly ascribed to Caucasus, which riseth betweene the  Euxine and Hircan Sea) supposed the highest part of the Earth, called nowM. Paul. Ven. Naugracot. Hee imagined, that the place first inhabited after the Floud was Margiana, whence those Colonies passed that with Nimrod built Babylon. His reason is, becauseGen. 11.2. they went from the East to the Plaine of Shinar, whereas Armenia beareth somewhat Westward from thence; As though that iourney had been presently after the Floud, which was an hundred yeares after: in which space it is likely they followed the Mountainous Countries Eastward a long time, and from Assyria Adiabena, turned backe into that fertile Plaine, where pride, fulnesse of bread; and abundance of idlenesse, set them on worke against God. I hold it not meet, that a fewe coniectures should counterpoize the generall consent of all Ages. Iosephus saith, the place in Armenia was called Apobaterion, of this their going forth of the Arke: and alleadgeth Berosus testimonie,  that a part of this Arke was then said to remaine in the Cordyaean (or Gordyaean) Hils, the pitch whereof some scraping away, wore the same for Amulets. And out of Nich. Damascenus lib. 96. There is (saith he) aboue the Region of the Minyae, a great Hil in Armenia, by name Baris, wherein, they say, many saued themselues in the time of the Floud, and one, brought in an Arke, there stayed (the remnants of the wood thereof continuing there long time after) which happily was he that Moses the Iewish Law-giuer writ of. This mountaine or mountainous Region the Caldean Paraphrast callethTremel. and Iun. Annot. Epiphan. lib. 1. contr. Haer. Kardu; Curtius, Cordaei montes; Ptolomaeus, Gordiaei: the people are called Cardyaei, or Gordyaei. In this Tract (saith Epiphan.) there is one high Mountaine called Lubar, which signifieth the descending place (Lubar in the Armenian and Egyptian language signifying the same that (...) before mentioned) and the  word Baris before cited out of Damascenus seemeth to be corruptly written for Lubaris.
The Armenians through all ages haue (as it seemeth) reserued the memorie hereof: and euenCartwrights Trauels. in our daies there standeth an Abbey of Saint Gregories Monkes neere to this Hill, which was able to receiueThe Persian King. Shaugh Thamas, and a great part of his Armie. These Monkes, if any list to beleeue them, say, that there remaineth yet some part of the Arke, kept by Angels: which if any seeke to ascend, carrie them backe as farre in the night, as they haue climed in the day. Cartwright, an eye-witnesse, saith, that this Hill is alwaies couered with snow; at the foote thereof issue a thousand Springs; there are adioyning three hundred Villages of the Armenians. He saith also that there are seene many ruinous foundations, supposed to be the workes of this first people, that a long time durst not aduenture into the lower Countryes, for  feare of an other floud.In Chron. Graec. Eusebij and praeparat. Euang. l. 9. c. 4. Abidenus saith, that the Ship or Arke was still in Armenia (in his time) and that the people vsed the wood thereof against many diseases with maruellous effect.
After that Noah had obtained his deliuerance, and was now gone out of the Arke; his first care wasGen. 8.20. Religion: and therefore hePh. Ferdinandus citeth seuen precepts of Noe; first, to obserue iustice: secondly, not to blaspheme: thirdly, not to vncouer any mans nakednes: fourthly, not to kil: fifthly, not to eate a member of any beast yet liuing: sixtly, not to serue idols, seuenthly, not to rob. Ex R. Ab. Ben. Kattan. hee built an Altar to the Lord, and tooke of euery cleane beast, and of euery cleane fowle, and offered burnt offerings vpon the Altar: And the Lord smelled a sauour of rest, and renued the auncient blessings and promises to Noah and his posteritie. The liuing creatures were also permitted to their food, and submitted to their rule, by whom they had in the Arke escaped drowning. Onely the bloud was prohibited to them, as a ceremoniall obseruation to instruct them in lenitie and hatred of crueltie: the politicall  Ordinance being annexed touching the bloud of man, against man or beast that should shead the same. This difference beingGibbins in Gen. 9. Cic. de Fin. lib. 2. alleadged of the life of Man and Beast, that the life of the Beast is his bloud, the life of Man is in his bloud. Not that the bloud which we see shed is the
 life of the beast: for that is properly Cruor, not Sanguis, that is, the matter, whose forme was the life or vitall spirit, which being separated from the body, is seuered also from the forme or life. And the life of Beasts hath no other forme, but that which is vnited with the bloud, as the life of trees is the sappe of trees; their bloud being (as it were) their soule. ButVt sit pecudum anima qualitatiu^, hominum vero substantiua. Aquin. Sanguis vehiculum animae. Aristot. de Gen. anima. l. 3. the life of man is in his bloud, hauing his seate therein, liuing when it is by death separated from the bloud; meane while the Spirits being the purest part of the bloud, as conduits conueying life to the bodily members, and as firme bands of a middle nature, between the body and soule, vniting them together; which bands and carriages being broken by effusion of bloud, the soule subsisteth a spirituall substance without the body, not subiect to substantiall corruption or mortalitie.  
God did also make a couenant for Man with the beasts of the field, infusing into the Nature of all things, a dread and feare of man, whereby they feare the power, the snares, and sleights of man; and therefore flee, or else submit themselues, not by that willing instinct, as to Adam in innocencie, but rather with a seruile feare. And although by hunger, or prouocation, or feare of their owne danger, they sometimes rebell, yet otherwise there remaines some impre^sion of this naturall decree in them, as experience in all places hath shewed. Euen the Lyon, King of Forrests and sauage Creatures, doth not easily giue on-set but on such occasions: yea, the Moores meeting with this Beast, doe rate and brawle at him; this magnanimous beast passing by with a leering countenance, expressing a mixt passion of dread and disdaine, fearing the voice of one, that feareth not the weapons of many, and which himselfe, by the terrour of  his voice, maketh the beasts to tremble. Hereunto the Lord addeth the Raine-bow, a newe Sacrament, to seale his mercifull Couenant with the Earth, not to drowne the same any more; which yet at last shall be burnt with fire, so to purge the Heauens and Earth of thatRom. 8.20. vanitie, whereto mans sinne hath subiected them. And thus much doeGregor. Mag. hom. S. in Ezec. Me^anc. Comest. some reade in the colours of theRabbini tres Iridis colores referunt ad tres Patriarchas: sicut and Christ^ani quatuor clo ores ad 4 elementa. Gib. Rainebow, of a waterish and fiery mixture, as a continued signe of the double destruction of the World; the first outward as alreadie past, the other inward as yet to come. Well, indeed, may this Bow be called theIris Thaumant. filia. Child of Wonder, both for the naturall constitution, and diuine ordinance: not that there was before no suchAlcuinum and Chrysost. a^cusat Pererius huius opin. l. 14 in Gen. Creature, but that then this vse of the creature was ordained. The reflexion or refraction of the Sunne-beames in a watery cloud, the brightnesse from the Sunne, and the cloud meeting together, the varietie of colours  proceeding from the varietie of matter; the fumish and dryer part of the cloud yeelding a purplish, the waterie a greenish Sea-colour, etc. borrowing the roundnesse from th Sunne halfe Eclipsed by the shadow of the Earth, are accounted the naturall causes of this wonder of Nature; sometime also by reason of abundance of matter, the same being doubled, one Bow within the other, their colours placed contrary, for that the one is the Image (by reflection) of the other. Neither is it to be thought, that there was no Raine-bow before the floud, any more then that there was no water, bread, or wine, before the institution of our Christian Sacraments, which name and dignitie, not Nature, but Vse, by the appointment of the God of Nature and Grace, doth giue vnto them. For not in the cloudes alone is this Bow to be seen, but as further witnesse of the naturall causes and constitution thereof, the same effect may bee shewed by concurrence of like causes in the Waters and Rockes where Riuers haue their fals;  yea, on the buildings of men: as I my selfe haue seen a perfect Raine-bow by the reflection of the Sun-beames on a boorded wall of a Water-mil, the boordes thereof being very wet with the fall of the water, and opposite to the Sunne.
The sonnes of Noah were Sem (which because of Diuine priuiledge, from whose loynes Christ was to come, according to the flesh is first named) Ham or Cham, and Iapheth, who seemeth (asIunius and alij. Pererius contra lib. 15. in Gen. learned men gather by theGenes. 10.21. Text) to be the eldest. Fabulous Methodius, contrary to Moses, speaketh of another Sonne Ionithus after the Floud, whereas theGen. 9.19. Scripture saith, That of those three all the Earth was replenished.
To shew directly which Nations descended of each of these three, were a hard taske: and  now after this confusion of Nations by warres, leagues, and otherwise, impossible. But for the first beginnings of Nations, before that Colonies were by violence of Conquerours, or by themselues, in their exceeding multiplying, voluntarily translated from one place to another, they are by Moses faithfully related, although the confusion of Languages and of Peoples do make the matter hard and harsh to vs. Yet the Names of Nations in the Greeke stories do in great part agree with the names of these first Patriarkes, asBroughtons Concent. M. Broughton hath shewed, by laying downe the names of Noahs house, which, vnvowelled, may admit sundry pronouncings, setting against them such names as Heathen Authors haue mentioned. Out of him, and Arias Montanus his Phaleg, and others, what I thought likeliest, I haue here inserted.
Iapeth, Iapetus: Gomer, or after the Septuagint Gamer: Camaritae, Cammerij, and Cimbri.  IosephusIoseph. Ant. l. 1. Trem. and Iun. An. saith, That the Inhabitants of Galatia were of Gomer, sometimes called Gomarae. MasterCamd. Brit. Camden deriueth the ancient Gaules and Britans from this Gomer: the name which
 they giue to themselues to this day implying the same, which is Kumero, Cymro, and Kumeri, a Brittish or Welsh-woman Kumeraes, and their Language Kumeraeg.
Magog. Massagetae and Getae.Magog is supposed the Father of the Scythians, before (saith Iosephus) called Magoges, Ezek. 38.2. and 39.6. who after inuading those parts, left the name Magog to Hierapolis in Syria, Plin. lib. 5. c. 23. Of Madai came the Medes, of Iauan the Iones or Grecians. Of Thubal the Iberians, called sometime (saith Iosephus) Theobeli. The Iberians, saith Montanus, dwelt neere to Meotis, certaine Colonies of them inhabited Spaine, and called it Hiberia, and themselues Hiberians: whence the Spaniards haue a report, that Thubal was the first people of their Countrie. The Cappadocians were called Meschini of Meshech, whose Citie,  Mazaca was named of Meshech, since by Tiberius named Caesarea, where Basil was Bishop. Hence was named Moschius mons, and Moschos, and the Moscouites.
From Thiras came the Thracians. Th^ name Tros may cause men to ascribe the Troians to this beginning. Of the Sonnes of Gomer, Aschenaz was Authour of the Nations in Asia, Pontus, and Bithynia, where was the Lake and Riuer Ascanius, a proper name also of men in those pares: the Axine or Euxine Sea: the Ascanian Iland, and Ascania in Phrygia. Of Riphath came the Paphlagonians, sometimes called the Riphathaei, saith Iosephus: and the Riphaean Hils in the North: the Amazonians were also called Aeorpatae:Herod. Melpom. The Arimphei also, neere to the Riphean Hils.
Thogar^a gaue name to the Inhabitants of Armenia Minor, whose Kings, called Tygranes,  and Townes Tygranokartae, witnesse it: some also attribute the Turkes or Turkeman Nation to this name and Authour. These peopled Asia first, and from thence by degrees these parts of Europe: of Togarma, Africanus deriueth the Armenians.
Of Iauans childrens, Elisha founded the Aeoles, called also Aelisei: of Tarshish came the Cilicians, whose Mother-citie was Tarsus, Pauls birth-place. Montanus thinketh that Tharsis was Carthage in Africa, which the Poeni after possessed: some referre the Venetians to Tharsis also Cittim, was another part of Cilicia. The Cretans (after Montanus) were called Chetim, and of others Cortini, of whom the Italian Coast called Magna Graecia was inhabited, and the Citie Caieta, builded. Of Dodanim came the Dorians and Rhodians. These peopled the North and West parts of the World in Asia and Europe.
Chams Posteritie was Cush Mizraim, Put, and Canaan: These possessed the South of Asia, and Africa. Of Cham is the name Chemmis in Aegypt, and Ammon the Idoll and Oracle so notorious. Cush gaue name to the Aethiopians and Arabians; knowne in Scripture by that name, Mizraim, to the Aegyptians, euen at this day so called in their owne and the Arabian Tongues. Put, to the Libyans, sometime called Phuthaei: the Riuer Fut is mentioned byLib. 5. c. 1. Plinie, not farre from Atlas. The Canaanites I need not mention: Moses planly describeth them.
Of the Sonnes of Cush, Seba Author of the Inhabitants of Arabia deserta, Psal. 72.10. or after Montanius, Sabaea regio thurifera. Chauila is a name more forgotten, supposed to bee Author of a People neere the Persian Gulfe.Sabbetha Stabei super sinum Persic. and Messabbathae ex ijs oriundi. Arias Montanus. Sabbetha left the name to the Inhabitants of  Arabia Foelix, where was the Citie Sabbatha with threescore Temples therein. Other People Arabia Foelix came of Raamah, where Ptolomaeus placeth Regama: the Garamantes also in Libya. Sabtheca was Author of the Sachalitae in Arabia Foelix. Nimrod the Sonne of Cush, some thinke to be Zoroastres, some Belus.
Mizraim begat Ludim, the Inhabitants of Maraeotica praefectura, in Aegypt: Anamim, the Cyreneans: and Lehabim, the Libyan^* and Naphtuhim the Aethiopians neere to Egypt, whose Towne Napata is mentioned in Ptolomie; Pathrusim the Pharusians, Casluhim, at the entrance of Egypt, Cassio^i^. Montanus interpreteth Ludim the Lydians; Ghananim, the Troglodites; Lebabim, the Cyrenaikes Naphthubim, Africa the lesse; Chasluhim the Saracens; C^phthorim, the Cappadocians.
 To Shems Posteritie befell the parts of Asia from Iudaea East-ward.
Shems Sonnes were El^m the Father of the Elamites, in the higher part of Persia: Ashur of whom came the Assyrians Arpha^ad; the Cudusians or the Chaldaeans are (with little likenesse of sound ascribed to him. Lud is holden Father of the Lydians; and Aram of the Syrians, called also Aramaei; others of Aram deriue Armenia.
Arams sonnes were Vz, of whom the Region Ausanitis was named: Chul, of whom Cholle seemeth to haue his appellation in the Palmy^ene Desarts neere to Euphrates. Gether, Ioseph^^ ^scribeth to him Bact^ia; others that part of Syria where ^nidar stood. Atergate and Derce^o, that notorious Syrian Goddesse, happily borrowed the name hence. Of Mash is the name Masius, part of the Hill Amanus. Montanus saith, of Mes, Misij and Misia,  whom Iuuenal cals Mesos.
--de grege Mesorum.
Ioctan begat Elmodad, of whom the Hill Emodus may seeme named; of Shalah the Selebij and Sariphi; of Hatzarmaueth, the Sarmatians; of Iarach, the Arachosians; of Hadoram, the Orites, People of India; of Vzal or Auxal, Auzakea a Citie in Scythia, and the Riuer
 Oxus: of Diklah (after Arias Montanus) Scythia intra Imaum, the reason I see not in the name: of Obal or Ghobal, the Cabolites, people of Paropanisus: of Abimael, Imaus: of Sheba, the Sabae, which Eustathius placeth in India, or according to Montanus, the Sacae: of Ophir, some thinke was so called Aurea Chersonesus, where Pegu and Malacca now are: Montanus thinketh it to be Peru: Chauilah hath not left so plaine impression behind. Montanus ascribeth to him India. Of Iobab, Arias Montanus coniectureth Parias in the West Indies to haue come, but with little probabilitie which I can see. And of the most before named we haue probable coniectures, not certaine proofes, as appeareth by the difference of opinions of Authours concerning them. Neither may we thinke that Moses intended so much a Geographicall Historie of all the Nations of the World, many of which were not, long after  this time, planted or peopled; but of the first Fathers, who peopled the places by degrees, as they increased in multitude which were neerest th^t Armenian Centre: and especially hee relateth and dilateth of them, whom it most concerned the Israelites to know, as the Cananites, whose bounds and Nations are exactly described. I could adde much touching the seuerall Nations descending of these three Brethren, and the bounds of their Habitations, in which Africanus sometime tooke profitable paines, and Eusebius out of him, although both be in this part lost: somewhat hath beene barbarously translated into Latine by an vnknowne Authour, for the Soloecismes, tedious; for the substance of History profitable to the Reader: and therefore by Scaliger in his Edition of Eusebius communicated to the World. But the vncertaintieIsidorus Etym. lib. 9. cap. 2. also Perer us, Osmerus, and other Commenters on Genesis, and Chronologians, haue done some-what in this argument, which yet as in many wee see much probabilitie, so very much is exceeding doubtfull of that they say. maketh me vnwilling to proceed in this Argument further.  
Of this vncertaintie no greater cause can bee alleaged, then the diuision and confusion of Tongues, the Historie whereof Moses declareth. For whereas God had giuen to Man two Priuiledges and principall Prerogatiues, whereof other creatures are no way capable, his inwardVinculum humanae societatis est rati^ and orat^o. Nequ^ vll^ re l^ngius ^bsumu^ a natur^ serarum, etc. Cic. Off^^^io. 1. Reason, and abilitie to vtter the same by Speech: this benefit of God in Nature was turned into a Conspiracie against God and Nature. They said one to another,(...) Come, let vs make Bricke for stone, and slime had they in stead of morter. Also they said, Let vs build vs a Citie and Tower, whose top may reach vnto the Heauen, that we may get vs a name, lest we be scattered vpon the whole Earth. This was their vaine arrogance and presumption, that when their guiltie consciences threatned a dissipation and scattering by diuine Iustice: they would thus hearten and harden themselues against GOD and Man: in stead of thankefulnesse to GOD,  and honouring his Name, they would winne themselues a name and honour: in stead of preuenting punishment by Repentance, they would in this Gyant-like fighting against GOD preuent future iudgements. But euen that, by which they intended to keepe them from scattering, was the true and first cause of their scattering. So doth GOD scatter the counsels of his Enemies, and taketh the wise in their craftinesse. Babel, or confusion, is alway the Attendant of Pride. Sibylla alleaged byAnt. lib. c. 4. Iosephus (for the Sibyls which wee haue in Greeke Verse, translated by Castalion into Latine, are but counterfeits, if (...) Scaliger iudge ^ightly Pseudo ^^byllin^ oracula, quae Ch^istian^ gen^i^us o^ij^ieb^nt quum t^men e Christianorum offici^^ prodijssent, etc. but that more ancient Sibyll^ testifieth of this confusion of Tongues in these words. When all me^ before vsed one sp^^ch, ^he^ erected a high Tower, as i^ they would ascend to Heauen but the Gods by Temp^sts ouerthr^w (...) Tower, and gau^ t^  each of them seuerall Languages, whereof ti^^ Co^^ ^^a^ nam^d Babylon: According to that of Moses,Scal. Ep. ad C^s^^^b. G^nes. 11.9. Therefore th^ (...) m^^^^ it (...) ^alled ^abel* because the Lord did ther^ (...) of all the Ear (...) the^ce the^ did the Lord scatter them vpon all the Earth. Th^ (...) and N^tura^^t^ (...) the World to ^ternall, and conceiue that all (...) caus^ of this diuers^^^ of (...). If such had ^e^ne Hierusalem, (...) (n^t the ^xpertest men (...) the^^ o^ne vulgar) speake all Languages: th^ (...) then hau^ (...) the^^^re power a^ a contr^^ effect to this of Babylon. Ma^s (...) this God^ (...) that: the one came fr^^ ^abylon^ the other from (...) a ta^^ and (...) ^erusalem  (...) ^e one and God shall (...) lost the (...) their owne speech, and (...) Tongues (...)
(...) c^riositie and (...)(...) q. 59. in G^^. and that Heb^^^ (...) wit^ ^^s^s,Sc^^. O^usc. Ep. ad Tomso^. (...) ^hat ^he Sy^^^n ^^^orn^s attribute gr^^ter Antiqutie to th^ ancient by (...) to the Hebrew, which (...) all one, saith he, as if one should contend, that the (...) were ancienter then the Latine. Hee concludeth, that the Bible w^^ written in the most ancient  Language, which at first was p^^^ (...) by Merchandize and Warres corrupted. For Assyri^, sayth he, was first inhabited both before and after the Floud* and from thence were Colonies sent into Syria (...), which held their Language pure, by reason few Strangers had recourse to them till after the (...) of the first Temple, as appeareth by
 Coynes of the Tyrians and Sidonians, which are digged out and found daily.Herodot. lib. 2. PSAMMETICHVS King of Egypt, caused two Children to bee closely brought vp by a Shepheard, who should at times put Goates to them to giue them sucke, without euer hearing humane voyce. After two yeares they vttered the word Bec, Bec, which was the voyce that they had heard of their Nurses the Goates; but not so interpreted by Psammetichus; for hee inquiring in what Language Bec was significant, and hearing that the Phrygians so called Bread, ascribed to them the prioritie of all Nations and Languages. Melabdim Echebar, the great^elat. Regn. Mogor. Ioan. Oran. Mogor (as the Iesuites Epistles declare) made the like tryall of thirtie Children, whom hee caused, without hearing of man, to be brought vp, setting Guards  to obserue the Nurses that they should not speake to them: purposing to bee of that Religion whereto they should addict themselues. But neither couldLoqui naturale est homini, hanc vero linguam aut illam, artis. Viues de trad. disc. l. 3. they euer speake, or would he euer addict himselfe to one certaine Religion.Indoscyth. Goropius by a few Dutch Etymologies grew into conceit, and would haue the World beleeue him, that Dutch was the first Language; which if it were, wee English should raigne with them as a Colonie of that Dutch Citie, a streame from that Fountaine, by Commerce and Conquests since manifoldly mixed. But his euidence is too weake, his authoritie too new.
TheOrig. in Num. 11. Hier. in Sophon. c. 3. Chrys. in Gen. 20. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 16. c. 11. etc. common and more receiued opinion is, that the Hebrew was the first, confirmed also by Vniuersalitie, Antiquitie, and consent of the Christian Fathers and Learned men, grounding themselues vpon this Reason, That all the names mentioned in Scripture  before the Diuision, are in that Language onely significant: besides, it is not like, that Shem conspired with these Babylonians, and therefore not partaker of their punishment. Now it is very probable and almost manifest, that hee wasSee Brougton on that Argument. Genebrard. Chron. Gen. 10.^1. the same which after is called Melchisedech, King of Salem; betwixt whom and Abraham, in that familiaritie, it is not likely, that there was much dissonance in Language. Hee is also called the Father of all the Sonnes of Heber, by a peculiar proprietie, although hee had other Sonnes, because the puritie of Religion and Language remayned in Hebers Posteritie. And why should Heber call his Sonne Peleg (Diuision) but of this Diuision which then happened? The Nation and Language of Israel borrow their name (Hebrew) of him. And if it had happened to himselfe, why should hee more then others,  haue so named his Sonne?


CHAP. IX. A Geographicall Narration of the whole Earth in generall, and more particularly of ASIA.
TYPUS ORBIS TERRARUMmap of the world, in two hemispheresDomini est terra and plenitudo ejus, orbis terrarum, and universi qui habitant in eo. Psalmo 24.@@@@

WE haue all this time beene viewing one Nation which alone was knowne in the Earth, vntill confusion of Language caused diuision of Lands; and haue taken notice of the Heads and Authours of those Peoples and Nations, that from that time were scattered ouer the World, and after setled in their proper Habitations. We haue not followed the opinion of some, both of theAugustine. Hierom. Arnobius. Epiphan. Broughton, etc. Ancients, and later Writers, in defining the number of Nations and Languages through the World, reckoned by them seuentie two. For who seeth not, that Moses, in that tenth of Genesis is most carefull to describe the Posteritie and bounds of Canaan; which GOD had giuen to Israel, which it were absurd to thinke in so small a Territorie to bee of so many (that is, eleuen) seuerall Languages? And how many Nations were founded after  that by Abrahams Posteritie (not to mention so many other Fountaines of Peoples) by the sonnes of Hagar, and Ketura, and Esau the Sonne of Isaac? Neyther could the World so suddenly bee peopled: and of that, which then was peopled, Moses writing a Historie of and for the Church, so farre mentioneth the Affaires and Nations of the World, as it was meete for the Church (and especially that Church of the Israelites) to know, according as it was likely they should haue then, or after, more or lesse to doe with them.Excerpta barbaro. Latina apud Ios. Scalig. Eusebium. Africanus hath reckoned the seuentie two by name. But how easie were it in these dayes to set downe seuentie two more, of differing Nations, both in Region and Language; and how little of the World was then knowne, shall presently bee shewed. Besides it may bee a question, whether diuers of those, there mentioned, did not speake the same Language  (as in Chaldaea, Syria, and Canaan)Gibbins in Gen. 11. with some diuersitie of Dialect, a little more then in our Northerne, Westerne, and Southerne English: Which may appeare, both by the Pilgrimages of the Patriarkes, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in those parts (which had needed new Interpreters, by that rule, in euery two or three dayes trauell, except themselues had beene almost miraculously skilfull in Languages) and by the Chaldaean and Syrian Monuments and Bookes, which some obserue to come nigh to the Hebrew.D. Willet in Dan. c. 1. q. 25. Doctor Willet reproueth Philoes opinion, That the Chalde and Hebrew was all one, because Daniel, an Hebrew, was set to learne the Chalde: or that the Syrian and Chalde, according to Mercerus opinion, was the same; yet grants, that in the first times the Syrian and Chalde little differed.Scal. Epist. ad Toms. and ad Vbert. Scaliger (a fit man to speake of Languages, who could speake so many) saith, as before  is obserued, That in Assyria was the first, both Man and Language, euen the same which thence passed with their Colonies into Syria and Canaan, where it remayned pure, euen then when in Assyria it selfe it was corrupted by entercourse of strangers. Abraham spake this corrupted Syrian, which tooke place only in the Tracts of Euphrates, at the first: but after, both he and his Posteritie vsed the Language of Canaan; so that Laban, whose Kindred, Countrey and Language was the same withGen. 31.47. Abrahams, yet spake another and differing Language from that of Iacob, one calling that Galed, which the other calleth Iegarsabadutha. Thu^ i^ appeareth by him, that the ^nci^nt Syrian, Assyrian and Ch^ldaean, were first that which is now cal^ed Hebrew, bec^use the H^brewes obserued and ret^yned it, and onely haue left Bookes to vs written therein (whom the Cananites called Hebrewes,  asQui ex tra^^^^ Euphratensibus ^^rlibus ad illos peniebant, Hebr. eos, hoc est, (...), vocabant. Scaliger and Montan^^ affirme, because Ab^aham had passed ouer the Riuer Euphrates vnto them) but after degenerated first in the p^^ts neare Euphrates, where it was first spoken: and when the Tyrians and Sidonians had the Empire of the Sea, by reason of their Traffique, it proued impure the^^ also, howsoeuer in the time of Elisa or Dido, the Phoenician o^ Punicke, which shee carryed, (...) Africa, was pure Hebrew, as were also their Letters. The later Ca^^hagi^an Letters, were read from the left hand to the right, as the Latine and Greeke, but those from the right hand; yet not the same which now are called Hebrew (but ought rather to hee called Iewish, as brought by them from their Babylonish Captiuitie) but the Canaan or Phoenician Letters, which the Samaritans still vse, and wherein Moses had innou^^ed nothing, a^ some will haue him, neyther in the Letters, nor in the  Language, but vsed them as (...) were long before his times. Warres and Traffique could not but further alter those Languages in continuance of time: which appeared most after the Captiuitie, when the Iewes spake not Hebrew, but Syrian, and that also in likelihood more and more by time altered. Perhaps it was with these three Languages, as with the FrankesSee Wolfgan. La^. de Mig. gentium, lib. 3. Beat. Rhenanus, R. Verstegans Antiq. Language, when they first seated themselues in Gallia, and that which is now called,The olde French, and our old English are very like, both (in their originall) Dutch. French; or the Saxon and the present English: for there were no lesse mutations and transmutations, by times and Warres; in those parts then in these. It seemeth therefore probable, that at the first diuision of Languages, they that most disagreed, did furthest separate themselues, and they that spake eyther the same, or neere in likenesse to the same speech, obserued the same Neighbour-hood of Nation, as of speech; which,  the names and words of the ^hoeni^ian, Syrian, Persian, Arabian and Egyptian Languages testifie. The diuision of Tongues was about an hundred yeares after the Floud, Anno
 Mundi; a thousand seuen hundred fiftie seuen, as Caluisius and Buntingus account.
Now that wee haue spoken of the first Authours of the principall and first Nations, let vs suruey the Lands and Inheritance, which GOD gaue vnto them, which was the habitable Earth. This Earth, together with the Waters, make one Globe and huge Ball, resting on it selfe, supported by the Almightie hand of GOD, to the roundnesse whereof, the high Mountaines in comparison of the whole, can bee small impediments, and are butOf this see more Chap. 2. as a few motes of dust sticking to a Ball. Possidonius, Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, Plinie, Ptolomey, and others, skilfull in Geographie, haue endeauoured by Art to finde out the true quantitie hereof: and although there appeare difference in their summes, yet that is imputed  rather to the diuersitie of their furlongs, which some reckoned longer then others, then to their differing opinions. But neuer had they so certaine intelligence of the quantitie of the Earth, as in our time, by the Nauigations ofF. Magellanes Spaniards,F. Drake. T. Cauindish. English, andOliuer Noort. Dutch, round about the same, is giuen vs; Art and Experience consulting, and conspiring together, to perfect the Science of Geographie. For whereas the Ancients deuided the World into three parts,Some of them made but two; ascribing Africa to Asia, as Eratosthenes, Varro, Silius Italicus, or to Europe, as Lucanus l. 9. and Paulinus. Asia, Africa and Europe, and yet neuer knew the East and North parts of Asia, nor the South of Africa, nor the most Northerly parts of Europe: not onely these three are by Land and Sea farre more fully discouered, but alsoA. Maginus. Geog. three other parts, no lesse (if not much greater) then the former, are added to them; namely, America, Mexicana, and America Peruuiana, and Terra Australis, or the Land lying toward the South Pole. As for  the seuenth part, which some reckon vnder the North Pole, because we haue no relation butMercat. Tab. Vniuersal. from a Magician, a Fryer of Oxford, called Nicholas de Linna, which might with as good conscience lye to vs, as by Art-Magicke take view of those Parts (otherwise it is not certainly knowne, whether it be ioyning to Asia, or whether it bee Land or Sea) I therefore leaue it out in this diuision.
Europe is diuidedOrtel. Mercat. Gem. Phrys. etc. from Africke by the Mediterranean Sea; from Asia by the Egean and Euxine, Maeotis, Tanais, and a Line from the Fountaines thereof North-wards: on the North and West parts washed with the Ocean; which running by the Staights of Gibralter, floweth along the Coasts of Africke, to the Cape of Good Hope, and thence passeth all alongst on the East-side thereof into the Arabian Gulfe, where, by a Necke of Land, it is encountred:  This Necke, the Mediterranean, and Ocean, doe limit the bounds of Africa: The rest of the old World is Asia. America, Mexicana, or North, and the South called Peruniana, are seuered by the narrow straights of Dariene, in other places compassed by the Sea: The South Continent is very little knowne, and contayneth the rest of the World; not bounded in the former limits. But in their particular places wee shall heare of each of them more fully.
It cannot be without some great worke of GOD, thus in the olde and decrepit Age of the World, to let it haue more perfect knowledge of it selfe; which wee hope, and pray, may be for the further enlargement of the Kingdome of CHRIST IESVS, and propagation of his Gospell. And as in former times, in those then discouered parts, the Iewes  were scattered, some violently, some willingly, through ASIA, AFRICA, and EVROPE, to vsher the Gospell into those parts, and make way for that which the most of themselues reiected: who knoweth, whether in the secret Dispensation of Diuine Prouidence, (which is a co-worker in euery worke, able euen out of euill to bring good) the Donations of Popes, the Nauigations of Papists, the preaching of Fryers and Iesuites may be fore-runners of a further and truer manifestation of the Gospell, to the new-found Nations? for euen alreadie it is one good step of an Atheist and Infidell to become a Proselyte, although with some soyle: and againe, the Iesuites there cannot play the Statesmen as in these parts, yeaIesuitarum Epistolae. Thus did Fr. Xauier, and the rest of them. (themselues in their Relations being witnesses) they rather take Euangelical courses of those, which heere they count Heretikes, and by laying open mens sinne through the  fall, and Diuine Iustice, onely by CHRIST satisfied, doe beate downe Infidelitie with diligent Catechising: although vpon that golden foundation they build afterward their owne Hay and Stubble, with their racke of Confession, and rabble of Ceremonies, and (the most dangerous to new Conuerts) an exchanged Polytheisme in worshipping of Saints, Images, and the Host. But if GOD shall once shew mercy to Spaine, to make them truly Catholike, and, as a diuine Inquisitor, condemne that Deuillish Inquisition to perpetuall exile, how great a window may by that meanes be opened vnto this new World for their conuersion and reformation? And why may not the English Expedition and Plantation in Virginia, and the Nauigations of other Protestants, helpe this way, if men respected not their owne pride, ambition, and couetousnesse, more then the Truth and Glory of GOD? But hee that by  Fishers conuerted the olde World, and turned the Wisedome of the World into foolishnesse, subdued Scepters by preaching the Crosse, yea, by suffering it in himselfe and in his members, is able of those stones to rayse vp Children to Abraham; and that by the
 mouth of Babes and Sucklings, by weakest meanes, when it pleaseth him. Let vs therefore pray the Lord of the Haruest to send forth Labourers into these wide and spacious fields, ripe thereunto.
But to returne to our parts of the World, whence this Meditation hath with-drawne me. The ancientLege Ortelij Aeui veteris descrip. and Maris pacisici. Geographers were ignorant of a great part of that three-fold diuision: as appeareth by their owne Writings. The vse of the Load-stone, found out by Iohn Goia of Melfi, an Italian (or asP. Bellonij obseru. l. 3. c. 16. sic and Kecker. Problem. nautica. Vid. Pancirol. l. 2. c. 10. and ad eum Salmuth. Gilbert. de Mag. l. 1. saith, Some ascribe this inuention to Paulus Venetus, as if hee had brought it out of China 1260 some to Salomon, etc. Seb. Cabot first fou^d out the variation of the Compasse. Bellonius obserueth, by one Flauius, but Albertus Magnus was the first that writ of the Nature of it) was a great and necessary helpe to further Discoueries, especially after that Henrie sonne of Iohn the first, King of Portugall,Bar. dec. 1. l. 1. Asiae Osorius de Reb. Ema. lib. 1. Maff. l. 1. Hist. Ind. Dam. 4 Goes de mor. Aethiopum. Got. Arthus hist. ^nd. This Henr^e of Portugall, the great Discouerer, was son to Philip daughter to Iohn of Gaunt by his first Wife: so that by the Mothers side hee was English. Gen. Hist. of Spaine. l. 17. Lew. de Mayern. Tarquet. beganne to make Voyages of Discouerie vpon the Coast of Africa, and Iohn the second seconded  that Enterprise, and vsed the helpe of Mathematicians, Roderigo and Ioseph his Physicians, and Martin Bohemus, by whom the Astrolabe was applyed to the Art of Nauigation, and benefit of the Mariner, before vsed only in Astronomie. This Iohn also sent men of purpose into Arabia, and Aethiopia, and other Countries of the East, to learne further knowledge thereof. From these beginnings, daily increasing, hath Nauigation (first in Portugall, and by degrees in other Europaean Nations) by the helpe of Astronomicall Rules growne to her present perfection, and by it, Geographie. And if the longitude of places might as easily be found out as the latitude, which our Countriman Master Linton madeComplement of the Art of Nauigation. promise of, wee should yet grow to better knowledge in those Sciences, and of the World by them. Moreouer, as the Expedition of Alexander, and those flourishing Monarchies in Asia, brought  some knowledge thereof to the Ancients: So the Histories of later times, but especially the great Trauels by Land of Marcus Paulus, Odoricus, Will. de Rubruquis, Ioannes de Plano Carpini, our Countriman Mandeuile, and others, before this skill of Nauigation, haue giuen much light to the knowledge of the In-land Countries of Asia, which wee are first to speake of.
As for the Circles, the Aequinoctiall, which parteth the Globe in the middest, the Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorne in twentie three degrees and a halfe from either side of the Aequinoctiall, the Arctike and Antarctike Circles in twentie three degrees and a halfe from the North and South Poles, or not much differing (which are vsually set in Maps with red or double lines, for distinction:) The Meridians, which are Circles passing ouer our heads, in  what part of the World soeuer we be, and also through both the Poles: the Horizon, which diuideth the vpper halfe of the World which we see, from the nether halfe which wee see not: the ParallelsEuerie Region where the longest day is halfe an houre longer or shorter then it is in any other Region, must bee accounted in a seuerall Climate from it; halfe whereof is a Parallel: so that betweene the L^ne and the Polar Circle are 48. Parallels, and 25. Climates on eith^r side of the Equinoctiall. Beyond the Polar Circles, this distribution is improper and lesse certaine, the dayes increasing whole dayes, weekes, monethes, etc. See Iac. Cheyneius Geog. lib. 1. c. 10. R. Hues de Glob. pag. 51. Keckerm. Syst. Geog. lib. 1. Records Cast. lib 3. Ptolemey and the Ancient are not herein to be followed. of Latitude from the Aequinoctiall towards either Pole: The Climes or Climates, which are the spaces of two Parallels: Also the tearmes of Poles, which are two, the Arctike, and the Antartike; and the Axletree of the World (a right line imagined to passe from the one to the other, through the Centre of the Earth;) the Degrees, containing sixtie miles (or after Cornelius de Iudaeis, sixtie eight thousand ninetie fiue paces and an halfe, and after other Authors otherwise, according as they haue differed in opinion touching the measure of the Earth, or touching the furlongs, miles, and degrees, which they vsed in their computation; the variety whereof both auncient and moderne among the Greekes, Romans,  Arabians, Italians, Spaniards, and others; Master Hues our Countriman hath studiously collected: into ninetie, of which degrees euery fourth part of the world is diuided, and amount in the whole to three hundred sixtie. Also the Geographicall tearmes of Litius, Fretum, Insula, Sinus, Continens, Promontorium, Isthmus, that is Shores, straits, Islands, Bayes, Continent, Capes or Headlands, Neckes of Land, and such like: All these (I say) and other things of like nature, needfull to this kind of knowledge, the studious shall find in those Authors which teach the Principles of Astronomy and Geography, with the vse of Globes or Mappes, as Master BLVNDEVILE, Master HVES andEuclid. Io. de Sac. Bos. Clauius, Proclus, Simlerus, A. Mizaldus, B. Keck. Sistem. Geog. Ios. Langius Elem. Math. Iac. Cheyneius Geog. R. Record. Castle of knowledge. Danaeus Cornel. Valerius Gem. Phrys. etc. others.
My intent is not to teach Geography, but to bestow on the studious of Geographie, a History of the World, so to giue him flesh vnto his bones, and vse vnto his Theorie or Speculation, whereby both that skill may be confirmed, and a further and more excellent obtained.  Geographie without Historie seemeth a Carkasse without life and motion:Vt n. historia est oculus prudentiae politicae, ita Geographia est oculus and lumen historiae. Eod. Meth. c. 1. Cosinogr^phia complectitur sub se tetam Physicam, Astronomiam, and Geographiam. History without Geographie mooueth, but in moouing wandreth as a Vagrant, without certaine habitation. And whereas Time and Place are Twinnes and vnseparable companions, in the chiefe Histories to set downe the true time of chiefe Accidents, will adde much light to both; a great taske in one Country: but to take vp the whole World on my shoulders, which haue not the strength either of Atlas or Hercules to beare it; and in the whole to obserue the description of Places, order of times, and the History of Actions and Accidents, especially Religions, (olli

 robur and as triplex, thrice happy hee that could happily atchieue it) I confesse beyond my abilitie exactly to performe; but with the wisest, I hope that the haughtinesse of the attempt in a thing so full of varietie and hardnesse, shall rather purchase pardon to my slips, then blame for my rashnesse. And how can I but often slip, that make a perambulation ouer the World, that see with others eyes, that tell of matters past so many ages before I had a Beeing? Yet such is the necessitie of such a History, either thus, or not at all. But as neere as I can, I purpose to follow the best euidence, and to propound the Truth: my fault (where it is worst) shall be rather mendacia dicere, then mentiri, and yet the Tales-man shall bee set by the Tale, the Authors name annexed to his Historie, to shield me from that imputation.
 And first we must begin with ASIA, to which the first place is due, as being the place of the first Men, first Religion, first Cities, Empires, Arts: where the most things mentioned in Scripture, were done; the place where Paradise was seated; the Arke rested; the Law was giuen; and whence the Gospell proceeded: the place which did beare Him in his flesh, that by his Word beareth vp all things.


HONDIVS his Map of ASIA.
map of Asia
ASIA


ASIA (afterA. Maginus Gotarous Arthus Histor. Ind. Orient. Cornel. de Iudaeis. Abr. Ortel. and alij. some) is so called of Asia, the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis: which was wife to Iapetus, mother of Prometheus: Others fetch this name from Asius the sonne of Manaeus: both with like certaintie and credit. It is greater then Europe and Africa: yea, the Islands thereof are larger, if they were put together, then all Europe. It is compassed with the  Easterne, Indian, and Scythian Oceans, on three parts: on the West it hath the Arabian Gulfe, that Necke of Land which diuided it from Africa, the Mediterranean, Aegean, Pontike Seas, the Lake Maeotis, Tanais, with an imagined line from thence to the Bay of S. Nicholas. Some
 make it yet larger, and make Nilus to diuide it from Africa, but with lesse reason. Taurus diuideth it in the middest: On the North side is that which is called Asia interior: on the South is Asia exterior. More vnequall is that diuision into Asia the greater and the lesse, this beeing lesse indeed, then that it should sustaine a member in that diuision. Io. Barrius diuideth it into nine parts, Ortelius into fiue, Maginus into seuen, which are these, First, That part of Tartaria, betwixt Muscouia, the Northerne Ocean, the Riuer Ob, and the Lake Kytai, and a line thence drawne to the Caspian Sea, and that Isthmus which is betwixt that and the Pontike Sea: secondly, the great Chams Countrey, from thence to the Easterne Sea, betwixt the frozen Sea and the Caspian: thirdly, That which is subiect to the Turke, all from Sarmatia and Tartaria Southwards, betweene Tygris and the Mediterranean Sea: fourthly, The Persian  Kingdome, betweene the Turke, Tartar, India, and the Red Sea: fiftly, India, within and beyond Ganges, from Indus to Cantan: sixtly, The Kingdome of China: seuenthly, The Islands. These diuisions are not so exact as may be wished, because of that variety and vncertainty in those Kingdomes. Many things doth Asia yeeld, not elsewhere to be had; Myrrhe, Frankincense, Cinamon, Cloues, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Muske, and other like, besides the chiefest Iewels. It hath also Minerals of all sorts: It nourisheth Elephants, Camels, and many other Beasts, Serpents, Fowles, wilde and tame, as in the ensuing Discourse, in their due places, shall appeare; yet doth it not nourish such monstrous shapes of men, as fabulous Antiquitie fained. It brought foorth that Monster of Irreligion, Mahumet; whose Sect, in diuerse Sects, it fostereth, with long continuance of manifold Superstitions. It hath now those  great Empires of the Turke, Persian, Mogore, Cathayan, Chinois; it had sometimes the Parthian, and before that, the Persian, Median, Assyrian, Scythian: and first (as it seemeth) before them all, the Babylonian Empire vnder Nimrod, which is therefore in the next place to be spoken of.


CHAP. X. Of Babylonia: the originall of Idolatrie; and the Chaldaeans Antiquities before the Floud, as BEROSVS hath reported them.  
COnfusion caused diuision of Nations, Regions and Religions. Of this Confusion (whereof is alreadie spoken) the Citie, and thereof this Countrey tooke the name.Plin. l. 5. c. 12. Plinie maketh it a part of Syria, which hee extendeth from hence to Cilicia.Strab. lib. 16. Strabo addeth, as farre as the Pontike Sea. But is vsually reckoned an entire Countrey of it selfe, whichPtol. Geogra. lib. 5. cap. 20. Ptolomey doth thus bound. On the North it hath Mesopotamia, on the West Arabia Deserta; Susiana on the East; on the South, part of Arabia, and the Persian Gulfe. Luke maketh BabyloniaAct. 7.21. a part of Mesopotamia: Ptolomey more strictly diuideth them: whereunto also agreeth the interpretationD. Willet in Dan. c. 1. q. 15. of the Land of Shinar, that it was the lower part of Mesopotamia, containing Chaldaea  and Babylon, lying vnder the Mount Sangara. In this Countrey was built the first City which we read of after the Floud, by the vngratefull World, mooued thereunto (as some thinke) by Nimrod, the sonne of Cush, nephew of Cham. For as Caines posteritie before the Floud, were called the sonnes of Men, as more sauouring the things of men then of God: more industrious in humane inuentions, then religious deuotions: so by Noahs curse it may appeare, and by the Nations that descended of him, that Cham was the first Author, after the Floud, of irreligion. Neither is it likely, that he which derided his old Father, whom Age, Holinesse, Fatherhood, Benefits, and thrice greatest Function of Monarchy, Priesthood and Prophecie, should haue taught him to reuerence; That he (I say) which at once could breake all these bonds and chaines of Nature and Humanitie, would be held with any bonds of Religion; or  could haue an eye of Faith to see him which is inuisible, hauing put out his eyes of Reason and Ciuilitie. Had hee feared God, had he reuerenced man, had hee made but profession of these things in some hypocriticall shew, hee could not so easily haue sitten downe at ease in that Chaire of Scorning, whence we read not that euer hee rose by repentance. From this Cham came Nimrod,Gen. 10.9. The mightie hunter before the Lord; not of innocent beasts, but of men, compelling them to his subiection, although Noah and Sem were yet aliue, with many other Patriarches.
As for Noah, the fabling Heathen, it is like, deified him. The Berosus of fabling Annius, calleth him Father of the gods, Heauen, Chaos, the Soule of the World. Ianus his double face  might seeme to haue arisen hence, of Noahs experience of both Ages, before and after the Floud. The fable ofSaturnus filius Coeli, cui subsecuit viri ia. Saturnus cutting off his Fathers priuities, might take beginning of that
 act, for which Cham was cursed. Sem is supposed to be that Melchisedech King of Salem, the figure of the Lord, and the propagator of true Religion; although euen in his posteritie it failed, in which Abrahams Father, as witnessethIosh. 24.2. Ioshua, serued other gods. Iaphets pietie causeth vs to perswade our selues good things of him; Cham and his posteritie we see the authors of ruine. PhiloPhilo de Antiq. Method. Reuel. and Methodius (so are the two bookes called, but falsly) tell, That in these daies they began to diuine by Starres, and to sacrifice their children by Fire; which Element Nimrod compelled men to worship: and that to leaue a name to posteritie, they engraued their names in the brickes wherewith Babel was builded. Abraham refusing to communicate with them (and good cause, forThe building of Babel was An. Mun. 1757. and Abraham was borne An. 1948. or after Broughton, Iunius, and others 60. yeeres later. But the Iewish Chronicles Sedar Olam Rabba and Sedar Olam Zuta, make it 340. yeeres from the Floud to Abraham; interpreting ^he words of Moses (in his dayes, (Phalegs) the Earth was diuided) of his last daies in the end of his life. K. Abraham Leuita numbreth from the floud to Abraham 292. yeeres. he was not yet borne) was cast into their Brick-kill, and  came out (long after from his Mothers wombe) without harme. Nahor, Lot, and other his fellowes, nine in number, saued themselues by flight.Chronic. before the Bible. Gen. 20.9. Others adde, that Aram, Abrams, brother, was done to death for refusing to worship the Fire. Qui Bauium non odit, amet tua carmina Maeui.
To come to truer and more certaine reports, Moses saith, That the beginning of Kimrods Kingdome was Babel and Erech,Erec. Scalige^ interpreteth Arectei campi mentioned by Tibul. l. 4. as hee readeth it. and Acad and Calne, which three, some interpret Ed^ssa, Nisibis, Callinisum. And whereas commonly it is translated in the next words, Out of that Land came Ashur, and built Niniueh: Tremellius and Iunius read it, Out of this Land, hee (Nimrod) went into Ashur, or Assyria, and built Niniue and Rehoboth, Calah, and Resen. ButHugo de S. Vict. Ar. Montanus. Melancthon. Chron. Gram^y. As^t. Otho Heurnius. most vsually this is vnderstood of Ashur, the sonne of Sem, who disclayming Nimrods tyrannie,  built Niniue, which after became the chiefe City of the Assyrian Empire, to which Babylon it selfe was subiected not long after. Xenophon de Aequiuocis (if his authority be current) saith, That the eldest of the cheife families were called Saturni, their Fathers had to name Coelum, their wiues Rhea^ and out of a piller, erected by Semiramis to Ninus, alleageth this inscription, My Father was Iupiter Belus, my Grandfather Saturnus Babylonicus, my great Grandfather Saturnus Aethiops, who was sonne of Saturnus Aegyptius, to whom Coelus, Phoenix Ogyges was Father. Ogyges is interpreted Noah, therefore called Phoenix, because of his habitation (as is thought) in Phoenicia, not farre from whence, in Ierusalem Sem raigned. Saturnus Aegyptius, may be the name of Cham, of whose name Egypt is in Scripture tearmed thePs. 18.51. land of Cham. Saturnus Aethiops is Cush; Nimrod, Babylonicus, the father of Belus,  who begat Ninus. But this cannot be altogether true: For Niniue hath greater antiquitie then Nimrods Nephew (howsoeuer the Greeke Histories ascribe this to Ninus, and Babylon to his wife Semiramis) except we say, that by them these two Cities formerly built, were enlarged and erected to that magnificence, which with the growth of the Assyrian Empire they after obtained.
EusebiusChron. Gr. Edit. Scal. pag. 9. and 13. in the first booke of his Chronicle attributeth the originall of Idolatry to Serug, the Father of Nahor. BedaBed. Chron. saith, In the daies of Phaleg Temples were built, and the Princes of Nations adored for gods. The same hathIsid. Chro. But in Etim. 1.8. cvl. he saith that after the Iewes account, Ismael made the first Images of Earth, which the Gentiles ascribed to Prometheus. Isidore, EpiphaniusEpiphan. con. haer. l. 1. in initio. referreth it to Serug; and addeth, That they had not grauen Images of Wood or Metall, but pictures of men; and Thara the Father of Abraham, was the first Author of Images. The like hath Suidas. Hugo de S.  Victore saith, Nimrod brought men to idolatrie, and caused them to worship the fire, because of the fiery nature and operation of the Sun; which errour the Chaldaeans afterwards followed. These times, till Abram, they called Scythismus. The reason of their Idolatrie,Annot. in Gen. Eusebius alleageth, That they thus kept remembrance of their Warriours, Rulers, and such as had atchieued noblest enterprises, and worthiest exploits in their life time. Their posteritie ignorant of that their scope (which was, to obserue their memorials which had been Authors of good things, and because they were their forefathers) worshipped them as heauenly Deities, and sacrificed to them. Of their(...). God-making or Canonization, this was the manner: In their sacred Bookes or Kallenders they ordained, That their names should bee written after their death, and a Feast should be solemnized according to the same time, saying, That their soules  were gone to the Isles of the blessed, and that they were no longer condemned or burned with fire. These things lasted to the dayes of Thara; who (saith Suidas) was an Image-maker, and propounded his Images (made of diuers matter) as gods to be worshipped: but Abram broke his Fathers Images. From Saruch the Author, and this Practice, Idolatry passed to other Nations: Suidas addeth specially into Greece; for they worshipped Hellen, a Gyant of the posterity of Iapheth, a partner in the building of the Tower.
Not vnlike to this, we reade the causes of Idolatry in the booke ofWisdom. cap. 14.14. Wisdome (supposed to be written by Philo, but because the substance is Salomons, professing and bearing his name) which of all the Apochrypha-Scripture sustaineth least exception, attaineth highest commendation: When a Father mourned grieuously for his sonne that was taken away suddenly, he made  an Image for him that was once dead, whom now he worshippeth as a God, and ordained to his seruants Ceremonies and Sacrifices. A second cause hee alleageth, viz. The tyrannie of men, whose Images they made and honoured, that they might by all meanes flatter him that was absent, as though hee had
 beene present. A third reason followeth; The ambitious skill of the workeman, that through the beauty of the worke, the multitude beeing allured, tooke him for a God, which a little before was honoured but as a man. The like affirmethHieron. in Ose. 2. Cyp. de Idol. vanitate. Polid. lib. 1. de inuentorib. Hierome, Cyprian, and Polydore de inuentoribus;Lactant. lib. 4 cap. 28. vid. Isid. Etym. l 8 c vlt. LACTANTIVS (as before is shewed) maketh that the Etymologie of the word Superstitio, Quia superstitem memoriam defunctorum colebant, aut quia parentibus suis superstites celebrabant imagines eorum domi, tanquam deos penates; either because they honoured with such worship the suruiuing memory of their dead Ancestors; or because suruiuing and out-liuing their Ancestors, they celebrated their Images in their, houses, as houshold gods. Such Authors of new Rites and Deifiers ofOmnia idola ex mortuorum errore creuerunt. Hier. in Hos. 2. dead men they called Superstitious: but those which followed the publikely-receiued and ancient Deities, were  called Religious, according to that Verse of Virgil. Vana superstitio veterumque ignara deorum. But by this rule (saith Lactantius) wee shall find all Superstitious which worship false gods, and them only religious which worship the one and true GGD. The sameLib. 2. c. 14. Lactantius faith, That Noah cast off his sonne Cham for his wickednesse, and expelled him. Hee abode in that part of the Earth which now is called Arabia, called (saith he) of his name Canaan, and his Posteritie Canaanites. This was the first people which was ignorant of GOD, because their Founder and Prince receiued not of his Father the worship of GOD. But first of all other, the Egyptians began to behold and adore the heauenly bodies: and because they were not couered with houses for the temperature of the Ayre, and that Region is not subiect to clouds, they obserued the Motions and Ecclipses of the Starres, and whiles they often viewed them  more curiously, fel to worship them. After that, they inuented the monstrous shapes of beasts, which they worshipped. Other men scattered through the World, admiring the Elements, the Heauen, Sunne, Land, Sea, without any Images and Temples worshipped them, and sacrificed to them sub dio, til in processe of time they erected Temples and Images to their most puissant Kings, and ordained vnto them Sacrifices and Incense so wandering from the knowledge of the true GOD, they became Gentiles. Thus farre Lactantius. And it is not vnlike that they performed this to their Kings, eytherBullinger. de Orig. erroris lib. ^: cap. 9. in flatterie, or feare of their power, or because of the benefits which they receiued from them, this beeing (saithPlin l. 34. c. 4. Plinie) the most ancient kinde of thankefulnesse, to reckon their Benefactours among the gods. To which accordethDe Nat. D. l. 2. Cicero in the Examples of Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius,  Liber, Romulus. And thus the Moores deified their Kings, and the Romanes their deceased Emperours.
The first that is named to haue set vp Images, and worship to the dead, wasAmbros. in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 1. Ninus, who when his FatherSome think, and with probable coniecture, that Belus was Nimrod. Belus was dead, made an Image to him, and gaue priuiledge of Sanctuary to all Offenders that resorted to this Image: whereupon, mooued with a gracelesse gratefulnesse, they performed thereunto diuine honours. And this example was practised after by others. And thus of Bel or Belus beganne this Imagerie, and for this cause (saithLyra in Sap. 14. Pet. Comest. Hist. c. 40. Lyra) they called their Idols Bel, Baal, Beel-zebub, according to the diuersitie of Languages.Cyril. l. 3. cont. Iul^an. Cyrillus calleth him Arbelus, and saith, that before the Floud was no Idolatrie amongst  men, but it had beginning after in Babylon, in which, Arbelus (next after whom raigned Ninus) was worshipped. TertullianTertul. de Idol. out of the Booke of Enoch, before mentioned, is of opinion, That Idolatrie was before the Floud. Thus to continue the memorie of mortall men, and in admiration of the immortall heauenly Lights, together with the tyrannie of Princes, and policies of the Priests, beganne this worshipping of the creature, with the contempt of the Creator: which how they increased by the Mysteries of their Philosophers, the fabling of their Poets, the ambition of Potentates, the Superstition of the vulgar, the gainfull collusion of their Priests, the cunning of Artificers, and aboue all, the malice of the Deuils, worshipped in those Idols, there giuing answeres and Oracles, and receiuing Sacrifices; theOenomaus out of Hesiod. affirmeth the number of Gods in the World to bee 30000. which number hee saith was then much encreased. Euseb. de (...) preparat. l. 5. c. 15 Histories of all Nations are ample Witnesses. And this Romane Babylon, now Tyrant of the West, is the heire of elder Babylon (sometimes Ladie of the  East) in these deuotions, that then and still Babylon might bee the mother of Whoredomes and all Abominations. To which aptly agree the Parallels of Babylon and Rome inOros. l. 2. c. 2, 3 Orosius, the Empire of the one ceasing, when the other beganne first to haue a being; which hee further prosecuteth in many particulars.
But before we prosecute these Babylonian affaires after the Floud, it shall not be amisse to shew here the Chaldaean Fables of Antiquities before the Floud, out of Berosus a Chaldaean Priest, which liued in the time of Alexander. PolyhistorPolyhist. in Euseb. Chron. citeth out of Berosus his first Booke this report of himselfe; and TatianusTatianus apud Scalig. saith he was the Priest of Belus, and wrote his Chaldaean Storie to Antiochus, the third after Seleucus, in three Bookes. His name signifieth the Sonne of Osee.  
Alorus raigned the space of ten Sari (Sarus with them is three thousand sixe hundred yeares) Alasparus three Sari; Amelus thirteene Sari; Amenus twelue; Metalarus eighteene;
 Daorus tenne; Aedorachus eighteene; Amphis tenne; Otiartes eight; Xixuthrus eighteene: in his time, as is said before, the Floud happened. The whole space is an hundred and twentie Sari, which amounteth to foure hundred thirtie two thousand yeares. This I thought not vnfit (although incredible) to report from Berosus, both because my scope is to declare as well false as true Religions (it being not Theologicall but Historicall, or rather Historically Theologicall) and because the Ancients, Cicero, Lactantius, Augustine, haue mentioned this monstrous Computation of the Chaldaean Kalender, which yet they racke higher to foure hundred threescore and ten thousand yeeres. Here you haue the particulars out of Apollodorus and Abidenus, which both borrowed them of Berosus.Eragmenta haec extan^ in Ch. on gr. Buseb. lib. 1. per Scalig. Photij Bibliotheca in Helladio. Polyhistor addeth, that there came  one out of the Red Sea, called Oannes and Annedotus a Monster (other-where like a fish, his head, feet and hands like a man, as saith Photius, but Al. Polyhistor ascribeth two heads, one of a fish, and the other of a man) the Image whereof was vnto his times reserued. This Monster liued without meate, and taught them the knowledge of Letters and all Arts, buildings of Cities, foundations of Temples, enacting of Lawes, Geometry and Husbandry, and all necessaries to mans life. Afterwards he returned to the Sea; and after him appeared other such Monsters. Foure of them came out of the Sea, saith Abidenus, when Daos (whom Apollodorus calleth Daorus) raigned; their names were Euedochus, Eneugamus, Enaboulus, Anementus. Pentabiblus (it seemeth) was then their chiefe Citie. That Oannes the first did write of the first beginning: That all was darknesse and water, in which liued monstrous  creatures, hauing two formes; men with two wings, and some with foure; with one body two heads, one of a man, and another of a woman, with the priuities of both Sexes: others with hornes and legs like Goats; some with Horse feet; some like Centaures, the former part Men, the after part Horses; Buls also headed like Men and Dogges, with foure bodies, etc. with many monstrous mixtures and confusions of creatures, whose Images were kept in the Temple of Belus. Ouer all these ruled a woman, named Omorkae, which signifieth the Sea, and by like signification of Letters, the Moone. Then came Belus and cut her in twaine, and made the one halfe of her Land, the other Heauen, and the creatures therein appeared. This Belus made men and beasts the Sunne, Moone, and Planets: these things reporteth Berosus in his first Booke; in the second he telleth of Kings (before mentioned) which raigned till the  Floud: After the Floud also the same Polyhistor out of him sheweth, That Sisuthrus hauing by Saturnes warning before, built an Arke (as is before said) and laid vp all Monuments of Antiquitie in Sipparis a Citie dedicated to the Sunne, and now with all his World of Creatures escaped the Floud, going out of the Arke did sacrifice to the gods, and was neuer seene more. But they heard a voyce out of the Ayre, giuing them this Precept, To bee Religious. His Wife, Daughter and Ship-master were partakers with him of this honour, Hee said vnto them, the Countrey where they now were was Armenia, and hee would come againe to Babylon, and that it was ordayned, that from Sipparis they should receiue Letters, and communicate the same to men: which they accordingly did. For hauing sacrificed to the gods: they went to Babylon and digged out the(...). Letters, Writings, or Bookes, and building many  Cities, and founding Temples, did againe repayre Babylon. Thus farre out of Alexander Polyhistor, a large Fragment of the true Berosus.


CHAP. XI. Of the Citie and Countrey of Babylon:The former M^p of Paradise doth descripe the Topography of the Countrey of Babylonia. their sumptuous Walls, Temples, and Images.
 LEauing these Antiquities, rotten with Age, let vs come to take better view of this stately Citie.Herod. l. 2. Herodotus,Philostr. de vit. Apol. l. 1. c. 18. Philostratus,Plin l. 6. c. 26. Plinie, andSolinus. c. 60. Solinus report concerning the compasse of Babylon, That the walls contayned foure hundred and eightie furlongs, situate in a large Plaine, foure square, inuironed with a broad and deepe Ditch full of water.Diod. l. 3. c. 4. Diodorus saith, That there were but so many furlongs as are dayes in the yeare, so that euery day a furlong of the wall was built, and thirtie hundred thousand Work-men imployed therein.See lib. 16. Strabo ascribeth to the compasse three hundred and eightie furlongs: andCurt. l. 5. Curtius, three hundred fiftie eight, (ninetie furlongs thereof inhabited, the rest allotted to Tylth and Husbandry,) Concerning the thicknesse of the walls, or the height, they also disagree. The  first Authors affirme the height two hundred Cubites, the thicknesseEt duo in aduersum misit per moenia cu^rus. Propert. 3. fiftie. They which say least, cut off halfe that summe. Well mightN. Lyr. in Da^. 4 Aristotle esteeme it a Countrey rather then a Citie, being of such greatnesse, that some part of it was taken three dayes before the
 other heard of it.Arist. Politic. l. 3. c. 2. Lyranus out of Hierome vpon Esay affirmeth, that the foure squares thereof contayned sixteene miles a piece, wherein euery man had his Vineyard and Garden according to his degree, wherewith to mayntaine his Family in time of siege. The Fortresse or Tower thereof he saith was that which had beene built by the Sonnes of Noah. And not without cause was it reckoned among theGreg. Naz. in vit. Basil. Martial. Ep. 1. Nicetes and Non. in Naz. Wonders of the World. It had a hundred Brazen gates, and two hundred and fiftie Towers. It was indeed a Mother of Wonders: so many Miracles of Art accompanyed the same, the workes partly of Semiramis, partly of Nabuchodonosor; which I would desire the Reader to stay his hastie pace, and take notice of. Euery where I shall not, I cannot, be so tedious in these kinds of Relations.Diod. Sic. l. 3. (or after the Greeke. l. 2.) c. 4 Diodor. thus addeth of Semiramis; shee built also a bridge of fiue furlongs. The walles were made of  Bricke and Asphaltum, and slimy kind of Pitch which that Countrey yeeldeth. Shee built two Palaces, which might serue both for ornament and defence; one in the West, which inuironed sixtie furlongs; with high Bricke walles: within that a lesse, and within that also a lesse circuit, which contayneth the Tower. These were wrought sumptuously with Images of beasts, and therein also was game and hunting of beasts: this had three gates. The other in the East, on the other side the Riuer, contayned but thirtie furlongs. In the lower Countrey of Babylonia she made a great square Lake contayning two hundred furlongs; the walls whereof were of Bricke, and that pitchie Morter; the depth thirtie fiue foot. In the middest of the Citie she erected a Temple to Iupiter Belus (saith Herodotus) with Brazen gates (now in his time remayning) foure square:Herod. l. 2. each square contayning two(...), translated a furlong, is but six hundred foot. furlongs, in the middest  whereof is a solid Tower, of the height and thicknesse of a furlong: vpon this another, and so one higher then another, eight in number. In the highest Tower is a Chappell, and therein a faire bed couered, and a Table of Gold, without any Image. Neyther, as the Chaldaean Priests affirme, doth any abide here in the night, but one woman, whom this God shall appoint. They say, the God himselfe there lyeth. In regard of this exceeding height, Diodonus affirmes, that the Chaldaeans did thereon make their obseruations of the Starres. Hee also addeth, that Semiramis placed in the top three golden statues; one of Iupiter fortie foot long, weighing a thousand Babylonian Talents, till his time remayning; another of Ops, weighing as much, sitting in a golden Throne, and at her feet two Lions, and iust by huge Serpents of siluer, each of thirtie Talents: the third Image was of Iuno standing, in weight  eight hundred Talents.In respect of this Idolatry, it is like that Dionys. cals Babylon a holy Citie. Her right hand held the head of a Serpent, her left, a Scepter of stone. To all these was common, one Table of gold, forty foot long, in breadth twelue, in weight fiftie Talents. There were also two standing cups of thirty Talents, and two vessels for Perfume of like value: three other vessels of gold, whereof one dedicated to Iupiter, weighed twelue hundred Babylonian Talents: (euery Babylonian Talent is said to containe seuen thousand Drachmae Atticae, sixtie three pounds, nine ounces and a halfe, and halfe a quarter Troy weight.) All these the Persian Kings tooke away. Without the Temple, by Herodotus testimonie, was a golden Altar, and another huge one besides, for their solemne Sacrifices, the other beeing not to bee polluted with bloud, except of sucking things. In that greater Chaldaeans burnt yeerely in their sacrifices a hundred thousand talents  of Libanotus. One statue of gold twelue cubits high, Darius affecting spared; but Xerxes both tooke it, and slew the Priest that forbad him.
I might here also tell of those Pensile gardens, borne vp on arches, foure square, each square containing foure hundred foot: filled on the roofe with earth, wherein grew great trees and other plants. The entrance was (as it were) a hill: the arches were builded one vpon another in conuenient height, still increasing as they ascended: the highest which bare the walls, were fiftie cubits high, and twelue in breadth: There were within these Arches, Innes. There was also a conueyance of water to the watering thereof. This Garden was made long after Semiramis time byA rege Syro. Diod. a King, which herein seemed to lord it ouer the Elements, and countermaund Nature, being himselfe the seruant of his wiues appetite,  who in this lowly valley wherein Babylon stood, would faine haue some representation of her owne hilly and mountainous countrey of Media.
This King was Nabuchodonosor, as witnessethBeros. fragm. apud Ioseph. contra Appion. lib. 1. Vid. Scal. notas in haec frag. Berosus in Iosephus, who hauing conquered Egypt, Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia, inriched the Temple of Belus with the spoyles, and added a new Citie to the old, without the same. And prouiding that the enemie might not after turne the course of the Riuer, and approach to the Citie, he compassed the inner Citie with three Wals, and the vtter Citie with as many, these of bricke, those also with bitumen, or pitchie slime of that Countrie, adding thereunto stately gates. And neere his fathers Palace he built another more sumptuous: and this hee did in fifteene dayes. Therein hee raysed stone-works like vnto mountaines, and planted the same with all manner of trees.  Hee made also a pensile Garden. Many more things (saith Iosephus) doth Berosus adde, and blameth the Greeke writers for ascribing the building of Babylon to Semiramis an Assyrian.
 This fragment of Berosus cited by Iosephus, doth well serue vs to cleare both the holy and prophane Historie. In the one; DanielDan. 4.27. induceth Nabuchodonosor walking in his royall Palace in Babel, with words answerable to his pride. Is not this great Babel that I haue builded for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my maiestie? His words (euen in the speaking) were written in the Booke of GOD, and an enditement thereof framed in the highest Court; where he was adiudged presently the losse of Reason, which he had thus abused, Till hee knew that the most High bare rule ouer the Kingdome of men, giuing the same to whomsoeuer hee will. Well might he say, he had built it, in regard of this new Citie and Palace, with other miracles thereof: with more truth then some Expositors,  which accuse him herein of a lie, for arrogating that which Semiramis did. His wife also, for whose loue he did this, was (asScal. notae in frag. Berosi. Scaliger thinketh) Nitocris, mentioned by Horodotus; who also coniectureth that shee was the Daughter of Aliattes, that Daniel intendeth her, Dan. 5.10. that shee administred the Kingdome in the time of her husbands madnesse, and in the times also of Euilmerodach and Balsasar: a woman no whit inferiour to Semiramis; that it may be said, Semiramis began Babylon, and Nitocris finished and perfected it, finishing and perfecting those workes which Nabuchodonosor her husband before the time of his madnesse had begunne.
And for Semiramis, profane historiesClarae Carihaginis arces, Creditur and centum portis Babylona superbam Foemineus struxisse labor. Claud. generally make her the founder of this Citie, and among othersPseudo. Beros. l. 5. Annius his Berosus, who (contrary to this fragment of the true Berosus in Iosephus)  saith, that Semiramis made Babylon of a towne a great Citie, that shee might be rather esteemed the builder thereof, then enlarger. Nimrod had before built the Tower, but not finished it, and did notNec designatam vrbem fundauit, lib. 4 found the Citie, which hee had designed and set out, and Belus his sonne hadFundamenta designata Babyloniae, oppidi magis quam vrbis erexit. Gen. 11.8. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. li. 18. c. 2 Ap. Euseb. Prep. lib. 9. Dan. ca. 3. erected those designed foundations, rather of the Towne then the Citie Babylon. Moses testifieth that at the first building, they were (by confusion of language) forced to cease their worke, leauing a name of their shame, in stead of that renowne and name, which they had promised to themselues. It may be that Semiramis did amplifie this: and happily so did other Assyrian and Babylonian kings, as Augustine and Abidenus affirme. Hanc quidem putant condidisse Babylona, quam quidem potuit instaurare. Likewise Abidenus saith, that the wals being by inundation fallen, were built againe by Nabuchodonosor, and  agreeth in other things with Berosus. But the Graecians are children, in comparison of ancient Historie, and little of this matter can we affirme on their testimonie; their first Historian Herodotus liuing long after this age, in the time of the Persian Monarchie. Howsoeuer; Nabuchodonosor is hee which (by diuine and humane testimonie) there established that golden head of the Image, the seat of the Babylonian Monarchie, raising it to that high top of worldly excellence. Yea Daniel speaketh of one more sumptuous Image, then any mentioned by Herodotus and Diodorus, set vp by this King threescoreLyranus thinketh that the Basis whereon it stood, is included in this height: for (as Symetrians obserue) the length of a man holdeth proportion but of sixe, and not of ten to the breadth. cubits high, and six broad, enioyning a Catholicke and vniuersall idolatrie thereunto, which the three Saints Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused, and in a fierie triall were found both Martyrs and Confessors.See D. Willet in Dan. 3. Ver. 14. c. 18. Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Pererius, Pintus, Pellicanus, thinke that Nabuchodonosor  set vp this Image for himselfe, requiring diuine honour to be giuen vnto it, as Caligula since amongst the Romans; but by his expostulation, Will yee not serue my god? and the like answere of those three men: We will not serue thy gods, it seemeth to haue beene consecrated to Bel, or some other Babylonian Deitie. Which because it was erected in the plaine of Dura (this is thought to bee Dera in Susiana, mentioned by Ptolomey)Ptol. Geog. l. 6. cap. 3. Daniel might haue good occasion of absence from thence, whose office was toPraefectus praetorio. sit in the gate of the King, at Babylon.
Strabo. l. 15.Strabo out of Megasthenes (whom Annius hath set out as truly as he hath done Berosus, saue that he lisped in the name, and called him Metasthenes) sayth of this King,Metasthenes Annij. The true Megasthenes write about fiftie yeeres before Berosus, hauing trauelled al the East, about the end of Alexanders raigne. whom hee nameth Nabacodrosor, more esteemed of the Chaldaeans then Hercules, that he came in  his expeditions as farre as the Pillars of Hercules (the straights of Gibraltar) and as far as Tearcon the Aethiopian, and that he conducted an army out of Iberia into Thracia and Pontus. This Tearcon is he whom the Scripture calleth Tirhaka, which warred against Senacherib.
2. King. 19.9.But to returne to our pensile Gardens, which Diodorus and Curtius attribute to a Syrian King (which was no other but this Conquerour of Syria,Syria comprehendeth in it (after the largest sense) Babylonia also. See cap. 15. and Plin. l. 5. c. 12. Nabuchodonosor) and both they and Strabo doe at large describe and account among the worlds wonders, as were also the Bridge and the Walls of the Citie. And no lesse wonderfull was that Obeliske, or Needle: a square stone made spire-fashion, cut by Semiramis out of the mountaines of Armenia, one hundred and fiftie foot long, and foure and twentie thicke, on many Waines brought to the  Riuer, thence to Babylon, and there erected. Plinie testifieth, that the Temple of Belus stil remaineth in his dayes: and that Belus was inuentor of Astronomie.
This Temple was the same with the Sepulchre of Belus, which Strabo sayth, was rased by
 Xerxes; yet not so, but that Alexander would haue repaired it; but in regard that it asked so much labour and time (for onely the clensing of the earth required ten thousand men two moneths worke) he was not able to finish that which he had begunne. In the description he saith lesse then Herodotus, that it was a Pyramis, or spire-worke, a furlong, or six hundred foot in height, and each of the fouresquares containing as much. ArrianusAraian. de rebus gestis Alexand. lib. 3. affirmeth that Alexander had the same purpose of other Temples also. The Temples, sayth he, which Xerxes had ouerthrowne, he commanded to be repayred, and among them the Temple of Belus, whom the Babylonians with singular Religion worship.Ar. lib. 7. At his returne homewards Belus in thankefulnesse (it seemeth) sent his Chaldaean Priests to meete him, and forbid him to enter the Citie, as he loued his life, whose Oracle Alexander contemning, there ended his  dayes. The cause why he listned not to them, is thought a mistrust, that he conceiued of the Chaldaeans. For whereas Xerxes, at his returne out of Greece, had razed this and all other sacred places of the Babylonians: Alexander minding the repaire hereof, hauing already remoued the rubbish, thought with his whole Armie to atchieue this enterprise. But the reuenue which the Kings of Assyria had left for the maintenance of this Temple sacrifices, after the ouerthrow thereof, was shared among the Chaldaeans; which they by this attempt were like to lose, and therefore were willing to want his presence.
This Temple some suppose to be that Tower of Babel, mentioned by Moses, Gen. 11. and supposed still in part to remaine. For about seuen or eight miles from Bagdat, as men passe from Felugia a Towne on Euphrates, whereon old Babylon stood, to this new Citie  on Tygris (a worke of eighteene houres, and about forty miles space) there is seene a ruinous shape of a shapelesse heape and building, in circuit lesse then a mile (some say, but a quarter of a mile) about the height of the stone-worke of Pauls steeple in London: the bricks being sixe inches thicke, eight broad, and a foot long (as master Allen measured) with Mats of Canes laied betwixt them, yet remayning as sound, as if they had beene laid within a yeeres space.Mentioned also by Sir, Ant. Sherley in his trauels into Persia. Thus master Eldred, and master Fitch, master Cartwright also, and my friend master Allen, by testimony of their owne eyes, haue reported. But I can scarce thinke it to be that Tower or Temple, because Authors place it in the middest of old Babylon, and neere Euphrates. Whereas this is neerer Tygris: Isidore affirmeth, that first after rhe floud, Nimrod the Giant founded Babylon, which Semiramis the Assyrian Queene enlarged, and made the  wall with Bricke and Bitumen. The height of the Tower was fiue thousand one hundred seuenty foure paces,Verstegan. Anriq. c. 1. Verstegan addeth, the passage to mount vp was verie wide and great, winding about on the out-side: the middle and inward part for the more strength being all massie: and by Cart, Camels, Dromedaries, Horses and Asses, the carriages were borne and drawne vp: and by the way were many Lodgings and Hosteries both for man and beast; yea fields also for graine and pasture; if yee can beleeue it. But it is now, as wee see, come to confusion. Also there are yet beyond Tygris some ruines of a Temple, which is called the Temple of Bel, with high yron gates, as is reported.
Dominicus NigerDomin. Nig. Asia Com. 4. hath these words: Seleucia in processe of time hath changed her  state and her site. For it was on the westerne banke of Tygris, which a Cut from Euphrates flowed into; in which place are now seene the ruines thereof, where the shepheards haue erected them cottages: and on the Easterne banke haue the Barbarians built the Citie, and called it Bachdad, right ouer-against the old. If this be true, vaine is the conceit of credulous Trauellers, which suppose those ruines to be the monuments of Babylons buriall, and confound against this later world, with the reports of Babels Tower.
The Bitumen of slimie pitch which they vsed in stead of Morter in their building is as Dominicus Niger out of Trogus reporteth, common in those parts. Herodotus telleth, that eight dayes iourney from Babylon, was another Citie, named Is, with a small rill of the same name, which runneth into Euphrates, carrying thither (as tribute) much of this slimie matter.  Niger mentioneth one place, where, out of a clift or opening of the earth, proceedeth such a stinke, that it killeth the Birds which flie ouer it. And at this day, two dayes iourney from BagdatR. Fitche. Hak. Voy. tom. 2. at a place called Ait, is a mouth continually throwing forth boyling pitch, therefore by the Moores called Hel-mouth, which runneth into a great field, almost full thereof: and herewith they pitch their boates. The water, as my friend master Allen (who liued in Bagdat diuers moneths) told me, is warme, and accounted medicinable, for which cause he hath drunke largely thereof: the liquid pitch floateth on the top of the water, like clou^ed Creame, to vse his owne phrase.
The Countrie of Babylonia hath beene the most fruitfull in the world,Herod. lib. 2. yeelding ordinarily two hundred, and in some places three hundred increase: the blades of the Wheat and Barley about foure fingers broad.Plin. Nat. hist. lib. 18. cap. 17. Plinie, somewhat otherwise: They cut saith he) or mow  their corne twice, and seed it a third time in Babylonia, otherwise it would be nothing but
 blade: and yet so their barrener laud yeeldeth fiftie, their best an hundred increase. Tygris and Euphrates ouerflow it, but bring not fatnesse to the soyle, as Nilus in Egypt, but rather cleanse that superfluous fatnesse which naturally it hath.
The soyle is of a rosennie clay, sayth master Allen, and would still retaine in likelyhood his ancient fertility, if it were watered with like diligent husbandrie: In digging, it yeeldeth corrupt waters, fauouring of that pitchie slime. In the Citie anciently, it seemeth that in euery Garden of any Citizen of sort, were rils made out of the Riuer. The ruines from the Tower aforesaid to Bagdat (which some call Babylon) and beyond on the other side of the Riuer, containe twentie two miles, yet to be seene: which happily are the ruines, not of  old Babylon, so much as of the Neighbour townes here built Seleucia, Vologesocerta, and Ctesiphon: which I rather thinke, because they reach beyond Tygris as well as on this side.
To returne to the religious places in Babylon: Caelius Rhodiginas tels,Cel. Rhod. Lec. Antiq l. 8. c. 12. that in the Temple of Apollo, was found a golden chest of great antiquitie, which being broken by some accident, thence issued a pestilent vapour, that infected not those alone which were present, but the neighbouring Nations, as farre as Parthia. Ammianus MarcellinusAmmian. l. 23. hath the like Historie of the Image of Apollo Chomeus at Seleucia, which was brought to Rome, and there placed by the Priests in the Temple of Apollo Palatinus: and when as a certaine hole which the Chaldaean Wise-men had by Art stopped, through the couetousnesse of certaine Souldiers breaking in thither for spoyle, was broken vp, the world was thence poysoned with a contagion,  from Persia, as farre as France.Philost de vitu Apol. l. 1. c. 18. Philost. aid Viu. de trad. dis. lib. 5 Magna Homeri mendatia maioribus mendacijs corrigil. Et postea, c^isdem Apollonius pene t^tus sigmentum est valiosum ac blaspemum, etc. Philostratus reporteth (but who will beleeue his reports?) of Apollonius, that he saw at Babylon such stately Palaces, as scarce agree with the state of Babylon, in the time of Apollonius, which was while Domician raigned; amongst other things, hee saw Galleries full of Greeke Images, as of Orpheus, Andromeda, etc. He came also into a Gallerie, the roofe whereof was made bowing like the heauens, and couered with Saphire, so to resemble Heauen, and the Images of their gods, made of gold, were there son. From the roofe there hanged foure birds of gold, representing the goddesse of Reuenge, which they called the tongues of the gods, I know not by what art or mysterie, admonishing  the King not to exalt himselfe.


CHAP. XII. Of the Priests, Sacrifices, religious Rites, and customes of the Babylonians.
THe Chaldeans (saithDiod. Sic. l. 3. cap. 8. Diodorus) were of reputation in Babylon, as the Priests in Egypt; Chaldaean, being a name sometime applyed to the whole Nation; sometime appropriated to the Priests, who spent their whole time in religious  Seruices, and in Astrologie. Many of them by diuination foretold things to come, as wee haue shewed before in the Historie of Alexander; and the booke of Daniel witnesseth this their profession. By their auguries, or diuination by birds, by sacrifices and enchantments, they were accounted to doe good or harme to mankind. They were most expert in their sacred Rites, in the knowledge whereof they were brought vp from their child-hood; and continued in that course of learning all their liues, the child being instructed in his Fathers science. They professed the interpretation of dreames, and prodigious accidents in Nature. Their opinions were, That the world is eternall, without beginning and end: the order and furniture of all was done by diuine prouidence: all heauenly things were perfected, not by chance, of their owne accord, but by the  determinate and firme decree of the gods. By long obseruation, searching the course and nature of the starres, they foretold things to come. But the greatest power they attributed to the fiue Planets, and especially to Saturne. They call them Mercuries, because when others are fixed, these haue their proper motion and shew future things, as the Interpreters of the gods, by their rising, setting and colour. Vnder their course they giue the title of godsDij Consultores. to thirty other starres, the one halfe, aboue; the other, vnder the earth, beholding all accidents. And in tenne dayes one of the higher is sent to the lower, as an Angell, or Messenger of the Starres, and one from them to the higher: And this course they take eternally.
They hold twelue principall gods, each of which hath his peculiar moneth, and his signe in the Zodiake; by which the Sunne, and Moone, and fiue Planets haue their motion. These  Planets they esteeme to conferre much good or euill in the generation of men, and by their nature and aspect, things to come may be foreknown. Many things they foretold to Alexander, Nicanor, Antigonus, Seleucus, and to priuate men, beyond the reach of men. They
 number foure and twenty constellations without the Zodiake, twelue towards the North, and as many towards the South. These Northernly are seene, which they attribute to the liuing: those Southernly are hidden, and present (they thinke) to the dead, which they hold the Iudges of all. Concerning the site, motion, and Eclipse of the Moone, they hold as the Greekes; but of the Sunnes Eclipse they haue diuers opinions, and dares not vtter their opinion thereof, nor foretell the time. The earth they conceiued to bee hollow like a boate. R. Moses Ben Maimon out of a booke intituled de Aagricultura Aegyptiorum,R. Mos. Moreb. l. 3. c. 30. Vid. eius Epist. ad Masil. Iud. attributeth like things vnto them: that they beleeued the Starres were gods, and that the Sunne was the chiefe God, and next to him the Moone: that the Sunne ruleth the superiour and inferiour world. And concerning Abraham, that he was borne in a land which worshipped the fire,  which when he reproued, and his Countrimen obiected the operations of the Sunne, hee answered that the Sun was as the Axe in the hand of the Carpenter. But at last the King cast Abraham into prison, and when as there hee still continued the same disputes and opinions, the King fearing hurt to his people, banished him into the vtmost bounds of Chanaan, hauing first spoyled him of all his good. This contradicteth the Historie of Moses, and of the old and new Testament, which commend Abrahams faith, in voluntary forsaking of his country at the commaund of GOD,Gene. 12. Heb. 11. and not by compulsion of man, although it reacheth not to the formerMentioned, supra. c. 10. absurbitie, which ascribeth this to the time of Nimrod. And whether Abraham was an Idolater before that his calling, is handledLib. 2. c. 2. else where. But to returne to our Rabbine (highlyIos. Scal. in Epist. ad Casaubon Omnia allius Magistri opera tanti facio, vt solum illum inter Iudaos desiise nugari dicam admired by a most admired Author) he saith, that hence Abraham grew renowmed  through the the World, all Nations honoring his memory, except some Heathens, as the Parthians on the left hand, and Indians on the right, which were remainders of the Chaldaeans, and called Zabij. These Zabij, Scaliger also sayth were Chaldaeans, so called a vento Apeliote, as one might say, Eastern-men, or Easterlings: and addeth, that the Booke so often cited bySo the Iewes call the said R. Mos. of the first letters R. M. B. M. Rab. Mos. Ben. Maimon. contracted Rambam. Rambam, concerning their Religion, Rites, and Customes, is yet extant in the hands of the Arabian Muhamedans. Out of this booke our Rabbie reciteth their opinions: that Adam was borne of man and woman, as other men; and that hee was a Prophet of the Moone, and by preaching perswaded men to worship the Moone, and that hee composed bookes of husbandry: that Noe also was a husband-man, and beleeued not in Idols. For which the Zabij put him in prison, and because he worshipped the Creator. Seth also contradicted  Adam in his Lunarie worship. They tell also that Adam went outThese fables were some rubbish of Paradise, the trees and Serpent therein, etc. In his Epistle to the Marsilian Iewes, he writeth of Bookes which mention Iambasor, Tzareth, Roani, and say they were before Adam, and that Sombascher was Adams master: and of the Indians, which say they haue Cities 100000. yeeres old, etc. of the Land of promise, which is towards India, and entred into Babylon, whither hee carried with him a tree still growing with branches and leaues, and a tree of stones, and leaues of a tree which would not burne, vnder the shadow of which tree he said ten thousand men might be couered, the height whereof was as the stature of a man. Adam also had affirmed in his booke of a tree in India, the boughes whereof being cast on the ground, would stir like Serpents; and of another, which had a root shaped like a man, endued with a kind of sounding voyce differing from speech; and of a certaine hearbe which being folded vp in a mans clothes, would make him walke inuisible, and the smoke of the same, being fired, would cause thunders: another tree they worshipped which abode in Niniuie twelue yeeres, and contended  with the Mandrake for vsurping her roome, whereby it came to passe that the Priest or Prophet, which had vsed to prophesie, with the spirit of that tree, ceased a long time from prophesying, and at last the tree spake to him, and bade him write the sute betweene her and the Mandrake, whether of them were the more honourable. These fooleries, saith he, they attributed to Adam, that so they might proue the eternitie of the world, and Deitie of the Stars. These Zabij made them for this cause Images of gold to the Sunne, of siluer to the Moone, and built them Temples, saying, that the power of the Planets was infused into those Images, whence they spake vnto men and taught things profitable. The same they affirmed of those trees which they apropriated to each of them with peculiar worships, rites, and hallowings, whereby that tree receiued a power to speake with men in their sleepes.  From hence sprang magicall diuinations, auguries, necromancie, and the like. They offered to their chiefe god a Beetle, and seuen Mice, and seuen Fowles.
The greatest of their bookes is that of the Aegyptian seruice, translated into Arabike by a Moore called Enennaxia, which containeth in it many ridiculous things; and yet these were the famous wise-men of Babylon in those daies. In the said booke is reported of a certaine Idolatrous Prophet named Tamut, who preaching to a certaine King this worship of the seuen Planets, and twelue Signes, was by him done to a grieuous death. And in the night of his death, all the Images from the ends of the world came and assembled together at the great golden Image in the Temple at Babylon,Of this mourning for Tamut or Thamuz, See Ezek. 8.14. and vid. infra. c. 17. which was sacred to the Sunne, and hanged betweene the heauen and the earth which then prostrated it selfe in the midst of the Temple  with all the Images round about, shewing to them, all which had befallen Tamut. All the Images therefore wept all night, and in the morning fled away each to his owne Temple.
 And hence grew that custome yearely in the beginning of the monerh Tamut, to renew that mourning for Tamut. Other bookes of theirs are mentioned by him, one called Deizamechameche, a booke of Images, a booke of Candles, of the degrees of Heauen, and others falsly ascribed to Aristotle, and one to Alformor, and one to Isaac, and one, of their Feasts, Offrings, Prayers, and other things pertaining to their Law, and some written against their opinions, all done into Arabike. In these are set downe the Rites of their Temples and Images of stone or mettall, and applying of Spirits to them, and their Sacrifices, and kinds of meates. They name their holy places sumptuously built, the Temples of Intelligible formes; and set Images on high mountaines, and honour trees, and attribute the increase of men and  fruites to the Starres. Their Priests preached that the Earth could not bee Tilled, according to the will of the gods, except they serued the Sunne and Starres, which being offended, would diminish their fruites, and make their Countries desolate. They haue written also in the former bookes, that the Planet Iupiter is angrie with the Deserts and drie places, whence it commeth that they want water and trees, and that Deuils haunt them. They honoured Husband-men, and fulfilling the will of the Starres, in tilling the ground: they honoured Kine and Oxen for their labours therein, saying that they ought not to be slaine. In their festiuals they vsed Songs, and all Musicall instruments,R. Mos. l. 3. 31. and 33. affirming that their Idols were pleased with these things, promising to the doers long life, health, plentie of fruits, raines, trees, freedome from losses, and the like. Hence it is, saith R. Moses, that the Law of Moses forbiddeth  these rites, and threatneth the contrarie plagues to such as shall obserue them. Tehy had certaine hallowed beasts in their Temples wherein their Images were, before which they bowed themselues and burned incense. These opinions of the Zabij,Cap. 38. were holden also by the Aramites, Chanaanites, and Aegyptians.
They had their magicall obseruations in gathering certaine hearbs, or in the vse of certaine metals, or liuing creatures, and that in a set certaine time, with their set rites, as of leaping, clapping the hands, hopping, crying, laughing, etc. in the most of which women were actors; as when they would haue raine, ten Virgins clothed in hallowed garments of red colour, danced a procession, turning about their faces and shoulders, and stretching their fingers towards the Sunne: and to preuent harme by haile, foure Women lay on their backes  naked, lifting vp their feete, speaking certaine words. And all Magicall practices, they made to depend of the Starres, saying, that such a Starre was pleased with such an incense, such a Plant, such a metall, such words, or workes, and thereby would be as it were hired to such or such effects, as to driue away Serpents, and Scorpions, to slay wormes in nuts, to make the leaues fall, and the like. Their Priests vsed shauings of the head and beard, and linsey wolsey garments, and made a signe in their hand with some kind of metals. The Booke of Centir prescribeth a woman to stand armed before the starre of Mars,Moloch and Saturnes sacrifices of humane bodies. See Cap. 18. and a man clothed in womans attire painted, before the starre of Venus to prouoke lust. The worshippers of the fire made men beleeue that they which would not cause their children to passe through the fire, should lose them, and easily perswaded them thereunto as a thing easie, saith the Rabine,  for they did not burne them (although herein both diuine and humane testimonies make me beleeue the contrarie.) From hence, saith hee, descended the customes, obserued by women, in holding and mouing their children ouer the fire or smoke.
They had their diuersities of Processions; and when they hallowed a tree to an Image, one part of the fruit thereof was offered, and the other eaten in the house of the Idoll: the like they did with the first fruits of euery tree; making men beleeue that otherwise the tree would become vnprofitable. They had their magicall enchantments in the planting or grafting of trees, with obseruations of the starres, incenses, words: but this most Diabolicall, that in the houre when one kinde was to be ingrafted into another, the science which was to bee ingrafted, should bee holden in the hand of some beautifull woman,Aversa Venus. and that some man  should then carnally, but vnnaturally, haue knowledge of her, the woman in that instant putting the science into the tree. They vsed also to make circles when they planted or sowed, and went about the same, some fiue times, because of the fiue planets, some seuen, in regard of the Sunne and Moone, added to that number. For this cause the Iew not vnprobably thinketh that mixtures in garments, seedes, and the like, were forbidden by the Law of Moses, with other rites any way resembling these.
They further worshipped Deuils, beleeuing that they appeared to men in the formes of Goates, and therefore called their Deuils Kids, and held it vnlawfull to sheare or to eate their kids: but especially they abhorred the killing of Kine, but performed much worship to them, as they also doe in India to this day. They sacrificed Lyons, Beares, and wilde  Beasts, as is mentioned in the Booke Zeuzit. They held bloud in much abomination, accounting it a great pollution, and yet did eat it, because (they said) it was the food of
 Deuils, and they which did eat it, should haue communion with them: and that they would come to such and reueale vnto them things to come. Some, whose nicer stomackes could not indure to eate it, receiued the same, when they killed a beast,Idem citat P. Ric. in explic. praecept. neg. 220. ex R. Mos. Gerundensi. in a Vessell or in a ditch, and did eate the flesh of that Sacrifice, being placed about that bloud, thinking that the Deuils did eate the bloud, and that thus by this as it were eating at the same table, was entertained betwixt them and the Deuils mutuall familiaritie and societie. They beleeued also that in their sleepes, the Deuils came and reuealed secrets vnto them. Concerning a menstruous woman their custome was, that shee should sit alone in a house, and that the places where shee set her feet should be burned; whosoeuer talked with her was vncleane, yea if he but stood in the wind of her, the wind from her did pollute him. Likewise these  Zabians thought, whatsoeuer went from their bodies was vncleane, as nailes, haire, bloud; and therefore Barbers and Surgeons were holden polluted: and after cutting off their haire, vsed much washing for expiation. But it needeth some expiation that I insist so long in these narrations, and haue need of some Barber or Surgeon to ease me of superfluities, if that can be superfluous which fitteth so to our proiect, and in the iudgement of the learnedst of the Iewish Rabbines in many ages, seemed the cause of so many prohibitions in Moses his Law, lest they should conforme, themselues in religious obseruances to these superstitious Zabians.
But let vs now returne to Diodorus, who affirmeth that the Chaldaeans numbred fortie three thousand yeeres, vntill the comming of Alexander, since first they had begunne their  obseruations of the Starres. These yeeres Xenophon de aequiuocis interpreteth of moneths; for so (sayth he) the Chaldaeans reckoned their antiquities; in other things they kept their computation according to the Sunne. But of their fabulous antiquities wee haue heard before: where wee haue also touched, that one beginning of Idolatrie did arise of this curious and superstitious Starre-gazing, especially in the Countries of Aegypt, where not at all vsually; and in Chaldaea, where diuers monethsEight moneths together Master Eldred, Hak. Voy. tom. 2. together, they haue neither raines nor cloudes.
Strabo diuideth the Chaldaeans into sects, Orcheni, Borsippeni, and others, diuersly opinionate of the same things. Borsippa was a Citie sacred to Diana and Apollo. PliniePlin. l. 6. c. 26. Tertia Chaldaeoru^ Doctrina, etc. Scalig. thinketh them named Orcheni. etc. of the place, and not of difference of sects, as if there had beene Vniuersities or Colledges of Chaldaeans, the Orcheni were of Erech. Scal. notae in frag. Ber. addeth the Hippareni. DanielDan. 2.2. See D. Willet. Comm. ibid. q. 7. and 29. reckoneth vp foure kind of Wise-men among the Chaldaeans:  the first are called Chartummim, which were Enchanters; Ashaphim, Astrologers; Mecashpim, Sorcerers or Iuglers, deluders of sense; and Chasdim, Chaldaeans, which, howsoeuer it were a generall name of that Nation, yet was it appropriated vnto a certaine sect and profession of learning among them which seemed to excell the rest, and were their Priests, Philosophers, and Mathematicians, as you haue heard. In the seuen and twentieth verse of the same chapter are mentioned also Cachimim, Wisards, which by coniectures and casting of lots did ghesse of things to come: and Gazrin, of the word gazar, to cut; these opened, and diuined by the entrals of sacrifices. The vanitie of their diuinations appeareth in that Prophet, howsoeuer they haue beene renowned therefore among the Heathens: as in the foretelling of Alexanders death, and before that, whenQ. Curtius. Darius had changed his Scaberd  into the Greeke fashion, the ruine of that Empire by the Greeks. When FaustinaIul. Capitolin. M. Ant. Philos. the Empresse, wife to M. Antonius, had fallen in loue with a Fencer or sword-player, and being sicke confessed the same to her husband, the Chaldaeans were sent for, who gaue counsell to kill the Fencer, and that shee should wash her selfe in his bloud, and then accompanie with her Husband: which was done and Commodus begotten, who in qualities resembled that Fencer vpon this occasion (as the people reported) though others esteemed him a Bastard. PlutarchPlut. in vit. Mar. and Syl. sheweth how vainely the Romans depended on their predictions. Thus Iuvenal reproues them:
Iuven. Sat. 6.Chaldaeis sed maior erit fiducia, quicquidDixerit Astrologus, credent a fonte relatumAmmonis.Ioues Oracles no greater credit haueThen sooth-saying of Chaldaee coozening knaue.
Many Edicts were after made against them. Otho HeurniusOtho Heurn. Chaldaic. laboureth to bring the Grecian Philosophie from the Chaldaeans: yea Aristotle himselfe, as hee had receiued the the Persian and Indian Philosophie by tradition of Pythagoras and Democritus, and the Aegyptian and Iewish learning from Plato, so was hee instructed (sayth hee) in the Babylonian  sciences by Callisthenes. But Caelius RhodiginusCael. Rhod. Lec. Ant. lib. 16. ca. 4. and Iosephus ScaligerIos. Scal. praef. in Manil. thinke them rather corrupters of learning, whereof they had no solid knowledge, and that the Greekes
 attained thereunto by their owne industrie, without borrowing of the Chaldaeans. Peucer deemethPeuc. de Diuinat. Theom. and Astrol. them too Philosophicall, the peruerters of Religion into Theoricall speculations of Nature, and confuteth their fiue kinds of prognosticating. But their estimation could not haue beene such in Daniels time, if they had not beene very learned: and somewhat was added, as wee may well coniecture, to their learning by him, who by Nabuchodonosor wasDan. 2.48. Praefectum antistitem super omnes sapientes Bab. constituit. Trem. set ouer them. For besides the gifts wherewith hee was enriched, and the ciuill authoritie wherewith he was dignified, he was exalted also to this Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction ouer the Schooles of the Wise-men, (as after Iunius and Osiander, D. Willet hath obserued) as it were their Superintendent: which though Caluin thinketh hee refused, yet  it appeareth by the title which the KingDan. 4.6. Praefecte Magorum. after gaue him, that hee accepted it. In which his Superintendentship, sayth our AuthorD. Willet in Dan. 2. and Iun., such laudable sciences as might safely be learned, he promoted and furthered; such corruption and superstitions as were practised among them, he corrected and reformed: but such abuses as could not be taken away, hee forbare, and kept himselfe free from them. And here haue we a testimonie of their Hierarchie, which Nature taught these and all people, contrarie to the Noueltie of Paritie. In the dayes of Hezechiah, when the Sunne went backwards, it appeareth how studious the Chaldaean Nation was, in that2. Chro. 32.31. their Princes sent their Ambassadours into Iudaea to enquire thereof. Yea the Delphian Oracle, as Theodoret citeth it out ofTheod. de curand. Graec. affec. ser. 1. Porphyrie, ascribing the finding out of that learning which leadeth to the gods, not to the Greekes, but to the Aegyptians,  Phoenicians, Chaldaeans, and Hebrewes; in which the Chaldaeans (as that Father out of Daniel obserueth) were furthered by the Hebrewes.
SomePhilostrat. de vita Apol. lib. 1. doe call the Babylonian Priests, Magi: but because they were by this name best knowne, and most esteemed among the Persians, which in that vicinitie of Regions had as neere Neighbourhood in Religions, wee will speake of these Magi, in our Persian Relations. And it is thought that the Persian Magi came from these Chaldaeans. MornaeusPh. Morn. de Verit. C. R. reckoneth among the Chaldaean opinions, that of Oromases, Mitris, and Ariminis, that is to say, GOD, Mind and Soule: which hee applieth to the Christian doctrine of the holy Trinitie. The Oracle of Apollo, pronounced the Chaldaeans and Hebrewes to bee onely wise.
 The Chaldaean opinion concerning iudiciall Astrologie, was not receiued of all the Chaldaeans, as Strabo reporteth. And Bardesanes Syrus, the best learned of the Chaldaeans (it is EusebiusEuseb. de pra. par. Eu. l. 6. c. 8. testimonie) doth at large confute that opinion (which yet many Wisards, carkasses of Christians still follow.) He affirmeth that in those things which a man hath common with a beast, eating, sleepe, nourishment, age, etc. a man is ordered by Nature, as the beasts are. But man hauing also a reasonable soule, and freedome of will, is not subiect to that naturall seruitude; which at large hee prooueth by the diuers customes of men, both in diuers, and in the same countries, in diet, gouernment, and Religion; as the Reader, willing to reade so worthie a discourse, may find related at large in Eusebius.
Alexander Polyhist.Euseb. de praepar. l. 9. c 4. out of Eupolemus, telleth that in the tenth generation after the  floud, in Camyrine a Citie of Babylonia, which other call Vr, Abram was borne, which excelled all in knowledge, and was the inuentor of Astrologie among the Chaldaeans. Hee by diuine precept went into Phoenicia, and taught the Phoenicians the course of the Sunne and Moone: and when the Armenians, warring vpon the Phoenicians, had taken his brothers sonne prisoner, hee by a band of his seruants recouered him, and freely dismissed the captiues, which he had taken. Hee after liued with the Priests at Heliopolis in Egypt, and taught them Astrologie; confessing that he had receiued that Art by succession from Enoch. Hee added that Belus raigned the second in Babylon, and was called Saturne, the father of a second Belus, and Canaan; which Canaan was the father of the Phoenicians and the Aethiopians, brother of Mizraim the Author of the Egyptians: with many other things not  much differing from the Diuine Historie.
Astronomie in all likelihood was knowne to Abraham, to whom the heauenly starres might be Remembrancers of that promise, so shall thy seed bee: his countrie also, where it was practised, might therein further him, and the excellencie of the science in it selfe. But this star-gazing destinie, Iudiciall, Coniecturall, Genethliacall Astrologie, Reason and experience, GOD, and Man haue condemned. Vr signifieth light, which agreeth to the Fire, the Chaldaeans deitie,Ammian. l. 23. Plutar. de facie in orbe Lunae. which the Persians and Chaldaeans fained to haue receiued from heauen, and kept euer burning; as the Vestals in Rome. They held Water and Fire to be the beginning of all things. They made a chalenge of their fiery godSuidas in Canopo. Ruffin. hist. eccl. lib. 2., to contend with any other gods of the godlesse Heathen: an Egyptian encountred and ouercame them  thus: he caused his Canopus to be made full of holes stopped with waxe, and hollow in the middle, which hee filled with water: and the Chaldaeans putting their fire vnder, the waxe melting, opened a quiuer of watrie arrowes, that cooled the heat of their deuouring god,
 and deuoured him. They had yet a more foolish god, euen anAlex. ab Alexand. l. 6. c. 26. Onyon which they worshipped. They obserued diuers wicked Sciences of diuining, by Fire, Aire, Water, Earth, consulting with the dead, and with wicked spirits, -- Chaldaea vocatis Imperat arte dijs, sayth Claudian.
Euery day the KingCoelius l. 8. c. 1. offered a Horse, furnished, vnto the Sunne; as did also the Persians. Philostrat. sayth, that it was a white Horse of the Nisaean race, sumptuously trapped lib. 1. cap. 20. They obserued a feast in Babylon (AthenaeusAthen. lib. 14. cap. 17. citeth it out of Berosus) on the sixteenth Calends of September, which continued fiue dayes; in which the Masters were subiect to their seruants, and one of them royally attired, was caried out of the house, whom they called Zoganes, Baruch cap. 6. in the Epistle of Ieremie (Apocrypha) rippeth  vp their idolatrous Rites, Idols, Processions, bearing Idols on mens shoulders, the people before and behind worshipping: their Priests collusions to make gaines of the Idoll-offerings, together with their Priests shauen heads and beards, their rent cloaths, their roaring before the Idoll: their Temples wherein they stood with scepters, axes, or other weapons in their hands, hauing candles lighted before them, with other such rites; that, in the reading, one would thinke hee were telling the discourse of the mysteries of mysticall Babylon in the West;(...), which may be interpreted, with cords about them: which better answereth to Herodotus his report. so euenly they accord. The Chaldaeans inuocate their Belus, to doe miracles also, sayth hee, inuocating a dumbe Idoll to giue speech vnto another, which himselfe wanteth. But aboue all, one Beastly rite was in vse among them. The women, sayth hee,Bar. 6.42. sit in the wayes girded with k cords of rushes, and burne straw: and if one of them be drawne away, and lie with any such as come by,  shee casteth her neighbour in the teeth, because shee was not so worthily reputed, nor her cord broken. Thus was their glorie their shame.Hero. Clio. Strabo. lib. 16. mentioneth the same. Herodotus will yeeld vs a Commentarie on this place. The Babylonians haue an abominable law (sayth he) that all their women once in their life doe sit at the Temple of Venus to haue familiaritie with strangers: the richer sort comming in chariots, richly furnished and attended to this vngodly purpose. Their manner of sitting is, crowned on their Temples with garlands, their retiring places distinguished with cords, by which the stranger may haue accesse to which of them hee liketh best. And thus doe these Votaries of Venus sit, holding it religion to bee irreligious, none of them euer returning home, till some guest haue cast money into her lap, whom it is not lawfull for her to refuse, but to accept of him and his price, whatsoeuer he be, and follow  him aside from the Temple, where hee defileth her. At the giuing of the money hee vseth these words, Tanti tibi deam Mylittam imploro, that is, at this price, or for so much, I implore vnto thee the goddesse Mylitta (so the Assyrians call VenusThe Arabians called her Alytta, the Persians Mitra. The Babylonians called her also Alamhone. Lyl. Gerald. hist. Deor. Syut. 13. (...), verum nomen Veneris (ait Sca. epist. ad Cas.) hoc est, (...).) and this money is consecrated to a sacred vse. After this, with the goddesse good leaue, shee may returne home, although for no great price againe (saith our Author) to be hired. By this meanes the fairest are quickly dispatched, the rest endure a restlesse and irkesome penance, sometime a yeere, two, or three, before they can be discharged of their honestie and the law together, and hence might arise that former ambitious vpbraiding in Baruch.
Among their many Idols,Bel, ^elti, Nebo, Mero, Scheschach: sic Heurnius in Indico. Bel bare the bell, not here alone, but in all the countries of Assyria, and adioyning thereto; as appeareth in the Historie of the Bible: where Bel or  Baal is so often mentioned, as the Idoll of so many Nations and the sinne of the apostaticall Synagogue. TheyIe^. 19.5. Ierem. 32. 1. Reg. 18. and 16. 2. Reg. 23. and 10. Ose. 2. Es. 46. built vnto him high places: or else in stead thereof vsed the roofes of their houses to his worship: they built him houses, they made him Images, erected Altars, planted Groues, bended to him the knee, and kissed him in token of subiection, vsed perfume and incense, obserued to him holy dayes, cut and lanced themselues in his seruice, with other extaticall furies, and religious frensies, with ornaments of gold and iewels, inuocations and immolations, yea of their owne children; he had also his peculiar prophets and priests. These and such like doth the Scripture mention of this Babylonian Idoll, whose contagion infected the East with a Catholike Idolatrie that could plead Antiquitie, Vniuersalitie, and Consent, by euidence of Scripture-historie (which later Babylon cannot doe) and yet was but  Catholike and generall errour.
Bel was, sayth PliniePlin. l. 6. c. 26. Oth. Heurnij Indicus. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 3., Inuentor sideralis scientiae, the inuentor of Astrologie, which (Heurnius addeth) hee defiled with impure Magicke, as did his daughter Semiramis, who warred vpon Zoroaster, in enuie of his greater learning: Bels magicke appeared in his sepulchre, which Xerxes opening, found a vessell of glasse, and therein a carkasse swimming in oyle, which reached not to the brim by a hand-breadth. In a little pillar iust by was engrauen, that he should dearely repent it, which opening the sepulchre, did not fill vp the vessell: this Xerxes assayed to doe in vaine, and therefore departed very heauie, finding in his Grecian Expedition the truth of Bels prophecie. The like is said to happen, when Darius in hope of treasureHerod. lib. 1. telleth this of Nitocris. Rod. Toletanus reporteth as strange a prodigie of Roderigo, a little before the Sarasens inuaded Spaine, lib. 3. cap. 17. opened the sepulchre of Semiramis, hee found a chist, which being  opened, a venimous pestilence issued, that consumed the third part of men.
Ribera affirmeth,Rib. in Hos. 2. that diuers later Authors, and before themIn Ierem. 32. Theodoret, doe esteeme
 the name Bel or Baal to be a generall name, agreeing to all the gods of the Gentiles, according to the signification of the word, to wit, a Lord.Nic. S^rar. in Iudic. It was a name generall to their Idols, when it was put alone, but particular with some addition, as Bel-zebub, Baal-zephon. There were so many Baals in Syria, saythDrus Pra. pag. 225. Drusius, as there were Regions, and almost as many as Cities. The Moabites had their Chamos, the Ammonites Moloch, the Sydonians Astarte, in Gaza Maruan, in Hamath Asima, etc. all called Baal in like sort as the Europaeans varied the names of Iupiter: as Iupiter Capitolinus, Iupiter Ammon, Stygius, Olympius, and the rest, many gods and many lords, sayth Saint Paul1. Cor. 8.5., yet in the Easterne Dialect wee may reade many Baalim, and in the Westerne many Ioues, the Greeke (...),  and the Latine Iouis the ancient nominatiue, Iouis pater, Iouispiter, and by contraction Iupiter, (not as Tully, Lactantius and others, quasi iuuans pater) being all deriued, that wee may note this by the way, of that ineffable name which wee pronounce Iehoua. And had they not intended the true God, when they vsed Baal or Ioue absolutely without addition, neitherHos. 2.16. Act. 17.26. had the Lord prohibited thou shalt call mee no more Baali, that is, my Lord; nor Paul applied that speech of Aratus, (...). Wee are his generation, hauing foure verses before begunne his booke with (...), vnto the true GOD. Seruius isOn those words of Virgi Impleuitque mero pateram, quam Belus and omnes a Belosoliti, etc. Aeneid. 1. Author, that Belus the father of Dido descended of that ancient BELVS the first King of the Assyrians, which people worshipped Saturne and Iuno, which were after worshipped in Africa, whereupon the Punikes called GOD, Bal, (from whence came those names, Hannibal, Adherbal,  and such like) whom the Assyrians in some respect call Bel, and Saturne, and the Sunne. This opinion that in Bel they worshipped the Sunne, is followed by Tremellius and Iunius in their notes on Esaias, Chap. 46.1. because the Assyrians, Persians, and Babylonians, accounted the Sunne the greatest God, and worshipped the Fire as a particle thereof: To him the Iewes, with this borrowed forreine Idolatrie, dedicated Horses and Chariots, which2. King. 23.11. Iosias abolished, together with the Altars on the roofe of Ahas his house, and the high places, where their god might see their deuotions. Hierom, on that place of Esay sayth, that Bel was Saturn, which Suidas confirmeth. AugustineAug. tom. 4. quaest. lib. 7. 16. Elias Cretens. Com. in Nazian. Orat. in Iu^. 3. doth also take Bel and Baal for the same, Et Nicet. in Orat. 15. relateth the vsuall opinion (on those words, Iud. 2. They serued Baal and Astaroth) that Baal in those parts was the name of Iupiter, and Astarte of Iuno, and produceth the Punicke language, in which Baalsamen signifieth the Lord of Heauen;  and for Astaroth (which he readeth Astartibus) he sayth it is in the plurall number, in regard of the multitude of Iunoes Images, each bearing the name of Iuno. This also is exemplified in the blessed Virgin by Ribera, sometime called our Ladie of Loretto, sometime our Ladie of Monteferato, etc. according to the diuersitie of places, wherein they worship, not Marie the Virgin, but their owne Idols; the daughters of their whorish mother Babylon. For the Tyrians, Sydonians, Philistims, and other Syrian, and Assyrian Nations, the Scripture brandeth them with this Bel or Baal-Idolatrie: in hatred of which name, the Iewes called the Prince of Deuils, as the Acaronites did their principall Idols, by the name of Beelzebub.
Thus the Greekes and Latines hath confounded the Assyrian and Tyrian Bel, which by  IosephusScalig. Can. Isagog lib. 3. pag. 314. Scaliger, (who not vnworthily is calledM. Selden Annot. on M. Drayton. Polio^b. the Dictator of knowledge, and great Prince of learnings state) are distinguished and made two: the one (sayth he) is written (...) and the later (...) and reproued Hierome for making Belus, the father of Ninus, and the Virgilian Belus to be one. But in his notes on the fragments of Berosus and other ancient Authors, he sayth, the Tyrians and Sydonians called him (...) which the Greekes made Belus: and so Mr. Selden also is of opinion, that these names (...) and (...) differ onely according to the proprietie of the language, and not indeed: for the Grammarians obserue, that the Chaldee words often lose that middle letter. Elias in his Thesbi obserueth, that Baal signifieth the act of generation, which may well agree with those beastly Baal-rites before mentioned. Baal is read in the foeminine gender Tob. 1.5. Rom. 11.4. In Photius  isPhot. Biblioth. in Damascio. 242. Sachoniatho (as after followeth cap. 17.) maketh Elius the father of Saturn. mentioned, that the Phoenicians and Syrians called Saturne (...), and (...), EL, and Bel, and Bolathes. Lilius GiraldusLil. G. Gyr. hist. Deor. Synt. 2. out of Seruius affirmeth that (...), in the Assyrian language signifieth the Sunne, from whence the Greeke (...) is deriued: some attribute this to the Phoenician tongue, in which Hal signifieth GOD. The Assyrians named Saturne and the Sunne, Hel. The Indians called that Hercules, which Tully de Nat. Deor. numbreth the first Belus. But we find no end of these Labyrinths.
D. Willet in his Comment vponCap. 1. q. 16. Eadem Polanu^ in Dan. cap. 1. Daniel hath these words: The Chaldaeans had fiue Idols, three gods and two goddesses. Their first god was Bel, a name contracted of Behel, which commeth of Bahal, which signifieth a Lord: to whom was built that Temple before mentioned. The second was the Sunne, which they called Rach, that is, a King; because  he is chiefe among the Planets: and the Persians call him Mithra, as Iustinus Martyr sayth, Dialog. in Triphon. The Priest^ of this Idoll were called Raciophantae, Obseruers of the Sunne. Their third god was Nego, the Fire; so called of the brightnesse: this was carried about
 among them: the Priests were called Ortophantae. Their first goddesse was Shacha, which was the Earth, worshipped also of the Romans, vnder the name of Tellus and Opis: of the Syrians called Dorcetha. In the honour of this goddesse, they vsed to keepe a feast fiue dayes together in Babylon; during which time, the Masters were vnder the dominion of their seruants: one of which was vsually set ouer the rest, and royally clothed, and was called Sogan, that is, great Prince (our Lords of Mis-rule seeme to deriue their pedigree from hence.) This festiuall time was called Shache, whereof Babylon was called Sheshach, of keeping this Feast, Ierem. 25.27. and 51.41. Their other goddesse was Mulitia, which was Venus, whose Priests were called Natitae, or Natophantae. But the chiefest of their Idols was Bel. Hee also interpretethQuest. 16. those words, Dan. 1.4. Whom they might teach the learning  and tongue of the Chaldaeans, of Schooles wherein youth was brought vp in good letters, to bee after employed in the State. So among the Egyptians they had the like vse, where Moses was taught the learning of the Egyptians. Among the Israelites eight and fortie Cities were appointed for the Leuites, which were as the common Schooles and Vniuersities for the whole Kingdome; Samuel and Elizeus had their Schooles and Colledges of Prophets; yea, the rude Indians had their Gymnosophistes; and the Romans had their Colledges of Augures. This Bel or Baal Idolatrie passed out of Asia into Europe, euen as farre as these parts of Britaine. For the Celtae and Britanni worshipped Abellio, Belenus, or Belinus, as appeareth by inscriptions in Lipsius and Scaliger; and our famous Antiquarie Mr Camden mentioneth an Altar in Cumberland, inscribed Deo sancto Belatucadro. And on the Coynes  of Cunobelinus, the Brittish King, was stamped Apollo, or Belenus (which in heathen mysteries are the same with the Sunne) playing on a Harpe: and the name Cunobelinus makes euidently to our purpose. Heliogabalus is another Syrian idolatrous title for the Sunne, as appeareth by an inscription Soli Alagabalo; for so also is that name written. Neither is Gabalus from any other deriuation, the name of the Romane Emperour, Priest of that god, whose name he vsurped, deriued from the Hebrew Ahgol-Baal, that is, the Round or Circular Lord, either in respect of the Sunnes Circular bodie and iourney, or of that round stone which the Syrians conceited (as the Troians of their Palladium, and the Ephesians of their Diana, to haue diuinely descended.) Such stones (as Mr Selden in relation of those things obserueth) were the Baetaelia, or Betuli, of the Ancients dedicated to diuers deities, somewhat  of fashion like fire, round and sharpe vpwards, the beginning of which Baetuli, some deriue from Iacobs stone at Bethel.
In the seuenteenth Chapter of the second Booke of Kings, is mentioned Succoth Benoth an Idoll of the Babylonians. Beda interpreteth it the Tabernacles of Benoth, and so the word Succoth vsed, Amos 5.25. is by Saint Stephen, Act. 7.43. interpreted. And so doth theRa. in Gloss. ordin. Glosse on that part of the Kings interprete; where Lyra,Lyra in 4. Reg. 17. according to the signification of the words (a Tabernacle of wings) relateth out of Rab. Sal. that this Idoll was made like to a Hen brooding her chickens: which Idols the Babylonians framed in worship of that constellation, called by the vulgar, the Hen and chickens, and of the learned Pleiades; as others did to the Sunne, others to the Moone. SomeWolph. in 2. Reg. 17. Selden in tract. de DIS Syris. applie it to the mysterie of their  Idoll, (which Christ the Trueth, truly sayth of himselfe) protecting his worshippers, as a Hen her chickens. My learned friend, Mr Selden hath gathered by the signification of Succoth Benoth (the Tabernacles of the daughters) that thereby is meant the Temple of Venus, Mylitta or Vrania, where the daughters of the Babylonians sate, as before is said, to performe their filthie deuotions; yea, by an easie deduction hee deriueth the name of Venus from this Benoth: B and u, easily exchanged, the moderne Iewes pronounce th like s Venos; Suidas also calls her Binos. And in Africa was a Citie called Sicca Venerea, a name transported by the Punikes from this Siccuth, or Succoth Benoth, where was a Temple of like nature, in which the women purchased their marriage-money by prostituting their bodies. It seemeth the Idolatrous Priests carried the Tabernacle of their Idoll on their shoulder,  in apish imitation of the true Priests and Leuites: for so Amos sayth,Amos 5.26. Yee carried Succoth, or Sicchuth your King, Chiun your Images, which DrusiusDrus. in Amos. interpreteth Moloch and Hercules.
In the fourteenth Chapter of Daniel (as the Latines read) is a large historie both of Bel, a dead statue, and of a liuing Dragon which the Babylonians worshipped. The Priests of Bel were seuentie, besides their wiues and children, whose fraud and coozenage Daniel detected, making it manifest by their foot-steps in the ashes, which hee had strewed in the Temple, that they were the deuourers of that huge portion of fortie sheepe, twelue measures of meale, and sixe great pots of wine, daily consecrated for Bels breake-fast. He after slew the Dragon also; for which the Babylonians forced the King to lodge him sixe dayes  among the Lions. But howsoeuer generally more authoritie is to bee ascribed to the Apocryphall bookes, then to any humane Historie, or other Ecclesiasticall Authors, asZanc. Confes. Zanchius
 religiously holdeth, yet for this fragment of Daniel, it is accountedWhittak. de Scrip. quaest. 1. cap. 9. the worke of Theodotion a bad man, who foysted it into his translation. And not onely the Reformed Churches account it as it is, but Driedo a learned Papist, Erasmus a Semi-christian (so Bellarmine calleth him) Iulius Africanus of old, and the Iewes generally, reiect it out of the Canon, as the Cardinall himselfeBellar. de verbo Dei lib. 1. c. 9. hath obserued: and he is faine th tell vs of another Daniel, of the Tribe of Leui, ro maintaine the credit hereof. But Hierome in the Preface of his Commentaries stileth them, Belis Draconisque fabulas, quas veru auteposito, eoque iugulante subijcit, ne videretur apud imperitos magnam partem voluminum detruncasse: and alleageth Eusebius, Origen, Apollinarius, and other Ecclesiasticall Doctors, which were of his mind, and thought they  needed not to answere Porphyrie, who had hence raked some obiections against the Christians for these things which had not authority of Scripture.
As for Pyramus and Thisbe, with Cyparissus and such like, I leaue themMetamorph. 4 and 10. Ouid and the Poets. It seemeth worthy relation that fell out at Assus, a Babylonian Citie, where a Dolphin so loued a boy, that following too far after their wonted sportings, he stucke fast in the sands:Solinus, c. 18. which Alexander interpreting to be omious, preferred the Boy to the Priesthood of Neptune
For the present Saracenicall Religion, now obserued in these parts, our third booke shall largely relate thereof. Concerning other Babylonian customes: Herodotus. l. 2. telleth of three families in Babylon which liued on fish. It may bee the Carthusians of our Westerne  Babylon are of their of-spring: for whose sparing, their fellowes may eate the more flesh, with which those of old, and these later, may not (forsooth) pollute themselues.Quint. Curt. lib. 5. Curtius telleth generally, that for fleshly vices, the Babylonians were most corrupt. They prostituted their wiues and daughters to their guests for rewards. They were addicted to excessiue banquetting, and drunkennesse. In the beginning of their feasts, their women were modestly attired; by degrees they stripped themselues of their clothes, beginning with the vppermost, till nothing was left to couer their shame, or forbid their shamelesnesse. And not their Curtizans alone, but their Matrons, (yea, in token of ciuility) did thus prostitute themselues to those flames of lusts which haue come from hell, and carrie thither. Heere was Alexander, manly and victorious armie made effeminate, vnfit after to haue encountred with a strong enemy.Coelius Rhod. lib. 8. cap. 11.  Some ascribe the loose liues of the Babylonians, to a law of Xerxes, who to chastise them for a rebellion, enacted that they should no longer weare armes, but addict themselues to Musicke, riot, and such like.


CHAP. XIII. The Chaldean, and Assyrian Chronicle, or Computation of Times, with their manifold alterations of Religions, and Gouernment in those parts, vntill our time.
 WE haue beforeCap. 10. shewed the prodigious Chronologie of the Chaldaeans, reckoning the raignes of their Kings before the floud, 432000. yeeres. They tell also after the floud of diuers Dynasties or gouernements in this Country of Babylon.
First,Scalig. Can. Isag. lib. 2. and 3. theThe Chaldean Dynastie Chaldaeans, Euechoos raigned 6. yeeres, Chomusbolos 7. Poros 35. Nechubes 43. Abios 48. Oniballos 40. Zinziros 45.
He being dispossessed by the Arabians,The Arabian Dynastie. Mardocentes began the second Arabian Dynastie, and raigned 45. yeares, and after him Sisimardichos 28. Abias 37. Parannos 40. Nabonnabos 25.--41. The space of these two Dynasties is reckoned foure hundred and fortie  yeares. Thus Scaliger relateth: but in my mind, as the former was beyond all possibility of truth (which they tell of before the floud) so this hath no great likelyhood, at least for so long space before Belus, with whom the most histories beginne their relations, and Scaliger hisThe Assyrian Dynastie. Moses, Gen. 14.1. speaketh of Am^aphel King of Shin^r, that is of these parts of Babylonia, as his companions raigned not farre hence. third Dynastie, of one and fortie Kings in this order.

1 Belus, 55
2 Ninus, 52
3 Semiramis, 42
4 Nynias Zames, 38
 5 Arius, 30
6 Aralius, 40
7 Xerxes. 30
8 Armamithres, 38
9 Beluchus, 35
10 Balaeus, 52
11 Sethus, 32
12 Mamythus, 30
13 Aschalios, 28
14 Sphaerus, 22
15 Mamylus, 30
16 Spartheus, 42
17 Aschatades, 38
18 Amyntes, 43
19 Belochus, 25
20 Balatores, 30
21 Lamprides, 30

22 Sosares, 20
23 Lampraes, 35
24 Panyas. 43
25 Sosarmos, 37
26 Mithaeos, 42
27 Teutamos, 27
28 Teutaeus 44
29 Arbelus, 42
30 Chalaos, 45
31 Anabos, 38
32 Babios, 37
33 Thinaeos, 30
34 Dercylus, 40
35 Eupacmes, 38
36 Laosthenes, 45
37 Pyritiades, 30
38 Ophrataeus, 21
39 Ephatheres, 52
40 Acracarnes, 42
41 Tonos Concoleros, qui and Sardanapalus. 20
The summe of this Dynastie, 1484. yeeres.  

The fourth Dynastie wasThe Median Dynastie. of the Medes, begun by Arbaces, who depriued Sardanapalus; he raigned 28 yeeres, his sonne Mandauces 50. Sosarmus 30. Artycas 50. (In the 19. yeere of this King Nabonassar, the Babylonian rebelled, and began a new Dynastie in Babylonia. And in the 43. yeere of his raigne Salmanassar captiued the ten Tribes) Arbianes or Cardiceas 22. Arsaeos or Deioces 40. Artynes called also Phraortes 22. Astibaras or Cyaxares 40. Apandas alias Astiages 40. In all 322. yeeres.
The fifthThe Persian Dynastie. Dynastie was of the Persians, begun by Cyrus, which ouerthrew Astyages, and raigned 30. yeeres; His sonne Cambyses 8. the Magi 7. moneths, Darius sonne of Hystaspes 36. yeeres, Xerxes 20. Artabanus 7. moneths, Artaxerxes Longimanus 40. Xerxes 2.  moneths, Sogdianus 7. moneths, Darius Nothus 19. yeeres, Artaxerxes Mnemon 40. yeeres, Artaxerxes Ochus 26. Arses 4. Darius 6. In all, 231. yeeres.
The sixthThe Macedonian Dynastie. Dynastie was of the Macedonians, the first of which was Alexander, who after the conquest of Darius raigned 6. yeeres, Antigonus 12. Seleucus Nicator 32. Antigonus Soter 19. Antigonus Theos 15. (In the 12. yeere of his raigne, Arsaces the Persian rebelled) Seleucus Callinicus 20. Seleucus Ceraunus 3. Antiochus Magnus 36. Seleucus Philopater 12. Antiochus Epiphanes 11. Antiochus Eupator 2. Demetrius Soter 12. Alexander Bala 10. Demetrius Nicanor 3. Antiochus Sidetes 9. Demetrius D.F. 4. Antiochus Gripus 12. Antiochus Cyzicenus 18. Philippus 2. In all 237. And from the beginning of the first Dynastie 2633. These I haue heere inserted out of Scaliger, rather to shew the continued succession of the  Easterne Empire, then with any intent to perswade, that all these were Kings, and ruled the Country of Babylonia. For after Arsaces rebelled, the Parthians dispossessed the Syrian Kings, of these parts, and before, the Babylonians often rebelled; as in the time of the Persians, when Zopyrus by a strange stratagem, recited by Iustin and others, restored them to Darius: but especially in the times of the Medes, whose Dynastie was much disquieted: sometime the Scythians (saythOros. 1. c. 19. Orosius) and sometimes the Chaldaeans, and sometimes the Medes preuayling. Sometimes also (as the Scripture witnesseth) the Assyrians renewed their ancient power. Yea in the time of the Assyrian Dynastie, the Chaldaeans are said to warre (in the raigne of Panyas) against the Phoenicians, which argueth that they were then free.  
The Scripture and other Histories speake of Phul, Teglath-Phalasar, Iareb, Sargon, Salmanasar, Senacherib, Asar-haddon: which were great and mighty, not onely strong enough to defend themselues against the Medes, but to inuade forren Nations, yea did translate people from one Kingdome to another, and2. Reg. 17.24. seated the captiues of Israel, in the Cities of the Medes, and sent Babylonian Colonies to Samaria; which they could not doe, if they had not commanded both Assyria, and Media, with Babylonia.
Nabonassar rebelled, as is said, against Artycas, and began the Chaldaean Dynastie, from whom, for this restitution of liberty, the Chaldaeans began their Astronomicall computations: hee raigned 14. yeeres, Nassyus 2. Chinzerus and Porus 5. Dilulaus 5. Mardokempadus 12.Called Merodach. He sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah. Arkeanos 5. Interregnum 12. Belithus 3. Aporonadicus  6. Herigebalus 1. Nesnoemondacus 4. Interregnum 17. Iearaedin 13. Saosducinus 9. Kiniladacus 14. Nabopollasarus 29. (In the seuenteenth yeere of his raigne, hee sent his sonne Nabuchodonosor in Syria with an Armie.) Nabuchodonosor 30. Euilmerodach 6. Neregasolarus 5. Nabonidus 17. This was a Mede by linage (not as someScal. notae in frag. Beros. say King of the Medes,) sonne of Xerxes a Mede, but borne at Babylon, and by conspiracie raised to the kingdome: not inuading Babylon with Cyrus, but raigning in Babylon, till Cyrus depriued him. Megasthenes cals him a Mede, and the Scripture Darius Medus. Cyrus came against him in the nineteenth yeere of his raigne, and eleuen yeeres before the seuenty of the Captiuity were ended; in which space Cyrus had enough to doe to besiege and conquer Babylon, and Borsippa where Darius was. From the beginning of Nabonassar to the end of Cyrus are 217. yeeres. From thence to the  Asiatike Empire of the Macedonians 201. From thence to the rebellion of Arsaces the Parthian, of whom the Parthian Kings were called Arsacidae, 79. And the Dynastie of the Parthians
 continued 479. yeers: the last of them Artabanus being slaine. These Kings and the times of their raignes, are not easie to set downe, and Onuphrius is therefore reproued of Scaliger, for vndertaking this taske, in which authority fayleth him. Of them we shall speak in due place.
TheThe second Pesian Dynastie. second Persian Dynastie continued till the Mahumetans depriued them. The first, Artaxerxes raigned 12. yeers. Sapores 31. Ormisdas 1. Wararanes 3. Wararanus 2.--17. Wararanet 3. foure moneths. Narses 7. Ormisdas 7. Sabores was borne King, and Raigned 70. yeeres, Artaxerxes 4. Sabores 5. Wararanes 4.--11. Izdigerdes 21. Wararanes 5.--10. Isdigerdes 2.--17. Perozes 24. Obalas 4. Cabades 11. Zamaspes 4. Cabades againe--30. Cosroes Magnus 48. Ormizda 8. Casroes 39. Syroes 1. Adeser 7. Moneths, Barasas 6. Moneths, Baram  7. Monethr, Ormizda Iezdogird 3. In all 402.
The Saracens succeeded, whose names and times you may see in ourLib. 3. cap. 1. Saracenicall relation. After the Saracens, raigned the Tartars; and since, sometime one family, sometime another, among the Persians, till Solyman dispossessed the Sophian of the Babylonian dominion; vnder which Turkish seruitude it groneth till our daies.
I dare not take vpon me to be vmpire and decider of those many alterations among Chronologers: but haue simply followed Scaliger, whose very name is able to shield me from contempt, if not to yeeld mee commendation. Let others that haue more lust and leasure trauerse these matters at their pleasure: my intent is, most of all, the Historie of Religions; and the successions and alterations of States, I haue lightly touched: but precisely to determine in  what yeere of the world euery King beganne his raigne, and to dispute the same with all opiponets, would bee somewhat tedious to the Reader: to me (perhaps in these varieties of opinions) impossible. Leauing therefore the more studious to the Chronologers, let vs take a little reuiew of some principall occurrents in the former Catalogue.
Africanus begins the Assyrian Monarchie at Belus, and not, as the most, with Ninus: That Belus some thinke to bee the same with Nimrod, whom Ninus, as wee said before, consecrated. Semiramis isCaelius. R. lib. 17. cap. 29. reported to bee the first that caused Eunuchs to bee made. Ninias which succeeded, left not like monuments of his great exploites, as his Predecessors before him. Buntingus thinkes him to bee that Amraphel King of Shinar, mentioned Genes. 14. and that Arioch King of Elasser was his sonne. Howeuer, it breedes much difficulty, to reconcile  the ancient Historie of the Babylonian and Assyrian great and long continued Empire, with the Kingdomes and Kings in that Chapter by Moses mentioned. Eupolemus, as before is cited out of Eusebius, saith that those Kings were Armenians; Diodorus Tarsensis, as Pererius affirmeth, reckons them Persians; Iosephus, Assyrians. Pererius himselfe thinkes them vassals, and tributaries to the Assyrian: Genebrard suspects the Historie of the Assyrian greatnesse: and truely, not altogether vniustly: neyther doe wee reade in all the Historie of Mosce and Ioshua, of any Kings in those parts, for ought can be gathered, yeelding subiection to Babylon. And the Sodomite and his neighbours had beene the tributaries of Chedarlaomer King of Elam, and not of Amraphel King of Shinar; vnlesse we say, that violent things are not permanent, and the yoake imposed before by the Assyrians, was now in Ninias dayes reiected: Semiramis  being weakened with her Indian expedition; and Ninias by killing her, giuing occasion or discontent to her followers, the men of warre, which might hereupon (contemning this effeminate King, who had suffered his mother to possesse the Scepter so long) fall to sharing for themselues, and erect petty Kingdomes. Arius (happily) restored the Empyre thus decayed, if it be true that Buntingus writeth, that he was a great Warriour, therefore called Arius and Mars, and, as the god of warre, inuocated by che Assyrians. When Teutamos raigned,Diodor. Sic. lib. 3. cap. 7. Diodor. lib. 3 testifieth that Priamus, then besieged by Agamemnon, as vassall and tributary to the Assyrians, sent to him for ayde, who sent to his succour Memnon, with twenty thousand souldiers.
But to descend vnto times neerer both vs and the truth, and to view the ruine of that  great estate: we reade in the same Author, and inIustin. lib. 1. Orosius. li. 2. 1. 2. others, that Arbaces (whom Iustin calleth Arbactus; Orosius Arbastus) was by Sardanapalus made Captaine of the Armie, which was yeerely sent to Nina, or Niniue, where a conspiracy was contracted betweene him and Belesus a Chaldaean Priest, Captaine of the Babylonians, who by his Chaldaean skill in diuination, had foretold Arbaces this destined Empire, and was promised for his share the Babylonian principality. Thus the Medes, Babylonians, and Arabians, enterprising rebellion, assembled to the number of foure hundred thousand, whom Sardanapalus ouerthrew in battel twice; but being stil animated bySome thinke this Belelus to be Daniel, whom the Babylonian King called Belteshazzar. Broughtons Concent. Belesus predictions, which (said he) the gods by the Stars fore-signified; and by corrupting of the Bactrian Armie, sent to succor the King and adioyning themselues to the enemy, they at the third battell ouerthrew the forces of Sardanapalus, led  by Salamenus his wiues brother. The King fled into Niniue, trusting to a prophesie, That the Citie should neuer bee taken, till the Riuer were enemie to it. After two yeeres siege, by extreme raines, the Riuer swelling, ouerflowed part of the Citie, and cast downe twenty furlongs
 of the walls. Whereupon despayring, (as seeming to see GOD and man against him) he which before had chambered himselfe with women, and accustomed himselfe to the distaffe, in a womans both heart and habite; now in a manly resolution (if it may not more fitly be called a Feminine Dissolution, which thus runneth from that danger which it should encounter) gathered his treasures together, and erecting a frame in his Palace, there burnt them, himselfe, his wiues and Eunuches together. The Ashes, vnder pretence of a Vow thereof made to Belus, Belesus obtained of Arbaces the new Conquerour and Monarch, to carry to Babylon. But the coozenage being knowne, and Belesus condemned for the treasures, which with the ashes hee had conueyed, Arbaces both gaue them, and forgaue him; adding the praefecture of the Babylonians, according to promise.Phrygio. Carion. lib. 2. Some say that Belesus, whom  they call Phul Beloch, shared the Empire with him, Arbaces raigning ouer the Medes and Persians, the other ouer Niniue; and Babylonia: following herein the forged Metasthenes, who (as Annius maketh him to say) out of the Susian Librarie penned his Historie, hauing before fabled a Catalogue out of Berosus of the ancient Kings, contrary to that which out of the fragments of the true Berosus before is deliuered.
Sardanapalus is written (saithEuseb. Chron. per Scalig. Scaliger in his Notes vpon Eusebius) with a double ll. Sardanapalus, a name fitting to his effeminate life. (...) and (...) signifie the same, whence are those words of Cicero 3. De Repub. Sardanapalus ille vitijs multo quam nomine ipso deformior. Sardanapalus built Tarsus and Anchiale (saith Eusebius) at the same time: the one famous for the most famous Diuine that euer the Sunne saw (except the Sunne of Righteousnesse  himselfe) PAVL the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles: The other for the Authors Monument and stony Image,Strabo lib. 14 with this Assyrian Epigramme; Sardanapalus, the sonne of Anacyndaraxis, built Anchiale and Tarsus in one day; and thou O stranger, eate, drinke, play. And Verses were annexed, which I haue thus Englished.

Mortall, thou knowst thy selfe; then please thine appetite
With present dainties: Death can yeeld thee no delight.
Loe, I am now but dust: whilome a Prince of might.
What I did eate I haue; and what my greedy mind
Consum'd: how much (alas) how sweet, left I behind?  
Learne this (O man) thus liue, best wisdome thou canst find.

This his Legacie hee hath bequeathed to all Epicures, the liuing Sepulchres of themselues breathing graues (not of so many Creatures onely, better than themselues, which they deuour, but) of Reason, Nature, Religion, Soule, and (if it were possible) of GOD, which all lie buried in these swine couered with the skins of Men.1. Cor. 15.32. Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall die. Who knoweth whether Paul did not allude to this speech of the Founder of his Citie? This subuersion of the Assyrian Empire was Anno Mundi 3145. after Buntingus account. Of the Medes, see more in their proper place.
The Babylonian Empire renewed by Nabonassar, continued till Cyrus, of which times we  haue little record but in the Scripture, as neyther of those Assyrian Kings, which before had captiued Israel, and inuaded Iuda. Senacherib is famous, euen in the Ethnike history, although they had not the full truth. For thus HarodotusHerod. lib. 2. telleth, that Senacherib King of the Arabians and Assyrians warred on Egypt, where Sethon (before Vulcans Priest) then raigned: who being forsaken of his Souldiers, betooke him to his deuotion, amiddest the which hee fell asleepe. And the god appearing, promised ayde, which hee performed, sending an Armie of Mice, into the Armie of Senacherib, which did eate his Souldiers quiuers, and the leathers of their shields, and armour, insomuch, that the very next day they all fled. In witnesse whereof, the Image of the King, made of stone, standeth in the Temple of Vulcan, holding a Mouse in his hand, vttering these words, Hee that looketh on mee, let him bee Religious. This Historie the Aegyptians, in vanity and ambition, had thus peruerted and arrogated to  themselues.
Funccius of Osiander made Nabopollasar and Nabuchodonosor to bee one and the same, and diues Commenters vpon Daniel hold the same opinion, whom Scaliger and Caluisius confute at large. Nabopollasar is supposed to begin his raigne Anno Mundi 3325. which hee continued nine and twentie yeeres: in hisSc. canon. l. 3. seuenteenth yeere Nebuchadnezzer (so the Masorites misse-call him, saith Scaliger) or Nabuchodonosor his sonne was sent by him, to subdue the rebellious Aegyptians, Iewes, and Palestinians: at which time he carried away Daniel into captiuitie.Berosus apud Iosephum contra App. lib 1. Caluisius. He beganne his raigne Anno Mundi 3354. and in the yeere 3360. destroyed Ierusalem. In the yeere 3386. Euilmerodach his sonn^ succeeded him, whom Neriglossoorus  (as ScaligerAnimaduers. in Eusebium, pag. 85. affirmeth) slew, thereby to aduance his owne sonne the Nephew of Nabuchodonosor, called Laborosoarchadus, to the Scepter; which himselfe swaied as Protector in the minoritie of his sonne. But he being dead, and his sonne more fit for a chamber then a
 Throne, Nabonidus conspired against him, and slew him. This Nabonidus, sayth he, is Darius Medus, and Laborosoarchadus is that Baltasar mentioned by Daniel,D. Willet holdeth otherwise, Com. in Dan. 6. after Scaligers interpretation of the Prophet out of Berosus and Megasthenes.
It is a world to see how the Catholickes (so they call themselues) sweat in finding out that Nabuchodonosor mentioned in Iudith 1. Pintus would make it a common name to the Babylonian Kings, as Pharao to the Egyptians: Pererius will haue two of the name; others will haue him to be Cyrus; others, Cambyses, Artaxerxes, Ochus; Once, Babel is a Mother of confusion to her children, and makes them babble, while they will Canonize Apocrypha-Scriptures.
Cyrus ended the Babylonian Monarchie, and hauing wonne Babylon, and taken Darius Medus at Borsippa, he gaue him his life, and the gouernment of Carmania. An. Mund. 3409. As Nabuchodonosor had by Edict proclaimed the GOD of Daniel, so Cyrus ended the captiuitie of his people; giuing libertie to such as would, to returne. But many Iewes abode there still, and thence sent their yeerely offerings to the Temple. In the time of Artabanus the Parthian (when Caligula tyrannized at Rome)Ioseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 12. Asimaeus and Anilaeus, brethren of the Iewish Nation, grew mightie, and haughtie withall, forgetting GOD and themselues, which caused the Babylonians to conspire against them, and (after the death of the brethren, with thousands of their partakers) and slew in Seleucia fiftie thousand of the Iewish Nation. Neerda and Nibisis were then much peopled by the Iewes. And thus Religion  partly held the ancient course, partly was mixed (according to the custome of Conquests) with the Persian, Macedonian, Parthian, besides the Iewish and Syrian, vntill the Apostles preached here the Christian veritie. About the same time, Helena and her sonne Izates King of Adiabena (which is in these parts of Assyria) became Iewish Proselytes.
SeleuciaSeleucia was built by Seleucus Nicator on a channel, digged out of Euphrates into Tygris. Plin. l. 6. cap. 26. built by Seleucus (as it were the marriage-Chamber of Euphrates and Tygris, which there meete and mixe their waters; Nature being by mans industrie forced to yeeld to the match as Plinie sayth, for that purpose) emptied Babylon of her Inhabitants, and inherited her name also, with her people. It was from Babylon ninetie miles, or, as some reade it, fortie, inhabited with sixe hundred thousand Citizens. To spoile the spoiler, the Parthians built Ctesiphon three miles from thence, and failing of their purpose, Vologesus  built another Towne by, called Vologesocerta. Yet did Babylon it selfe remaine (but not it selfe) in the time of Ammianus Marcellinus, and after.
Ortelius thinketh that Bagdat was called Babylon (as Seleucia before had beene) because it stood neere to the place where Babylon had stood. For that old Babylon inPausanias Arcad. lib. 8. Pausanias time, had nothing left standing but the Temple of Bel, and the walls; sometimes, sayth he, the greatest Citie that euer the Sunne saw.
In Ieromes time,Hieron. in Es. 13. within those walls were kept beasts for the Kings game. It was after inhabited with many thousands of Iewes, and was laid euen with the ground, as Ios. ScaligerScal. animaduers. in Euseb. pag. 126. affirmeth in the yeere, after the Iewish account 4797. and after the Christian, 1037. Master Fox hath a littleAct. and Mon. ex M.S. Cariens. pag. 211. lengthned the date and fate thereof, shewing that Almaricus King  of Ierusalem rased and ruined it, and that it was neuer after inhabited Ann. 1170. But in Beniamin Tudelensis his dayes, which seemeth to be somewhat before Almaricus, this Citie was vtterly subuerted, as in his Itinerarie is related, in these words: One dayes iourney from Gehiagan anciently called Resen, is old Babel, containing thritie miles space, now vtterly ruined, in which the ruines of Nabuchodonosors palace are yet seene, not accessible for diuers hurtfull kinds of Serpents and Dragons there breeding. There nowSir A. Sherly. remaineth nothing but the small part of that great Tower, either of ornament, or of greatnesse, or of place inhabited.
Before that time was Bagdet built by Bugiafar, asI. de Bar. Asdec. 1. lib. 1. Barrius calleth him, or afterScal. can. Isa. lib. 2. and 3. Scaliger, Abugephar Elmantzur, who beganne to reigne in the one hundred thirtie and sixe,  and died in the one hundred fiftie and eight yeere of their Aegeira. Scaliger andLydyal. Em. Tem. vid. Ott. Fris. Chron. 1.7. cap. 3. Lydyate agree of this place (which in their Emendations of Time disagree so eagerly) that it was Seleucia, or built in the place, and of the ruines thereof: an opinion not so improbable, as theirs altogether which thinke the present Bagded to be the old Babylon. The storie of this Bagded or Baldach, and her Chalifs, ye may reade inLib. 3. cap. 2. our Saracenicall Historie. AuthorsLoys le Roy. lib. 8. Knolls T.H. pag. 113. M. Polo Ven. Haiton Armen. agree, that Haalon the Tartar sacked it, about the yeere one thousand two hundred and threescore, Mustratzem being then Chalipha, the foure and fiftieth, and last of those Saracenicall Popes. Hee found a miserable death, where others with miserablenesse seeke a blessed life, being shut vp and starued amidst those Treasures, whereof he had store, which niggardise forbade him to disburse in his owne defence.
 There is yet a bone left of this Calipha's carkasse, or some ghost and shadow of that great and mightie bodie, I meane that ancient name and power of the Calipha's, which magnificent Solyman the Turkish Emperour, in his conquest 1534. would seeme to acknowledge,
 in accepting the royall ensignes of that new conquered state at the hands of their Calipha: a ceremonie which the Soldans in Egypt and Persia vsed, more for forme then necessitie; this Assyrian and that Egyptian Caliph hauing but gesture and vesture, the Soldans themselues enioying both bodie and soule of this authoritie.
In the yeere one thousand one hundred fiftie nine, the Riuer Tygris ouer-flowed Bagded, and desolated many Cities. BarriusDecad. As. l. 1. affirmeth out of the Arabian and Persian Tarigh, which he saith he had seene, that Bagded was built by the counsell of an Astrologer, a Gentile named Nobach, and hath for ascendent Sagittarius; was finished in foure yeeres, and cost eighteene millions of gold. These studies of Astrologie did there flourish. One RichardusRich. contra. Alcoran. cap. 13. a Frier Preacher sayth, That here was a Vniuersitie, the Students whereof were  maintained at publique charge, of which number himselfe was one. That Caliph that founded it, for the preuenting of sects, banished Philosophie out of these Schooles, and accounted him a bad Saracen which was a good Philosopher. The reason whereof grew from some, which, in reading Aristotle and Plato, relinquished Mahomet.
Marco PaloM. Pa. lib. 1. cap. 7. or Paulus the Venetian saith, that they studied here in his time, the Law of Mahomet, Necromancie, Geomancie, Phisiognomie, Physicke, and Astronomie: And that it was then a great Staple of the Indian Commodities. This was within few yeeres after the Tartar had wonne it. He addeth, that there were many Christians in these parts; and that in the yeere one thousand two hundred twentie and fiue, in derision of the Gospell, the Caliph commanding by a day that the Christians should remoue a mountaine in testimonie  of their faith, according to the words of Christ, or else to abide the perill: this was effected by a Shoomaker, and the day in remembrance thereof yeerely solemnized with fasting the Euen.
The Iewes goe still to visite the Denne which is there shewed, as the place of Daniels imprisonment, with his terrible Gaolers, or fellow-prisoners, as Master Allen told me.
A certaine Merchant (the Discourse of whose voyageCap. 8. Ramusius hath published) speaketh ofThis may be Vr of the Chaldees, whence Abraham passed first to Canaan. Orpha, a towne in the way from Byr to Babylon, wherein the people foolishly suppose, that Abraham offered Isaac: at which time (say they) there sprang a fountaine which watereth their Countrey, and driueth their Mils. Here was a Christian Temple called  Saint Abraham, after turned into a Mahumetane Moschee, and now called Abrahams Well, into which if any enter so many times (they haue a set number) with deuotion, hee is freed of any feuer: The fishes which are many, haue taken Sanctuarie in these waters, and none dare take them, but hold them holy. Sixe miles from hence is a Well holden in like sacred account, which cureth Leprosies. Nisibis, Carrae, andVolater. l. 11. Edessa, were chiefe Cities of Mesopotamia: at Edessa reigned Abagarus, betwixt whom and our Sauiour passed (if we may beleeue it) those Epistles yet extant.
At CarrhaeSpart^an. in Caracal. Alex. ab Alexand. gen. dier. lib. 4. cap. 8. there was a Temple of the Moone, in which, they which sacrificed to the goddesse Luna, were subiect to the gouernment of their wiues: they which sacrificed to the god Lunus, were accounted their wiues Masters. As for this difference of sexe, ancient  Idolatrie scarce obserued it. For wee reade of the god Venus, which the Cyprians (sayth Macrobius) accounted both male and female: and so doth Trismegistus mystically say of God himselfe. So is Baal in the Scripture sometimes masculine, sometimes feminine. Hee sayth, that the Babylonians allowed marriages of parents and children.Lib. 2. cap. 24. Cafe is two dayes iourney from Bagdet,Cartwright. religious for the buriall of Hali and his sonnes, Hassan and Ossain: whereunto is resort of Pilgrims from Persia, whose Kings were wont here to bee crowned. But this Citie CurioCurio Sar. hist. lib. 8. calleth Cufa, assigneth it to Arabia, and sayth that of this accident it was called Massadale, or the house of Ali, slaine here by Muani his Competitor.
Mesopotamia is now called Diarbech. TheMaginus. chiefe Cities in it are Orfa, of seuen miles compasse, famous, say some, for the death of Crassus. CaramitAssyrias Lati^ maculauit sanguine Carras, sayth Lucan. the mother Citie of the Countrey, of twelue miles compasse. Mosul and Merdin, of which in the next Chapter.  Betweene Orpha and Caramit, was the Paradise of Aladeules, where hee had a fortresse destroyed by Selim. ThisCartwright. his Paradise was like to that which you shall finde in our PersianInf. l. 4. c. 8. and l. 2. c. vlt. Historie. Men by a potion brought into a sleepe, were brought into this supposed Paradise, where at their waking they were presented with all sensuall pleasures of musicke, damosels, dainties, etc. which (hauing had some taste of another sleepie drinke) after came againe to themselues. And then did Aladeules tell them, That he could bring whom hee pleased to Paradise, the place where they had beene: and if they would commit such murders, or haughtie attempts, it should bee theirs. A dangerous deuice. Zelim the Turke destroyed the place.  



CHAP. XIIII. Of Niniue and other neighbouring Nations.
WE haue hitherto spoken of Babylonia, but so, as in regard of the Empire, and some other occurrents, necessitie now and then compelled vs to make excursions into some other parts of Assyria, Mesopotamia, etc. And I know not how, this Babylon causeth confusion in that Sea of affaires, and in regard  of the diuision of the pennes (as sometimes of tongues) of such as haue written thereof. Hard it is to distinguish betweene the Assyrian and Babylonian Empire, one while vnited, another while diuided, as each partie could most preuaile: and no lesse hard to reconcile the Ethnike and Diuine Historie touching the same. PtolemeyLib. 6. cap. 1 straitneth Assyria on the North, with part of Armenia neere the hill Niphates; on the West with Mesopotamia; on the South with Susiana, and Media on the East. But her large Empire hath enlarged the name of Syria, and of Assyria (which names the Greekes did not well distinguish) to many Countries in that part of Asia. The Scripture deriueth Syria from Aram, and Assyria from Ashur. Both were in their times flourishing, and mention is made from Abrahams time, both of the warres and kingdomes in those parts: yea before, from Ashur  and Nimrod, as alreadie is shewed.
Mesopotamia is so called, and in the Scripture Aram or Syria of the waters, because it is situate betweene Euphrates and Tygris: the countries Babylonia, and Armenia, confining the same on the North and South. Whereas therefore wee haue in our former Babylonian relation discoursed of Assyria, extending the name after a larger reckoning: here wee consider it more properly. Euphrates is a Riuer very swift; for they which goe to Bagdet, buy their boats at Birra, which serue them but one voyage, and sell them at Felugia for seuen or eight which cost fiftie, because they cannot returne. But Tygris is swifter;Raph. Fitch. Hak to. 2. the Armenians bring victuals downe the same to Bagdet, on rafts made of Goats skinnes, blowne full of wind, and boords laid vpon them, on which they lade their goods; which being  discharged, they open the skinnes and carrie them backe on Camels.Strab. lib. 11. Di nys. Aser^ Carm. Geog. Lucan. l. 3. Dionysius and Strabo tell of this Riuer, that it passeth through the Lake Thonitis without mixture of waters by reason of this swiftnesse, which also giueth it the name; for the Medes call an Arrow Tygris. Lucan sayth it passeth a great way vnder ground, and wearie of that burthensome iourney, riseth againe as out of a new fountaine.

At Tygrim subito tellus absorbet hiatu
Occultosque tegit cursus, rursusque renatum
Fonte nouo flumen pelagi non abnegat vndas.

 The chiefe Citie in these parts was Niniue, called in Ionas,Ioh. 3.3. A great and excellent Citie of three dayes iourney. It had (I borrow the words of our reuerend Diocesan) anD. King on Ionas Lect. 2. ancient testimonie long before in the Booke ofGen. 10.11. Genesis. For thus Moses writeth, That Ashur came from the land of Shinar, and built Niniueh and Rehoboth, and Calah. and Resin. At length he singleth out Niniue from the rest, and setteth a speciall marke of preeminence vpon it, This is a great Citie: which honour, by the iudgement of the most learned (though standing in the last place) belongeth to the first of the foure Cities, namely, to Niniue. OthersAnn^us vpon Beres. imagined (but their coniecture is without ground) that the foure Cities were closed vp within the same walls, and made but one, of an vsuall bignesse.
Some ascribe the building of Niniue to Ninus the sonne of Belus:Volaterran. Plin. 6. Nat. hist. 13. of whom it tooke the  name, to be called either Ninus, as wee reade in Plinie; or after the manner of the Hebrewes, Niniue. They conceiue it thus, That when Nimrod had built Babylon, Ninus disdaining his gouernment, went into the fields of Ashur, and there erected a Citie after his owne name, betweene the riuers Lycus and Tygris. Others suppose that the affinitie betwixt these names. Ninus and Niniueh deceiued profane Writers touching the Author thereof, and that it tooke to name Niniueh, because it was beautifull or pleasant.Ar. Mont. Iunius and Trem. Others hold opinion that Ashur and Ninus are but one and the same person. And lastly, to conclude, the iudgement of some learned, is, that neither Ashur nor Ninus; but Nimrod himselfe was the founder of it. But by the confession of all, both sacred and Gentile Histories, the Citie was very spacious, hauing foure hundred and fourescore furlongs in circuit, when Babylon had fewer almost (as some report) by an hundred:Diod. Sic. Strabo. and as afterwards  it grew in wealth and magnificence, so (they write) it was much more enlarged. Raphael Volaterranus affirmeth, That it was eight yeeres in building, and not by fewer at once then tenne thousand workemen. There was no Citie since, by the estimation of Diodorus Siculus, that
 had like compasse of ground or statelinesse of walls;Paulus de Pa^atio vpon Ionas. the height whereof was not lesse then an hundred foot; the breadth sufficiently capable to haue receiued three Carts on a row: and they were furnished and adorned besides with fifteene hundred Turrets. Thus farre our reuerend and learned Bishop.
DiodorusDiod. Sic. l. 3 c. 1. telleth out of Ctesias, that Ninus, after he had subdued the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Syrians, Cilicians, Phrygians, and others, as farre as Tanais, and the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Persians, and other their neighbours, he built this Citie. After that, hee led an armie against the Bactrians of seuenteene hundred thousand footmen, and two hundred thousand horse; in which Expedition he tooke Semiramis from her husband Menon, who therefore (impatient of loue and griefe) hanged himselfe. Hee had by her a sonne of his  owne name, and then died, leauing the Empire to his wife. His Sepulchre was nine furlongs in height (each of which is sixe hundred feete) and ten in breadth. The credite of this Historie I leaue to the Author, scarce seeming to agree with Moses narration of the building of Niniue, any more then Semiramis building of Babylon. Some write, ThatAlian. var: hist. l. 7. c. 1. Semiramis abusing her husbands loue, obtained of him the swaying of the Empire for the space of fiue dayes; in which shee depriued him of his life, and succeeded in his estate.
But lest the name of this Citie call vs backe againe too much to those Assyrian Relations, before dilated, as much as concerneth our purpose; let vs see what can be said of their Religion here. Of this wee find little, but as before is shewed of the Babylonians.
Nisroch was the Idoll, in whose Temple Senacherib was slaine by his owne sonnes. But  what this Nisroch was, I cannot find. Certaine it is, that hee which had vpbraided confidence in the true GOD, finds his Idoll, euen in the place and time of his worship, his Traytor; and he which had blasphemed the GOD of heauen, finds Heauen and Earth, and his owne Bowels, against him. Venus VraniaWolph. in 2. King. 19. is reckoned among the Assyrian deuotions, and Adad was their chiefe god, which they interpret One, (and Macrobius, the Sunne, which, as before is said, they worshipped, and may well agree with that Latine Etymologie, Sol quasi solus) and Atargatis, the Earth. Belus also was here worshipped, as witnesse Dion, Eusebius, and Cyrillus. LucianLuc. in Ioue Tragaedo. sayth, That the Assyrians sacrificed to a Doue; the touching of which Fowle required much ceremonie for expiation: Whereto accordeth the fable, that SemiramisMetam. 4. was turned into a Doue.  
Concerning Adad and Atargatis, MacrobiusSaturnal. l. 1. 23. sayth, That the Assyrians ascribe all power to these two. The Image ofApud Macrob. Ada, Deus: lego Hada (...) id est vnus, Chaldaeum and Syrum est. Drus. Praet. in Luc. 18. fortasse (ait Seldenus meus) deductum ab (...) heb. Iud ^i enim vestibus suis inscriptum gerebant illud Deut. 6. Dominus vnus, etc. sic Archang in Cabal. dog. Apollo vocatur Sol, quia sine multitudine and Sol quia solus: est coelestis ignis, ait Plato, omnia decoquens quae ad magni animalis cibum pert^nent. Adad shined with rayes or beames downwards, designing the Sunnes force: That of Atargatis, with beames vpwards, as it were ascribing to the heauenly influence all her plentie: vnder the same Image were the shapes of Lions, as also the Phrygians fained the Mother of the gods, that is, the Earth, to be borne on Lions. But of this Atargatis more in the next Chapter.
Ionas was sent to preach to the great Citie of Niniue, as someGramay. As. Sigon. in Sulpit. thinke, in the dayes of Sardanapalus his next Predecessor. Broughton (with some other) thinketh in the dayes of Pul, or Phul-assur. Their repentance staid that iudgement. Nahum after denounced the like iudgement, which accordingly came to passe. Phraortes King of the Medes (mentioned in  the former chapter) besieged it. His sonne Cyaxares succeeded in the kingdome, and in this siege. After that, the Scythians inuaded Media, and held it eight and twentie yeeres, according to the Prophecie of Ieremie 49.34. and in the same Expedition obtained Niniue. But Cyaxares after preuailed against the Scythians, and Astyages his Sonne ouer-turned and destroyed Niniue, that it should no more bee a receptacle or encouragement to the Assyrians, to rebell against the Medes. Nahum threatnedNah. 2.6. opening of the gates of the Riuer, and destruction to the Temple, as Tremellius readeth it, noting thereon the casting downe of the Forts on Tygris, and amongst them the Temple of Belus there erected; out of whose notes on the first Chapter of Nahum, I inserted the former Relation. Herodotus in the Historie hereof sayth, That Phraortes there perished in the siege, with most part of his armie.  Cyaxares, to reuenge his Fathers death, renewed the siege, but was not able to hold his owne against the Scythians, vntill, after eight and twentie yeeres, that the Scythians had enioyed the Empire of Asia (vnder pretence of feasting being entertained in a banquet) the most of them, in their drunkennesse, were slaine by the Medes: and so the Scythians losing what before they had gotten, Cyaxares recouered the Empire, and destroyed Niniue. Thus was that CitieDorothaeus in his Synopsi, affirmeth, that by an Earthquake the lake which compassed the Ci^ie drowned it, and a fire consumed the vpper part thereof. destroyed, whose Riches, Beautie, Antiquitie, Largenesse, and Puissance, the Scripture so often mentioneth.
A man may compare Ecbatana of the Medes, Babylon on Euphrates, and Niniue on Tygris, to the Triumviri at Rome: So did they both emulate and share the Easterne Empire, as each could make her selfe strongest; now Babylon, another while Niniue, and sometime  Ecbatana preuailing; which is the cause of no small difficultie in these Histories. Mr Cartwright, an eye-witnesse, hath beheld (he sayth) the ruines of this Citie, and agreeth with
 Diodorus in the equalitie of the sides: two of which contained an hundred and fitie furlongs, the two other but fourescore and ten on a side.
Mosul is supposed to be Niniue, haply for the neerenesse,Of Mosull and the N^storians here, see Onuphrius in vita Iul. 3. or for that (as a posthume issue) it hath sprung from the former. The ashes yet haue not yeelded such a Phoenix as the former was, rather a witnesse of the others mightinesse, saith St. Anthony Sherley, and GODS iudgement, then of any magnificence in it selfe.G. Bo. Ben. part. 1. l. 2. Mosul is in fame for Cloth of Gold, and Silke, for fertilitie, and for the Patriarchall Sea of the Nestorian Christians, whose authoritie stretched to Cathay and India. Merdin, a towne on the same Riuer, is also a Patriarchall Sea of the Chaldees (or Mahumetane Sect.) In Paulus Venetus his daiesM. Paul, l. 1. cap. 6. they were in the Prouince.  of Mosul, partly Mahumetans, partly Christians: and in the Mountaines dwelt the Curdi, that were Participles or Mungrels in Religion, professing partly Christ, partly Mahumet, in practice robbers and wicked. The Christian Patriarch hath Archbishops and Bishops vnder him, as the Romane Pope. The Mahumetans are called Aratrie.
Assyria (saithMagin. Geogr. Magmus) is now called by Niger, Adrinsa; by Giraua, Azemia; by Pinetus, Mosul; by Mercator, Sarh; and of Castaldus, Arzerum. It sometime contained the Prouinces Arapachite, Adiabena, and Sittacene, now called (after some) Botan, Sarca and Rabia.
Boemus b telleth of a strange fashion, anciently vsed in Assyria;I. Boem. l. 1. That the maids which were marriageable, were yeerely brought foorth in publike, and set to sale to such as would marrie  them. The monie which was giuen for the fairest, was giuen to the more deformed for their portion in marriage.
The Assyrian vsed to wash themselues daily, but chiefly after carnall companie.
As for the Saracenicall Religion, we shall more fitly handle the same by it selfe, then tediously repeat the same things. For this therefore, and other Countries subiect to Turkish or Persian seruitude, the Reader may reade of their superstitions in their due place, when we speake of the Saracens, Turkes, and Persians. The relation of their Christian Rites belong to another Tome.
But let vs come out of Assyria into Syria; the Histories of which are not a little, as is said, confounded together, and many Rites were common to them both, and to all these parts,  from the Persian gulfe to Asia the lesse, as being so often subiect to one Empire or rather still parts of that one Empire, which receiued often alterations vnder the Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes, Persians, Macedonians, Scythians, Parthians, etc.


CHAP. XV. Of Syria, and the ancient Religions there: Of the Syrian Goddesse, and her Rites at Hierapolis: Of the Daphnean, and  other Syrian Superstitions.
SYRIA is called in Scripture, Aram, of Aram the sonne ofGen. 10.22. Shem, as before is said. And Strabo calleth the Syrians Arammaei. Hence also his c Arimi are deriued, and Arami (lib. 13.) It is diuersly bounded by diuers Authors:Strab. l. 1. and l. 13. some confounding the names of Syria and Assyria. Eustathius doth reckon these fiue parts thereof, Commagena, Seleucide, Coelesyria, Phoenicia, and Iudea.Mela de sit. Orb. l. 1. Mela extendeth it further, andPlin. l. 5. C. 12. Plinie nameth as part of Syria, Palaestina, Iudea, Coele, Phoenice, Damascena, Babylonia, Mesopotamia, Sophene, Commagene, Adiabene, Antiochia. And in this large sense dothG. Post. Bar. Syr. descrip. Broc. descrip. Ter. san. Postellus and Brocardus stretch it beyond Tygris  Eastward from the Mediterranean Sea, and from Armenia to Arabia. But Dom. Niger, and before himLib. 5. C. 15. Ptolemie (whom wee especially follow) make it to a but on the North vpon Celicia, and part of Cappadocia, by the mount Amanus; on the South, vpon Iudaea, and part of Arabia Petraea; on the East, vpon Arabia Deserta and Euphrates; on the West, vpon the Syrian Sea.
This countrie is thought to haue beene the habitation of our first Parents, before the floud, and of Noah and his sincerer Familie (as wee haue said) after. Yet how soone, and how much, they degenerated in the wicked off-spring of cursed Cham, whose posteritie peopled a great part hereof, till they were thence by the Israelites expelled, the Scripture is sufficient record. Yea, euen from Noahs time did they deriue their Idolatrie, as appeareth byLucian. de Dea Syria.  Lucians Narration of the Syrian goddesse, which he partly saw with his eyes, and partly receiued of the Priests report.
This goddesse was with godles Rites serued and obserued at Hierapolis: which (although
 StraboLib. 16. placeth it beyond the Riuer in Mesopotamia) is byLib. 5. c. 23. Plinie accounted in Coelosyria, called also Bambyce, and, of the Syrians themselues, Magog; and by Ptolemie named among the Syrian Cities of the diuision Cirristica, 71.15 Longit. and 56.15. Latit. And Lucian who himselfe was there; (Gilb. Cognat. in Annot. he calleth himselfe an Assyrian, and was borne at Samosata in Commagena) placeth it on this side the Riuer. Plinie and Strabo (deceyued in the name) mention the worship of Atargatis (called of the Greekes Derceto) in this place: Athenagoras in his Apologie for the Christians, hath these words: Semiramis the daughter of Derceto, a leacherous and bloudy woman, was worshipped by the name of the Syrian goddesse: but Lucian (other-where a scoffer, here an Historian) at large describeth it, making this difference betweene This and That, Atargatis was halfe a fish, but the Syrian goddesse wholly resembled  a woman.
There was another Hierapolis in Phrygia, wherein was a famous Temple of Apollo, with a Caue or Vault vnder it, deadly to al entrers but the Priests yea, to the birds also which flew ouer it. Damas. in vita Isidor. ap. Phot. 242.The City he thinketh to haue receiued the name Hierapolis (Holy City) of these holy things here obserued; in which respect it giueth place to none other place in Syria: hauing a stately Temple, enriched with gifts, statues, and (as they esteemed them) miracles. Arabia, Phoenicia, Babylonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Assyria, brought her presents, and celebrated her solemne Feasts.
This Temple was (in the Syrians opinion) first founded by Deucalion, whose Historie you would thinke Lucian had learned of the Hebrewes, not of the Syrians, or Greekes; so liuely doth hee expresse the Infidelity and cruelty of the old world; the manner of the floud; the Arke wherein, with himselfe, his wife and children, he saued also all other creatures that liued  on the earth, which came to him by couples, by dispensation of Iupiter. Hereunto these Hierapolitans adde, That in their Territorie was made a great Clift, which swallowed vp those waters: which Clift (but then verie little) was shewed to our Author: to whom also they reported, That in memorie hereof, Deucalion instituted that Rite, which to his time continued; That twice euerie yeere, not the Priests only, but many out of all Syria, Arabia, and beyond Euphrates, went to the Sea, and from thence brought water, which they powred downe in the Temple, that he had built ouer that Clift vnto Iuno, all which water was receyued into the same.
Some ascribe the building of this Temple to Semiramis, in honour of her mother Derceto: others to Attes, for the worship of Rhea: which Attes was a Lydian, and was Author of  the Superstitions of Rhea, to the Phrygians, Lydians, and Samothracians: but the opinion most probable was, that Dionysius or Bacchus was founder of it; two substantiall witnesses, besides others, affirming the same, namely two, Phalli or Priapi (huge Images of the priuie part of a man) erected at the entrie of the Temple, with an inscription, That Bacchus had consecrated them to Iuno. That ancient foundation being consumed by time, this later Temple was erected by Queene Stratonice, who being in a dreame enioyned this office of Iuno, and for neglecting the same, punished with sicknesse, vowed vpon her recouery to performe it. The King ioyned in Commission with her, as Generall of his Armie, and ouer-seer of these holy works, a beautifull young man, named Combabus, who fearing what might happen, gelded himselfe, and closing those his dismembred members (first for their preseruation  embalmed) in a boxe sealed, as some great treasure, he committed to the Kings fidelitie, to be safely reserued to his vse. Which his practice saued his life accordingly, being after produced to cleare him of adulterie with Stratonice, which had beene laid to his charge by his enuious accusers, and by the jealous King greedily apprehended. In memorie whereof, a brazen statue of Combabus was set vp in this Temple, and both then (whether to solace Combabus, or by inspiration of Iuno) and yeerely euer after, many in this Temple gelded themselues, and put off together the nature and habit of men, attyring themselues like women. These man-women Priests were called Galli.
The Temple was built in the middest of the Citie, compassed with a double wall; the Porch looking Northwards, almost an hundred fadome high; where stood those Priapi aforesaid,  about the height of three hundred fadome; vp to one of these, one ascendeth twice a yeere, and abideth in the top thereof seuen dayes. He carrieth with him a long chaine which hee letteth downe, and thereby draweth vp to him such things as hee needeth. Many offer gold, and siluer, and brasse, and one appointed receiued their names, which hee sheweth to him aboue, and he maketh his praiers for euery of them, sounding, while hee praieth, a little Bell. The temple within shineth with gold, and the Roofe is wholly of this metall. it yeeldeth so fragrant a smell, that the garments of those, which come thither, retaine this sent long after.
There is also another inner Roome or Quire, whereinto the chiefe of the Priests onely haue entrance; yet is it open without any dore. In this Sanctuary are the Images of the gods;  Iupiter, supported with Bulls, but Iuno sitteth vpon Lyons, holding in one hand a Scepter, and in the other a Distaffe, in some thing or other resembling diuers other goddesses, by the
 Aegyptians, Indians, Armenians, Babylonians, Aethiopians, and Medes, adorned with many Iewels: and among the rest, shee hath on her head a stone called the Lampe, of the effect, yeelding light in the night season, as if all the Temple were hanged with Lamps. This statue goeth twice a yeere to the Sea, for the water before mentioned: neyther of the Syrians is called by any name, but onely the Image, not expressing of whom.
In the Temple is the Image of Apollo cloathed with a beard, (contrarie to the custome of the Greekes) and in a farre more glorious manner giuing forth Oracles: for it moueth it selfe; which, the Priests espying, lift it vp aloft (otherwise it sweateth and moueth it selfe forward neuerthelesse) and being thus supported, it turneth it selfe and them about, and leapeth from one place to another. Then doth the chiefe of the Priests, make supplication and request for  all things: which if it misliketh, it goeth backwards: if it approueth, it carrieth them forwards: and without these Oracles they enterprise nothing neither priuate nor sacred: and Lucian saith, he saw it leauing the Priests (the supporters) and mouing it selfe aboue in the ayre. Here are also the statues of Atlas, Mercurie and Lucina, and without a great brazen Altar, and many brazen Images of Kings and Priests, and many others recorded in Poets and Histories. Among others standeth the Image of Semiramis, pointing to the Temple with her finger, which (they say) is the signe of her repentance, who hauing giuen commandement to the Syrians to worship no other god but her selfe, was by plagues (sent from heauen) driuen to reuoke that former Edict, and thus seemeth to acknowledge and point out another  Deitie. There were also places inclosed, wherein were kept and fed sacred Oxen, Horses, Eagles, Beares, Lyons.
The Priests were in number aboue three hundred, some for killing Sacrifices: some for offerings; some ministring fire to others at the Altar; their garment all white; their head couered; and euery yeere was chosen a new High-Priest, which alone was clothed with purple, and a golden head-tire. A great multitude there was besides of Musicians, Galli, and Propheticall women: they sacrificed twice a day, whereat they all assembled. To Iupiter they vse neyther song nor instrument, in sacrifice; as they doe to Iuno.
Not farre hence was a Lake of two hundreth fadome depth, wherein were preserued sacred Fishes, and in the middest thereof an Altar of stone, crowned alwaies with Garlands,  and burning with odours. They haue a great feast, which they call the going downe to the Lake, when all their Idols descend thither.
Their greatest and most solemne Feast was obserued in the Spring, which they called the fire: they solemnized it in this sort. They felled great trees; and laide them in the Churchyard (as you may terme it) and bringeth thither the Goates, Sheepe, and other beasts, they hanged them on these trees; together with them, fowles and garments, and workes of gold and siluer, which being set in due order, they carrie the Images of the gods about the trees, and then fet all on fire. They resort to this Feast out of Syria, and the coasts adioyning, and bring hither their Idols with them; and great multitudes resorting to the sacrifices, the Galli, and those other sacred wights beate and wound each other.  Others play on instruments, and others rauished by diuine furie, prophesie: and then doe the Galli enter into their orders: for the furie rauisheth many of the beholders. Whatsoeuer young man commeth prepared to this purpose, hurling off his garments, with a great voyce, he goeth into the middest, and drawing his sword, geldethOf the Knaueries of these effeminate Priests, in selfe-whippings, with whipstrings full of bones, and wounding themselues with weapons, their prodigious Sodomiticall lusts, thefts, fortune-tellings, and other abhominations, see Apuleius Asin. Aur. l. 8. and 9. and Lucians Asse, whence the former was taken. Euen still amongst the r^^i^ious men of the Turkes, and others both Mahometans and Indians, these seuere courses which themselues are vsed almost to a miracle in doing and suffering. So vaine, so vile a thing is man, to illude the world, and himselfe, and to doe homage to the deuill, with such austere hypocrisies, which imposed in, and for the verity, might with the worlds admiration, to Gods glory, proclaime them holy Confessors and Martyrs; which buy hell at a deerer rate following selfe deuotions and will-worships, then others (sauing their selfe denying) get the gift of God aeternall life. himselfe; and runneth thorow the Citie, carrying in his hands, that which he would no longer carry on his body. And into whatsoeuer house he casteth the same, he receiueth from thence his womanish habite and attire. When any of them die, his fellowes carrying him in to the uburbes, couer him and his horse with stones, and may not enter into the Temple in seuen dayes after: nor after the sight of any other carkasse, in one day, but none of that family where one hath died, in thirty dayes; and then also with a shauen head. Swine they hold for vncleane beasts. And  theQuid referam vt volitet crebas intacta per vrbes Alba Palestinae sancta columba Syro? Tibul. lib. 1. Hence it seemeth the Iewes held Doues in that hatred, that hee that kept Doues, might not bee alowed for a witnesse, as being accounted a sinner. Ph. Ferd ex. R. Ab. ben. Katton. yet Io. 2.16, are mentioned sellers of Doues in the Tempie, and they were an vsuall offering. Luc. 2. Doue they esteeme so sacred, that if one touch one against his will, hee is that day vncleane. This causeth Doues in those parts to multiply exceedingly: neyther doe they touch Fishes: This because ofEuseb. de praep. l. 8. cap. 5. Derceto, halfe a woman, halfe a fish; that, for Semiramis which was metamorphosed into a Doue,Iul. Hyginas Fab. 197. Iulius Hyginus hath this fable, that an egge of maruellous greatnesse fell out of heauen into Euphrates, which the fishes rolled to land; on the same did Doues sit, and hatched thereout Venus, who was after called the Syrian goddesse, at whose

 request Iupiter granted the Fishes their heauenly constellation: and the Syrians for that cause eate not their Fish nor Doues, but number them amongst their gods. TheirPlutarch. de superstitione. superstition concerning Herrings and Daces was ridiculous, esteeming that the Syrian goddesse did fill the bodies of such as had eaten them with biles an vlcers, causing also the fore-part of the leg and the liuer to consume.
Many are the ceremonies also to be performed of the religious Pilgrims or Votaries that visit this holy City: for before hee setteth forth, hee cutteth off the hayre of his head and browes, he sacrificeth a sheepe, and spreading the fleece on the ground, hee kneeleth downe on it, and layeth vpon his head the head and feet of the beast, and prayeth to bee accepted: the rest hee spendeth in the banquet. Then doth he crowne himselfe, and his fellow Pilgrims,  and after sets forward on his pilgrimage, vsing for his drinke and washing cold water, and sleepeth alwayes on the ground till his returne home. In this Citie were appointed publike Hostes, for diuers Cities diuers, called Doctors, because they expounded these mysteries: They haue also one manner of sacrificing, to hurle downe the beasts destined herevnto, from the top of the porch, which die of the fall. They haue a like rite to put their children in a Sacke, and carrie them downe, branded first on the necke or palme of the hand: and hence it was, that all the Assyrians were branded. The young men also consecrated their haire from their Natiuitie, which being cut in the Temple, was there preserued in some boxe of gold or siluer, with the inscription of the owners name thereon. And this did I (saith Lucian in my youth: and my hayre and name remaine in the Temple still. Of Atergatis, see more  in the Chapter of Phoenicea.Sueton. Ner. Suetonius tels of Nero, that hee contemned all Religions, but this of the Syrian goddesse: of which also he grew weary, and defiled her with Vrine. After which hee obserued a little Needle, supposed to haue a power of fore-signifying danger: and because soone after he had it, he found out a conspiracie intended against him, he sacrificed thereto three times a day. PlutarchDe Consolat. ad. Ap. calleth the Syrians an effeminate Nation prone to teares: and saith, that some of them after the death of their friends haue hidden themselues in Caues, from the sight of the Sunne many dayes.
Rimmon the Idoll of the Syrians, and his Temple is mentioned, 2. King. 5.18. Bur I haue litle certainetie to say of him.
Some reckon among the Syrian Deities, Fortune, conceyuing the mention thereof, Gen.  30.11. by Leah at Zilpa's trauel: the word bagad which shee vseth, is vsually in our translations and Tremellius, a troupe commeth: but in the vulgar Latine, foeliciter, in Vatablus, auspicato, in Pagnine and Montanus, venit prosperitas. The Ebrew and Greeke Interpreters vnderstand it of an ominous and well-wishing presage; yea, some Comments (I know not whether Planet-like) expresse the Planet Iupiter, called Mazal tob, whose influence helpeth in the opinion of Astrologers, as Munster noteth, to generation of children, according to the Rabines liberality, which will not haue so much as the meanest hearbe on the earth, to want correspondence and intercourse with some or other starre in heauen. Mazal signifies a starre; hence their superstition mentioned to Mazaloth, 2. Reg. 23. And the Iewish Astronomers calls the Zodiake the circle of Mazaloth, which name also their Cabalists ascribe to an order of Angels.  Many things could I here annexe out of a learned worke, written by Master Selden of the Inner Temple, de DIS Syris, (which according to his, and the wont of all such as Nature hath made ingenious, and ingenuous arts truely liberall) hee hath imparted to me, and now also to the world, a rich magazine and treasury of manifold learning, Diuine and Humane, in multiplicity of tongues, arts, and reading, out of which I haue borrowed in this and diuers parts of this worke, no meane nor few Iewels to adorne my booke, and enrich the Reader. This Testimony I here once for all publish of that booke, newly in the time of this Impression published, Of himselfe, wee want not publike proofe of his due in that, which hee hath giuen to the world; and the world in her more solid and lucid parts, cannot but reflect againe vpon the Giuer, TITLES OF HONOR, a man whose worth I confesse, I rather  admire then measure with my poore pittances of praise; which in this Gad or Fortune of the Syrians wanteth not his Bagad, foeliciter, or venit prosperitas, happily and prosperously obseruing many things to this purpose, out of the Chaldee Paraphrase, the Hebrew Rabbins, the Greeke Septuagint, the Latines, Cabalists, Astrologians and others, which (being somwhat beyond our common Reader) I forbeare to write, lest the contrary to Leahs wish be wished to me. Certaine it is that Labans daughters had not quite lost all their Syrian superstition, as appeares by Rachels stealing her fathers Theraphim,Vid. l. 2. c. 8. Idols which (Kimchi and Aben Ezra thinke) were made according to Astrologicall superstition, capable of celestiall influence and prediction, therefore stolne (as they conceiue) that her father should not consult with them touching their way in this flight.G. Malm. de gest. reg. Ang. l. 2. c. 10 The like doth Malmsbury report of Gerbertus, which by inspection  of the starres made an Idolls head, with which hee vsed consultations: (this was Siluester the second the Necromancer and Pope, An. Do. 998.) and the like tale is related of
 Frier Bacon. That Dea Syria before mentioned, was worshipped in the times of the Roman Empire: here also in this Iland, as appeares by an inscription, which Sir Robert Cotton hath DEAE SYRIAE, and diuers altar-stones inscribed DEABVS MATRIBVS, mentioned by Master Camden; which are thought to be the same with the Syrian goddesse, whose image was iust the same with that of Berecynthia, or the mother of the gods, interpreted also the Earth, and Heauen: For it is no vnusuall thing with superstition, coelo terram miscere, to make a hellish confusion of all things: Yea, the Astaroth before mentioned, are thought to be the same with Syria Dea, and these Dea matres. This Astarte is also accounted Iuno, and the Moone (as her Bull-head with hornes in stead of a crowne, wherewith they paint her, argue)  and Minerua and Venus, Io, and Lucina, and Mylitta, or Alytta, and Mitra, and Astroarche, and Coelestis, or Vrania the Queene of Heauen, and all things, and nothing;Ier. 44.18. 1. Cor. 8.4. for an Idoll is indeed nothing in the world: but the very beeing thereof is but the distracted, vaine, various, imagination, fancie, and phrensie of the Idolater. This is also the cause of ascribing difference or communitie of sexe to their Deities, as this Astarte, sometimes foeminine, sometimes masculine, as Venus likewise in some of the Greeke and Latine Poets, and the Egyptians mysterie of the Moone or Isis, with both sexes, as hath beene alreadie touched.
Antiochia built by Seleucus, (to whom, in honour of his memorie, in mount Casius they obserued sacred solemnities, as to a demi-God) some times the seat royall of the  Syrian Kings, third Citie of the Roman Empire, third seat of the Christian Patriarchs, and first, where that melodious name of Christian was heard, is now the Sepulchre (sayth Boterus) of it selfe, or (as Niger) a greater wildernesse, wherein it selfe is the least part of it selfe, being left but a small Village (saythCartwright. another) in the middest of its owne walles.
About fiue miles from Antiochia, was that faire and sacred Daphne, which Ortelius in his Theater hath presented to the Spectators, with a peculiar description, and of which the elder AuthorsZozomen. l. 5. cap. 18. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 18. Euagr. l. 1. c. 16. Strab. l. 16. haue plentifully written. It was ten miles about: a place euery way enuironed with many stately Cypresses, besides other trees, which suffered not the Sunne to kisse their mother (Earth) whose lap was according to the diuersitie of the season replenished  with varietie of flowers, her breasts flowing with streames of watery nourishment: A spring there was, deriuing (as men supposed) her water from the Castalian fountaines, to which, ancient (superstition and therefore superstitious Antiquitie) attributed a diuine facultie with like name and force to that at Delphos. This also was furthered by the Legend of Daphne,Ouid. Metam. lib. 1. recorded by the Poets, beleeued (and what will not Superstition beleeue, but the trueth?) by the credulous multitude: who was said to haue fled from Apollo, and here turned into a tree. But thus could not Apollo be turned from his loue, which he continued both to the Tree and place. This was Lettice sutable to the lips of vaine youth.Ter. in Eunucho. Et quia consimilem luserat (sayth amorous Chaerea, of Iupiter in the Comicke)
 Iam olim ille ludum, impendio magis, animus gaudebat mihi.Ego homuncio hoc non facerem?
There needed no other lecture of sensualitie to them, then this Legend, especially in this schoole, where euery place might be a place of argument (vnder pretence of reason and religion) to shut true Religion, and reason out of the place, especially with schollers greedie of this conclusion. Here you might haue heard the whisking winds in a murmuring accent breathing this lustfull Oratorie: the Enamelled floore did offer her more then officious curtesie (a soft, sweet, and inlayed bed) to lie on; the ayre with temperature, seemed to further Intemperance. The eye of the day, and watchmen of the night, were prohibited  by the Cypresse roofe, with their vnwelcome light, to testifie those workes of darknesse, which those guiltie boughs couered from discouering: Once, the concurring obiects of each sense, did in silence speake and perswade to sensuall pleasure, insomuch that by a generall Decree, Temperance and Temperate men were hence exiled, and scarce would the vulgar allow him the name of a man, which here would be transformed into a beast, or would presume, without a Curtezan, to tread on this holy ground. Needs must they goe whom the deuill driueth: such god, such religion.
Here were erected sumptuous buildings: the Temple of Apollo Daphnaeus, with a stately Image therein; the worke (as was thought) of Seleucus: also Dianas Chappell and Sanctuarie. Iulius Capitolinus writeth, that Verus a voluptuous Emperour spent foure Summers  here, and wintered in Laodicea and Antioch.Iul. Capit. Verus. Seuerus (more truly answering his name) did to death certaine Tribunes, by whose negligence the Souldiers here were suffered to
 riot. The Oracles added renowne to the place, which were deliuered out of these Daphnaean waters by a certaine wind or breath. Adrian the Emperour is reported to haue hence receiued the facultie of Diuining, by dipping a Cypresse leafe in the Fountaine. Iulian resorted hither often for that purpose. But his elder brother Gallus, (whom Constantius had called to be Caesar, and after, sayth Ammianus, for his outrages executed,) had in the time of his abode at Antioch, remoued the bones of Babylas their Bishop, and other holy Martyrs his companions in suffering, to this place, where also he built a Church. Now when as Iulian in his Persian expedition had sent others to visite all the other Oracles in the Roman Empire, himselfe here consulted with Apollo, (an Apostata Emperour with an Apostata Angell) about the successe of those warres. But all his sacrifices obtained no other  answere, then that he could not answere, by the countermand of a more diuine power there liuing in those dead bones. Hereupon Iulian command the Christians to remoue those ill neighbours; which they did (sayth Theodoret,) with a solemne procession, singing the Psalmes, and dancing with the heart, of Dauid, making this the burthen and foot of each verse, Confounded bee all they that worship grauen Images: wherewith, Iulian enraged, persecuted the Christians. Euagrius affirmeth, that hee built a Temple in honour of Babylas: how truely, I knew not. But the true God confounded both the Idoll and Idolater, shortly after, calling the one to giue account of his ill employed stewardship; vncertaine whether by diuine or humane hand: and for the other, his Temple was consumed with fire from aboue, together with the Image, one pillar whereof remained in Chrysostomes dayes. The  Pagans attributed this fire to the Christians: and no maruell: for what did not that fire of blind Idolatrie (kindled with zeale) attribute to the innocent Christians? herein testifying that it came from hell, and must to hell againe, by that hellish Character and impression, of so great fire, and as great darkenesse. Such is Hell, and such is ignorant Zeale: a fire, but no light.Zeale without knowledge resembled to hell. Apollo's Priest by no torments could be forced to confesse any author thereof: and the officers of the Temple affirmed it was fire from heauen, which certaine Countrey-people confirmed by their owne sight. Iulian, to satisfie his rage, caused some Temples of the Christians to be burned. NicephorusNic. l. 16.23. and 17.14. telleth of the continuance of this Daphnaean groue, honoured with buildings and spectacles, by Mammianus and Chosroes. Apollo's Image was made of wood, couered ouer with gold. Theodosius forbad the cutting of any  of those Cypresses.
OrontesLambit. Apollinei nemoris nutritor Orontes. Claudiax. is a Riuer which ariseth in Coelesyria, and payeth tribute to all the three brethren: it visiteth Pluto's Palace, running with a long tract vnder the Earth, and then heauing vp his head, maketh his gladsom homage to Iupiter; and after his custome payed to the Antiochians, in fine powreth himselfe into ahe lappe of Neptune, entring the Sea neere to Seleucia. ItStrab. lib. 16. was called Typhon, vntill Orontes, building a bridge ouer it, caused it to be called by his name. They had here a tale of Typhon, a huge Dragon, which diuided the earth, as hee went seeking to hide himselfe, and perished by the stroke of a thunderbolt. Thus did he indent a passage for this Riuer. Not farre hence was a sacred Caue, called Nymphoeum: also Mount Casius, and Anticasius, and Heraclia; and nigh thereto the Temple  of Minerua. In Laodicea was this goddesse honoured, to whom they offeredEus. de laudib. Constantini. and de praep. Eu. lib. 4. cap. 8. in yeerely sacrifice, in old time a maid, after that in stead thereof a Hart.
I may here mention also that, which TacitusTacit. l. 2. hist. reporteth of the Mount Carmel (as hee placeth it) betwixt Iudea and Syria, where they worshipped a god of that name with Ethnicke rites. They had not any Temple or Statue to this god, and Altar onely and Reuerence was here seene. Vespasian did in this place offer sacrifice, where Basilides the Priest viewing the entrals, foretold him of his good successe. Damascius in the life of Isidorus, mentioneth a Syrian goddesse,Ap. Phot. Biblioth. 242. named Babia, of whom infants newly borne, were by the Syrians, especially at Damascus, called also Babia: perhaps they were esteemed vnder her tutelage; and our English word, Babes, may hence borrow the originall.  




CHAP. XVI. Of the Syrian Kings, and alteration in Gouernment, and Religion, in those Countries.
SYRIA quickly grew into Peoples and Kingdomes; although Time hath long since deuoured both them and their memories. Of Menon the husband of Semiramis (mentioned by Diodorus) is spoken before. Adadezer was in  Dauids time,Nic. Damascenus speaketh of this warre, Adad (sayth Scaliger in his notes on that Fragment) was the common name of all the Syrian Kings: Hie om. sayth Benhadad. Appian. Alex. de bellis Syriacis. King of Aram Zoba, which some take for Chobal in Syria, some for Sophene in Armenia, and some for the Nubei: whatsoeuer they were, Dauid made them tributarie, Anno mundi 2903. Benhadad, Hazael, and others, the Scripture also mentioneth: but certaine succession, we find not recorded of these Syrian Kings, till the time of Alexander, which conquering all from Macedonia, to India, by his inexpected death, left his huge Empire to bee shared among his chiefe followers. Seleucus, the sonne of Antiochus, a Macedonian, first master of the Elephants; then Tribune; after that Deputie of the Babylonians, at last obtained the Kingdome of Asia, Anno Mundi 3638 of whom Appianus thus writeth: The first King of Syria after  Alexander, was Seleucus, called Nicator, because he was of very great stature; and as a wild bull had in a sacrifice of Alexander broken loose, hee held him with both his hands. Hee built sixteene Cities, called by the name Antiochia, of his father Antiochus: and sixe Laodicea's, in memorie of his mother Laodice: nine Seleucia's of his owne name: three Apamea's, and one Stratonicea, after the names of his two wiues. He prospered in his warres, tooke Babylon, subdued the Bactrians; pierced to the Indians, which had slaine Alexanders Gouernours (placed amongst them) after Alexanders death. He slew Lysimachus, and seuen Moneths after was circumuented and slaine of Ptolomei, (whose sister Lysimachus had married) being seuentie three yeeres old.
To him succeeded his sonne Antiochus, sur-named Soter. Anno 3667.Appian. ibid. who had obtayned  Stratonice his mother in law, of his father (moued thereunto by his sonnes violent loue, and his Physicians subtile perswasion.) His sonne Antiochus Theos was (contrarie to his name) poysoned by his wife: whose sonnes Seleucus, Callinicus and Antiochus succeeded: and after them Antiochus Magnus, the sonne of Callinicus, who much enlarged his Empire, adding thereto Babylonia, Egypt, and Iudea: but inuading Graecia, prouoked the Romans against him, with whom he compounded on base and meane conditions: Hee did yet comfort himselfe for his losse among his friends, saying, that he wasVal. Max. 4. cap. 1. beholding to the Romans, that eased him of so weightie a burthen, and lessened his cares of gouernment: (for they had cooped him in a corner of his Kingdome beyond Taurus.) After this, hee was slaine: exhibiting in himselfe a true example of the worlds falshood, that playeth with Scepters,  and vyeth Diadems, vsing men like Counters or Figures, in numbring and casting accounts, where the same, with a little difference of place, is a pound, shilling, or penie, one, ten, or an hundred. And yet as earthly happinesse herein comes short of heauen, that it is neuer meere and vnmixed, but hath some sowre sauce to rellish it: so falleth it as farre short of hell, that not onely hope, but the most miserable hap, hath some glimpse of comfort.
But to come to our Historie. Antiochus his sonne, sur-named Epiphanes, and after, Epimanes for his furious insolence, (who beganne his raigne Anno mundi 3774.) was first sent to Rome in hostage, for securitie of his fathers faith: and after that Seleucus his brother (which sent2. Mac. 3. Heliodorus to rob the Temple at Ierusalem) had a while warmed the Throne,  succeeded in the Syrian Kingdome. Of him and his tyrannie Daniel had long before prophesied in the interpretation of Nabuchodonosors Image,Dan. 2. whose legs are interpreted to be this Syrian, and the Egyptian kingdomes,Graserus interpreteth, and l boureth to proue these two legs to be the Easterne Empire, vnder the Turke, and Westerne vnder the Pope: refuted by D. Willet, in Append. ad Dan. both heauie and hard neighbours to the Church in Iudea, lying betwixt them: but more especially in hisDan. 7.24. Visions in the seuenth Chapter. Where, after other things, he fore-telleth of the ten hornes,Trem. Iun. in Dan D. Downam of Antichrist. D. Willet on Dan. 4. cap. 7. which are the eight Kings afore-named and two Egyptian Ptolemus, Euergetes, and Philopater, in their times preuayling in Syria, and infesting Iudea. And the last shall subdue three Kings, which were Ptolemie of Egypt, driuen out of Syria, Seleucus his brother, and Demetrius, to whom, after Seleucus, the right of the Scepter belonged. His policie, and blasphemie, and tyrannie, are also by Daniel plainely fore-signified, and in their euent as fully in the Historie of the Machabees related. There you may reade his wicked life, and wretched death: He tooke IerusalemCaluis.  Anno mundi 37^ and slew fourescore thousand people, robbed the Temple of eighteene
 hundred talents, and of the holy Vessels, polluted the Temple; forbade the Sacrifice, named it the Temlpe of Iupiter Olympius; forced men by tortures from their religion; with other execrable outrages, which would require a iust volume to describe.
As he was thus madde and raging against the true Religion: soAth. l. 5. c. 4. Athenaeus sheweth his vanitie in his owne, whose pompous solemnitie at the Daphnean Feast hee thus relateth. Antiochus, in emulation to Paulus Aemilius, proclaimed this solemne festiuitie in the Cities of Greece, and performed it at Daphne. First, passed in order fiue thousand men, armed after the Roman manner: next followed fiue thousand Mysians, and three thousand Cilicians, with Crownes of gold: of Thracians three thousand, of Galatians fiue thousand, of whom, some had shields of siluer. Twentie thousand Macedonians, and fiue thousand with shields  of brasse: after these, two hundred and fortie couples of champions which should fight in single combate. There followed one thousand Pisaean horse-men, and three thousand of the Citie, the most whereof had Crownes and Vials of gold, other trappings of siluer: Next came the band, called Socia, nothing inferiour in pompe or number: then a thousand extraordinarie, and another thousand in the band called Agema. Lastly, the barded horses fifteene hundred, all these in purple vestures, which many had embroidered, or embossed with gold: Chariots drawne with sixe horses, one hundred and fortie drawne by foure; one drawne by Elephants, attended with six and thirtie other. The rest of the pompe is incredible and tedious: eight hundred youths with golden crownes: a thousand fat oxen, and three hundred persons to attend the sacrifices: eight hundred Elephants teeth. There were  also the Images of all the gods, and Heroes that can be reckoned, some gilded, some clothed with golden vestures, their fabulous histories being with great pompe annexed. After all these, the Images of Day, Night, Earth, Heauen, Morning, and Noone. Then came a thousand Boyes, each hauing a piece of plate of a thousand drams: sixe hundred with vessels of gold: eightie women were carried in chaires footed with gold, and fiue hundred in others, footed with siluer, very sumptuously attired: two hundred of them out of basons of gold strewed odours. These spectacles lasted thirtie dayes. A thousand (and sometimes twelue hundred.) Halls or dining roomes, were furnished for bankets, the King himselfe affecting too officious familiaritie therein, visiting the tables of the baser people, yea, and that as a base Minstrell with musicke; not of the best instruments, but such as the poorer sort vsed for  want of better, as learned Casaubonus hath on that place of Athenaens obserued. So base is the Pride of Ambition, tempering a confused distemper; according (in a strange harmonie) the harshest discord of proud-aspiring, and deiected basenesse; where a base and seruile mind begetteth pride, and pride produceth a seruil basenesse, a changeling which the doting World fathereth on Humility.
Of the death of this Antiochus, the former and second bookes of Machabees seeme to disagree: and, which is more strange, the second booke in the first chapter saith,Percusserunt ducem and eos, qui cum eo erant and diuiserunt membratem, and capitibus amputatis foras proiecerunt, etc. 2. Mac. 1. hee and his company were destroyed in the Temple of Nanaea in Persia: and in the ninth chapter saith that in Media, at Echatana, hee was smitten with an vncouth disease, and a fall from his  Chariot, whereof he died. SomeMel Canus, loc. l. 2. c. 11. that would haue this history. Oanonicall, apply it to two Antiochi, as Lyra, and Rupertus, and after them Canus: but BellarmineBel. de ver. l. 1. c. 15. seeing that they will not agree with the times of any other, but Epiphanes, proueth himselfe Epimanes, and runneth mad with loue of that Trent-Minion; affirming, that in the Temple of Nanae a he fell but escaped (asGen. 14.16. the King of Sodome is said to fall, when Lot was captiued, and yet was not slaine) and after perished, as in the after part of the historie is expressed; whereas, it is there said, that they shut the dores on him, and cut him and his fellowes in pieces, and made them shorter by the heads: who yet after this (forsooth) could goe into Media and there haue a fall from his Chariot. They must haue no delicate stomacks, that wil be Iesuits, any thing must down when they will vp, especially, if Trent or the Vatican command, though manifest reason and sense (that I say not Religion) countermand. I enuie not the red Hat with these labels.  Wel fare that modestie of the Author2. Mac. 15.39. that confesseth his weakenesse: but Anathema to their Anathema's that enactConc. Trident. contradictions to be Canonicall.
I omit the successors of Antiochus, to wit, Antiochus Demetrius, Alexander, (who tooke away the golden Image of Victoria out of the Temple at Antioch, in his necessitie: iesting that Iupiter had sent him Victorie, and when hee would haue added IupiterIustin. l. 33. to his sacriledge, was chased away by the multitude, and after slaine by Gripus.) The rest with the times of their raigne are before expressed.Supra c. 12. Pompey set an end to these Seleucidan Kings, and the Romans enioyed the Countries of Syria, till the Saracens dispossessed them; whose history you may readeLib. 3. c. 12. in their due place. The Turkes displaced those Saracens; the Christians  of the West, by warre, made those parts Christian; but were expelled againe by the Turkes, and they by the Tartars. The MamalukeLib. 6. c. 6. slaues, and their Aegyptian Soldan after,
 held the Syrian Dominion, vntill Selim the great Turke subdued it to the Ottoman Empire, vnder which it still groneth. Of these things this our History will acquaint you in the proper reports of these Nations.
Aleppo is now chiefe Citie of Syria; but Damascus both in elder and later times hath born the greatest name, being the head of Aram, asEs. 7.8. Esay affirmeth; called of Iulian, the Citie of Iupiter, and eye of the whole East, Holy and Great, called alsoTzet. ad Lycophr. p. 100. the Trophee of Iupiter, because he there had conquered the Titans. It is interpreted drinking bloud, byHier. Com. in Ezec. li. 8. Hierom, who telleth (from the Hebrewes tradition) that in this field Kain slew his brother;Chytr. On^mastic. Chytreus expoundeth it saccus sanguinis,Wolphij Com. in 2. Reg. 1^. Genebrard, sanguinis mixtio. Wolphius deriueth it of two words, signifying bloud, and to  spoyle: which in the times of Hazael and Benhadad, and of Resin it performed: but neuer so much, as when the Saracens made it the sinke of bloud and spoyle, which they executed on the Christians:It was the seat of their Calipha in their first rising, and after that, of Noradine. see lib. 3. c. 2. and Noradine, Saladine, and the Turkes, fitting themselues and this Citie to the name, before the Aegyptian Sultans, and Ottoman Turkes, were Lords of it. Stephanus ascribeth the name to one Ascus a Giant, which cast Dionysius there into the Riuer: Or because Damascus, the sonne of Mercury comming hither out of Arcadia built it: or because Dionysius there fleid off the skin of Damascus, which had cut vp his Vines.
The Turkes now call it Leunclauius, and Chytreus testifie, Scham, and so is the whole Region called in the Arabian Chronicle, whose extract you may findli. 3. in our Saracenicall history.
 The Armies of Dauid, Ahab, Teglath Phalasar preuayled much against it. The Babylonians subuerted it: After that, the Ptolomeys repayred it: Pompei wanne it, Paul hallowed it: The Saracens (as is sayd) polluted it. The Christians in vaine besieged it, in the yeere one thousand one hundred forty and seuen. r Haalon the Tartar,Ch. Adrichom. Tehatrum Terra sanct. Tyr. bell. Sanct. lib. 17. Herold. conti. 6. See more of Damasc. inf. l. 3. c. 2. one thousand two hundred threescore and two, obtayned it, and about one thousand foure hundred, Tamerlane besieged it; and as he had done at Aleppo, filling the ditch with the bodies of captiues, and slain carkasses, cast wood and earth vpon them, and at last forced it and the Castle. Hee spared the Citie for the Temples sake, which had fortie Porches in the circuite, and (within) nine thousand Lampes, of Gold and Siluer. But the Aegyptians by a wile possessing it, he againe engirt it, and recouered it. Hee commanded Mahomet the Pope or Chalife, and his priests,  which came to meete him, to repayre to the Temple, which they did with thirteene thousand Citizens, where he burnt them all: and for monument of his victory, left three Towers erected of skuls of dead men. The Aegyptians regained and held it till Selim the Turke dispossessed them 1517.
Now in thus many alterations of State, who doubteth of diuersity in Religions in Syria? First, the true Religion in the times of Noah, and the first Patriarkes. Next, those superstitions of Rimmon, and the rest before related, in the Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Macedonian and Roman gouernments: After which long night, the Sunne of Righteousnesse shone vnto the Syrians, and made a more absolute Conquest then all the former, not by Legions and Armies, but by a handfull of Fishermen, (manifesting his Power in their weakenesse) the Reason of  Men, and Malice of Deuils, not being able to withstand their Euangelicall weapons, which s were mighty through GOD to cast downe holdes,2. Cor. 20.5. and bring into captiuity euery thought to the obedience of CHRIST, insomuch, that hence the t Christian World receyued first that name.Act. 11.26. And, how sweet would thy name remaine, O Syrian Antiochia, euen now in thy latest fates, which first was christned with the name Christian, haddest thou not out-liued thy Christianity, or rather, (after the soule departed) remained the carkasse of thy selfe; which ceasing to be Christian, hast long since ceased to bee, had not the Diuine hand reserued a few bones of thy carkasse to testifie this his iustice to the world! And what harmonie could haue beene more gratefull to the Gentiles eares, then thy memorie (Damascus) where the Doctor of the Gentiles was first taught himselfe, and made a Teacher of others? But in thee was the Chayre  of Pestilence, the Throne of Sathan, the sincke of Mahumetan impietie to the rest of the world, infecting with thy contagion, and subduing with thy force more Nations, then euer Paul by preaching conuerted. Syria, first in the first and principall Priuiledges of Mankind, embracing in her rich armes (if some bee right Surueiours) the promised Possession (the Seale of a further and better inheritance) was with the first subdued to Saracene seruitude: vnder their Caliph, vnder the Turkes, vnder the Christians from the West, vnder the Tartars from the East, vnder the Mamalukes from the South, and from the North the Ottoman, by new successions and vicissitudes of miseries and mischiefes, become a common Stage of bloud and slaughter. And in all these later changes of State, and chaunces of Warre. Religion was the life that quickned those deathes, and whetted those murdering swords: no crueltie or sacriledge  against GOD, or man, so irreligious, and inhumane, but Religion was pretended to be the cause, and bare the Standard to destruction; a new Religion alway erected with a new Conqueror.



For the Readers delight wee haue here added out of Hondius, which hee had contracted out of Ortelius) the Map of Pauls Peregrination, for the plantation of the Gospell.
map of the ancient Mediterranean
PEREGRINATIO PAULI In qua and omnia loca quorum fit mentis in actis et epistolis Apostolorum et Apocalypsi describuntur




CHAP. XVII. Of Phoenicia, and of the Theologie, and Religion of the ancient Phoenicians: of their Arts and Inuentions.
PHoenicia is the Sea coastStrabo l. 16. of Syria, after Plinie, or that coast or tract bordering on the Sea from Orthosa (now Tortosa) to Pelusium. This Sea coast  (saith Andreas Masius)Mas. com. in Ios. 5. was of the Greekes called Phoenicia, and of the Hebrewes peculiarly stiled Chanaan, and the Inhabitants Chananites. So the Spies tell Moses, theNum. 13.30. Mat. 13.22 Mat. 7.26. Chanaanites dwell by the Sea. The woman in the Gospell which Matthew calleth a Canaanite, is by Marke named a Syrophoenicean: and the Septuagint in this place, for the Kings of Chanaan read the Kings of Phoenicea. And in the Scripture it is appellatiuely vsed for aEs. 23.8. Os. 12.7. Pro. 31.24. Dionys. Aser. in vers. Merchant, because the Phoenicians or Chanaanites were famous for Merchandize, as appeareth both by diuine and prophane testimonie. Most properly the Northerly part is Chanaan Phoenicia, the Southern Palestina, although it is sometime extended, as wee haue said euen to Egypt. Dionysius (which maketh the Phoenicians the first Mariners, Merchants, and Astronomers) placeth  Gaza and Ioppe in Phoenicia. Sachoniatho aEuseb. de praep. Euang. lib. 1. ca. 6. and 7. An Author commended by Porphyriae. li. 4. cont. Christ. but not thus ancient, saith Scal. In notis ad frag. Phoenician, supposed to haue liued before the Troian warre, wrote in his owne language, the History of his Nation, which Philo Biblius
 translated into Greeke. This Philo in the beginning of his worke sayth, That his Author, Sachoniatho, as he was generally learned,Euseb. de praep. Euang. lib. 1. ca. 6. and 7. An Author commended by Porphyriae. li. 4. cont. Christ. but not thus ancient, saith Scal. Innotis ad frag. so especially he searched out those things which Taantus, called of the Aegyptians Thoyth, of the Greekes Mercurie, the first Inuenter of letters, had written: hee also blamed those, that by Allegories and Tropologies peruert and obscure the Historie of their gods: affirming plainely, That the ancient Phoenicians, Aegyptians, and others adored those men for gods, that had beene the Authors of good things to men, applying to them also the names of those Naturall gods, the Sunne, Moone, etc. so making some gods mortall, some immortall. According to this Taautus therefore, the first beginnings of all things were a darke disordered Chaos, and the spirit of the darke ayre. Hence  proceeded Moth, which we may interprete Mire, from whence issued the seedes and generation of all creatures in the Earth and Heauen; the plants first, and from them the reasonable Creatures called Thophasunin, that is, the beholders of Heauen, formed in the shape of an Eggs. From Moth also came the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. The Sunne by his heate separating these new-formed Creatures, their conflict in the ayre produced Thunder, which noyse awaked, and caused to leape out of their earth, this slimie generation; after of the Winde Colpia and Baau (which signifieth Night) were borne men, namedSeculum and primogenitus. Genus and Generatio. Age and First-borne; Age, taught men to liue of the fruites of trees: of these came Kind and Generation, who being troubled with heate, lifted vp their hands to the Sunne, which they tooke for a god, calling him Beelsamen (which signifieth the Lord of Heauen) whom the Greekes cal Iupiter.  Kind begate Light, Flame, Fire. S This last by rubbing of stickes together found out fire: From these descended in succeeding generations those Giants, that left their names to the hils where they dwelt, Cassius and Libanus, that contended against their brother Vson, who first aduentured the sea in the bodies of trees burned (in which manner the Indians, euen yet, make their canoas or boats) and he erected two Statues to the Wind and the Fire, whom hee adored with the bloud of beasts.
These first men after their death had Statues consecrated to them by posteritie, and yeerly solemnities. To these succeeded others, Hunter and Fisher, which had two Sonnes, one of which was named Chusor a great Magician: From these descended Amynus and Magus, Authors of Sheepe-cotes and flockes, or heards of Cattell. These were the Titans, Inuenters  of Arts, hunting, fishing, building, yron-works, tents and such like. To Misor, one of these was borne Taautus, first Author of Letters. At that time was borne Elius, and Beruth his wife, which dwelt in Biblos, the Parents of Caelus and Terra (his wife and sister) who deified with rites and ceremonies their father Elius being torne of wilde beasts. To these were borne Saturne, Baetilus, Dagon, and Atlas.
But Calus taking other wiues, there arose a great quarrell betwixt him and his former, ayded herein by her sonnes; of whom Saturne the eldest, created Mercurie his Scribe, by whose Magicall Arts, and by those weapons (first by him, and Minerua the daughter of Saturne deuised) Caelus was ouerthrowne: who, after two and thirty yeeres warre betwixt them, was taken by his sonne, and depriued of his genitories.
Saturne had issue (besides his daughters Minerua and Proserpina, Amor, Cupido, Saturne Iupiter, Belus and Apollo, of his Sisters, Astarte, Rhaea, Dione. Then also were borne Typho, Nereus, Pontus, the Father of Neptune. Saturne suspecting his brother Atlas, buried him in the ground, and cast vp an high hill ouer him: where, not long after, was a Temple erected to him. Dagon was inuenter of Tillage; and therefore calledIupiter Aratrius. Iupiter of the Plough. But Saturne becomming a great Conquerour, bestowed Egypt on Taautus or Mercurie, who first made a mysterie of their Theologie, as the Sonne of one Thalon, the Phoenician Priest, first did among the Phoenicians; applying allegoricall interpretations thereof to Nature; and instituting Rites to posterity. This allegoricall Theologie of Taantus was interpreted by Surmobolus and Thurro. It followeth in the History, That it was then a custome in great calamities,  for the Prince to appease the angry Daemon with his best beloued sonne, and thus (in the time of a perillous warre) was LeudHeurnius readeth it Iud, signifying an only sonne. the Sonne of Saturne, by a Nymph, named Anobreth, cloathed in royall apparrell, offered on an Altar erected for that purpose. This was practised long after by the King of Moab,2. King. 2.3. who being besieged by three Kings of Israel, Iuda, and Idumaea, sacrificed his eldest sonne: which yet some interprete of the eldest sonne of the King of Idumaea. Taautus ascribed Diuinitie to the Serpent, as being of a most fierie and spirituall nature, mouing it selfe swiftly, and in many formes, without helpe of feet, and a creature which renueth her age.Trem. and Iun. The Phoenicians and Aegyptians followed him herein, they calling it a happy Spirit of God, these, Eneth; and framed thereto the head of a Hawke  of which in his place wee haue spoken. And thus farre haue wee beene indebted toEuse. de praep. Euang. l. 1. Eusebius.
In the time of those warres betwixt Saturne and Caelus was borne Hercules: to whom was a Temple of great Antiquity at Tyre. To Hercules were also celebrated games at Tyrus
 euery fiue yeeres, to which Iason sent three hundred drams for a sacrifice. m Hiram in Solomons time pulled downe the old Temples of Hercules and Astarte,2. Mac. 4.19. and built new. He first erected a statue to Hercules, and in the temple of Iupiter consecrated a goldenIose. Ant. l. 8. Pillar.
The Sydonians also worshipped Astarte, in a stately and ancient Temple to her builded: whomLuc. Dea. Syr. cum annotat. Gilberti Cognat. Vid. Scal not. in frag. some interprete Luna,Pet. Mart. Comm. in 1. Sa. 7. some Venus, and one of her Priests, toCi. de Natur. deor. lib. 3. So Chytraeus, and before him Eusebius, and Plautus, in Mercator. The fable of Tamut is before recited, ca. 12. and mentioned Ezek. 8.14. Lucian, Europa. She was worshipped of the Punickes (a Phoenician colony) by that name of Iuno. But Philo Bybliensis saith it was Venus, which may bee all one: for Herodotus saith, Vrania (which was also Iuno) was Venus; and Luna also after Lucian. And so it appeareth by her hornie head wherewith Philo saith, shee was painted: the Arabians called her Alilat, the Chaldaeans Militta. The same is called also Beltis, or Baaltis, and Belisama in an old Inscription,  that is, Iuno Olympia, or Queene of Heauen; Shee ware on her head in stead of a Crowne a Bulles-head: whereby what else could be meant but the Moone, Queene of the night? as the Sunne Baalsamen is King of Heauen or Lord of the day. But the manifold names giuen to the same Deities brought in confusion, and a numberlesse Polytheisme: nor can wee well distinguish betwixt Minerua, Iuno, Venus, Luna, and other names of their mystie mysteries. Shee is called also Astroarche, Iuno, Lucina, Ilithyia, which hath her mid-wife-mysteries, borrowed together with the name from the Iewish Lilith, (of which we shall after speake) as the name Alilat also is. The Syrian goddesse before related, and the Persian Mithra) which some deriue of Mader, that is in the Persian also, a mother) is no other but this Astarte Vrania, or as Tertullian cals her Coelestis, or what other name before mentioned you please to  giue her: which I know not how mystically, is also called Cybele, Berecynthia, and (with a confused mixture of Heauen and Earth) THE EARTH. Astaroth a word plurall is exemplified in the European Iunones, mentioned in Inscriptions, and in those altars in Master Camden, and Master Selden, inscribed DEABVS MATRIBVS, diuers of which haue beene found in this Iland, intended by them (as were also the Beli) which made vowes, DIS SYRIS.
Lucian sayth, that he saw also at Biblos the Temple of Venus Biblia: wherein are celebrated the yeerely rites of Adonis, (who they say, was slaine in their Countrie) with beatings and wofull lamentings; after which, they performe Obsequies vnto him, and the next day they affirme him to be aliue, and shaue their heads. And such women as will not bee shauen, must prostitute their bodies for one day vnto strangers, and the mony hence accrewing,  is sacred to Venus. Some affirme that this ridiculous lamentation is made, not for Adonis, but Osiris; in witnesse whereof, a head made of Paper once a yeere in seuen dayes space comming swimming from Egypt to Byblos, and that without any humane direction: Of which Lucian reporteth himselfe an eye-witnesse. This is called the mourning for Thamuz, which Iunius interpreteth Osiris, whence the fourth moneth (commonly their Haruest) is called Tamuz. For Ists which instituted these rites, was their Ceres. Hierom interpreteth it Adonis; but it seemeth the difference is more in the name then the Idoll or rites. Women were the chiefe lamenters, if not the onely, as Ezechiel testifieth, and the pronenesse of that sexe to teares, and to superstitious deuotion also, (which they seeme to acknowledge,  whose praying stile is,Plutarch. Nicias Am. Marce. l. 22 and. li. 19. his wounding in his ripe age, sayth hee, signified the cutting off the ripe corne. Iu. Fir. de errore profan. relig. pro deuoto foemineo sexu) likewise Ethnike Authors are witnesses. Plutarch sayth, the women kept the Adonia, or feast of Adonis, euery where through the Citie, setting forth Images, obseruing exequies and lamentation. Ammianus reported of this festiuall solemnized at Antiochia, at the same time when Iulian entred the Citie, then filled with howlings and lamentings: and elsewhere compareth the women which lamented the death of their young Prince, to the women which obserued the rites of Venus in the feasts of Adonis. Iulius Firmicus affirmeth, that in most Cities of the East Adonis is mourned for, as the husband of Venus, and both the smiter, and the wound is shewed to the standers by. For, Mars changed into the shape of a Bore, wounded him for the loue of Venus. Hee addeth, that on a certaine night, they lay an Image in a bed, and number a set bead-roll of lamentations: which being ended, light is brought in, and then the Priest anointeth the  chappes of the Mourners, whispering these words, Trust in God for wee haue saluation or deliuerance,L. Viues in Aug. de C.D. li. 8. c. 27. from our griefes. And so with ioy they take the Idoll out of the Sepulchre. Was not this mourning, thinke wee, sport to the Deuill? especially when this Adonia was applyed vnto the buriall and resurrection of Christ, the Pageant whereof followeth the Good-Friday, and Lenten fast of the Papists. Yet is this worse then the former, not onely because Corruptio optimi pessima, the best things by abusing are made worst; but also because the treason of Iudas and Peters deniall is proposed in action to the peoples laughter, and inter tot eachinos and ineptias solus Christus est serius and seuerus, saith L. Viues, complayning of this great wickednesse of the Priests (magno scelere atque impietate Sacerd.) but here and elsewhere often,Expungit Index Expurgatorius. when he telleth tales out of Schoole, the good mans tongue is shortned, and their Index  purgeth out that wherewith hee seeketh to purge their leauen. But let vs backe from Rome to Biblos: Hereby runneth the Riuer Adonis also, which once a yeere becommeth red and
 bloudie: which alteration of the colour of the water, is the warning to that their Mourning for Adonis, who at that time they say is wounded in Libanus:Others think this forme of sheepe to be a sheepish conceit of the R.R and ascribe this name rather to the multitude of sacrifices. whereas that rednesse ariseth indeed of the winds, which, at that time blowing violently, doe with their force carry downe alongst the streame a great quantity of that red Earth or Minium of Libanus, whereby it passeth. This constancy of the wind might yet seeme as maruellous as the other, if diuers parts of the world did not yeeld vs instance of the like. In Libanus also was an ancient Temple dedicated to Venus by Cyniras.
Astarte or Astaroth was worshipped in the formes of sheepe, * not of the Sydonians only, but of the Philistims1. Sam. vlt. also, in whose Temple they hanged the armour of Saul. And wise Salomon was brought by doting on women, to a worse dotage of Idolatrie1. Reg. 11.5. with this  Sydonian Idoll among others. And not then first did the Israelities commit that fault, but from their first neighbour-hood with them, presently after the dayes of Ioshua.Iudg. 2.13. This Sidon, the ancient Metropolis of the Phoenicians (now called Saito) in likelihood was built by Sidon, eldest Sonne of Canaan,Gen. 10.15. Ios. 16.28. and fell to the lot of Asher,Chyrtaeus Onomast. whence it is called Great Sidon. It was famous y for the first Glasse-shops, and destroyed by Ochus the Persian. This faire mother yeelded the world a Daughter farre fairer; namely, Tyrus, now called Sur, (whose glory is sufficiently blazed by the Prophets, Esay, and Ezechiel) being situate in an Iland seuen hundred paces from the shore, to which Alexander in his siege vnited it; whom it held out eight moneths (as it had done Nabuchodonosor thirteene yeeres, which long  siege is mentioned in Ezec. 26.7) in nothing more famous, then for helping Salomon vnder Hiram their King,Anno mundi 2933. and d. to build the Temple, a hundred fiftie fiue yeeres before the building of Carthage. This Hiram (Ios. cont. Ap. lib. 1. Iosephus reports it out of Dius a Phoenician Historiographer) inlarged the Citie, and compasse^ within the same the Temple of Iupiter Olympius, and (as he addeth out of Menander Ephesius) therein placed a golden Pillar: he pulled downe the old Temples and built new, and dedicated the Temples of Hercules and Astarte. Ithobalus, Astartes priest, slew Phelles the King, and vsurped the Crowne. He was great Grandfather to Pygmalion the brother of Dido, Founder of Carthage.
The Phoenicians, famous for Marchandise and Marinership, sailed from the red Sea round about Afrike, and returning by Hercules pillars, arriued againe in Aegypt the third yeere  after, reporting (that which HerodotusHer. lib. 4. doubted of, and to vs makes the Storie more credible) that they sailed to the South-ward of the Sunne: They were sent by Pharaoh Neco. Cadmus a Phoenician was the first Author of Letters also to the Greekes. At Tyrus was the fishing for purple: not farre off was Arad, a populous Towne, seated on a rocke in the sea, like Venice.
Alongst the shore is Ptolemais, neere which runneth the Riuer Belaeus, and nigh to it the sepulchre of Memnon, hauing hard by it, the space of an hundred cubites,Ioseph. debel. Iu. lib. 2. c. 9. Pli. 5.19. and 36.26. Sirab. 16. yeelding a glassie sand: and how great a quantitie soeuer is by ships carried thence, is supplied by the Winds, which minister new sands to be by the nature of the place changed into glasse. That would seeme strange, if this were not yet stranger, that this new glasse, if it bee cast vpon  the brinkes of this place, receiueth the former nature of sand againe.
Belus and Hercules Tyrius, and the Sunne, called of them Heliogabalus, were Phoenician Deities. When Alexander the great imployed the greatest of his force and cunning to winne Tyrus, and to plucke it out of the armes of Neptune, a faster friend vnto her then euer Hercules, or Heliogabalus had beene; one of the Tyrians dreamed, that Apollo (so the Greekes call Heliogabalus) meant to forsake the Citie, who was therefore preuented with a golden chaine, wherewith hee was tied to the Image of Hercules (whom superstition honoured as their most assured Patrone) from which golden thraldome Alexander freed him in the conquest of the Citie. Glorious Alexander, shall I admire thy greatnesse, to become a Patron and Freer of the gods? or rather the blindnesse and vanitie of Superstition, which acknowledgeth  such Patrones of freedome, whom friends can binde, or enemies free; so making somewhat more colourable Alexanders ambition of Deity, to whom his Fortunes had made former Deities indebted for libertie.Drus. notae in lib. 1. Hasmon. Drusius is of opinion that diuers of these Phoenician Idols were deriued from names vsed in the Scriptures, so interpreting the words in 1. Mac. 3.48. Taantus of the Phoenicians, and the Aegyptian Thoth from Thohu, and Baau from Bohu, Bel from Baal, as Beelsamen; also Astarte, Asthoreth, from the store of sacrifices offered to her.Euseb: de landib. Constan. orat and de Prep. lib. 4. cap. 7. Eusebius relateth other Phoenician abominations, both bloudie and beastly: the one in yeerely sacrifice of the dearest pledges of Nature to Saturne: the other in that Temple of Venus, built in the most secret retreit of Libanus, where Sodome (burned with fire from aboue, and drowned in dead sea) seemed to reuiue: such was their practice of impure  lusts, intemperately vsing the Naturall sexe, and vnnaturally abusing their owne: worse in this then the Sodomites, that these intended sensualitie; they pretended Religion. Constantine rased these suburbs of Hell, and destroyed both the customes, statues, and temple
 it selfe.Aug. de Ciui. Dei lib. 4. c. 10. Augustine saith, That the Phoenicians prostituted their daughters to Venus, before they married them. Of Melcanthor, Vsor, and other their gods (sometimes men) I forbeare to speake. AlexanderLib. 2. c. 8. ab Alexandro, affirmeth, That the priest of the Sunne in Phoenicia, was attired with a long sleeued garment, hanging downe to the feete, and a golden Crowne.
Wee may adde to these Phoenician superstitions, their mysticall interpretation byMacrob. Saturn. li. 1. c. 21. Macrobius. Hee expoundeth Venus and Adonis, to signifie the Earth and the Sunne. The wild Boare which wounded Adonis, is the Winter, which for the absence of her Louer maketh the Earth to put on her mourning weedes (at whose approach she after putteth on her new apparell, saithS. P. Sid. Arc. libr. 1. our English Arcadian Oracle;) This was shadowed in a certaine Image in  Mount Libanus, pourtrayed in mourning habite. And to this sense he applyeth the Aegyptian rites of Osiris and Isis, and of Orus, which is Apollo or the Sunne, and likewise the Phrygian mysteries of Atinis, and the mother of the gods. Hee saith that they abstained from Swines flesh.
The Philistims and all that Sea-coast, byStrabo lib. 16. Plin. l. 5. c. 12. Strabo and Plinie, and Dionysius (as is said) are reckoned to the Phoenician. Their originall is attributed to Misraim, whose posteritie theGen. 10.14. vid. Iun annot. Deut. 2.23. Casluhim and Caphtorim chased the Avims, which formerly had inhabited Palestina, and by dint of sword purchased their Countrie. They had fiue principall Cities, Ascalon, Accaron, Azotus, Gath, Gaza. Of their sheepish Astarte yee heard euen now, and of their Legend of Dagon. Their Superstitions the Scripture oftenIudg. 16.23. 1. Sam. 5.2 mentioneth. What this Dagon  was (saithComm. Petr. Mart. in Iud. 16. Martyr) is not well knowne. But by the deriuation of his name (which signifieth a fish) it seemeth hee was a Sea-god. For such Sea-deities had the Greekes and Latines, as Neptune, Leucothea, Tryton: aboue his belly hee was of humane shape, beneath like a fish. Such is Idolatrie, diuine it will not bee, it cannot content it selfe with humane, but proueth monstrous; in the vglie and deformed Image, exhibiting the character of the true Author of this falshood. When CiceroCic. de Natur. deor. lib. 3. saith, the Syrians worshipped a fish; it may be construed of this Dagon. Happily (saithPetr. Mart^. com. in 1. Sam. 5. Martyr) they intended Neptune, or I know not what Deuill.Trem. annot. in Iudg. 16.23. Tremellius thinketh Triton. That which in the tenth Chapter is spoken of that Monster Oannes fitly agrees to this Dagon: yea and all the legend of Atargatis and Derceto: for wee need not repeat how little constant they are in the sexes of theirDrus. Quest. beb. lib. 1. qu. 82. gods, which  they made male, female, or Hermaphrodites at pleasure. This may wee see and say, when men are giuen ouer to themselues, when they become beasts, monsters, deuills: yea worse then such, for while they worship such, they professe themselues (as Clients and Votaries) to be worse and baser then their Deities. Drusius deriueth not this Dagon of Dag a fish; but of Dagon, which signifieth Wheat, whereof Eusebius saith, Dagon inuento frumento and aratro vocatus est, (...); and Philo Biblius, Dagon, (...): that is, is called Wheat or Bread-corne. But ScaligerScal. not. in frag. blameth Philo for that interpretation, and agreeth to that fish deitie: for Dagon (saith hee) is one, and Dagan another. He addeth that they worshipped gods in the likenesse of stones, which they called Baetul or Baitul, whence came the fable of the stone giuen to Saturne in stead of his children, to be deuoured. This (as wee haue said)  seemeth borrowed from Iacobs anointing the stone at Bethel. Saturne had many names, Il, Israel, Melcom. The Tyrians worshipped his starre; Amos 5.26. not the planet Saturne, but Luicfer. They had their purifications in the midst of their gardens to Adad, of which is spoken before.
When the Philistims had placed the captiued Arke in Dagons Temple, hee fell on his face before the Arke: But they placing him againe in his roome, with a second fall, his head and hands were cut off vpon the threshold: The stumpe (or as Tremellius and Vatablus read it) Dagon, or that part of him which resembled a fish, remained. And, therefore the Priests of DAGON, and all that come into DAGONS house, tread not on the threshold of DAGON. Thus true Religion, the more opposed, the more it flourished: the prison-house of her captiuitie  is the throne of her Empire: blind superstition, the more it is detected, the more enraged, addeth new deuotion, to encrease (not caring to amend) the former.
Dercet^s or Dagons Image LucianLuc. dea Syr. saith he saw in Phoenicia, not vnlike to that which is reported of the Mermayde, the vpper halfe like a woman, the other like a fish: (therefore of Plinie calledPlin. l. 5. c. 25 Portigiosa;) in reuerence of whom the Phoenicians were said to abstaine from fish. Authors doe also call this Idoll Atergatis: andAthen. l. 8. c. 6 Athenaeus reporteth, That the Countrey-law of the Syrians depriued them of fish: and that Gatis (a Syrian Queene) prohibited the eating of fish Ater Gatis, that is, without Gatis, without her licence, and therefore was called Atergatis, as a fore-staller of the fish to her owne delicate tooth. Mopsus a Lydian, after drowned her in the lake of Ascalon, where this fish-deuourer was of fishes deuoured.  They yet esteemed her a goddesse, and offered vnto her fishes of gold and siluer: and the Priests all day long set before her true Fishes rosted and sodden, which after themselues
 did eate; and it is not to be doubted but the metall-mawes of those Ostriges could also digest the other.
Diodorus SieulusNiceph. l. 1. c. 5 That hard by a lake full of fish,Diod. Sic. li. 3. cap. 2. neere vnto Ascalon was a Temple dedicated to this Fish-woman: her Storie followeth, That shee yeelding to the lust of a young man, had by that copulation Semiramis, whom (now too late repenting of her follie) shee exposed on the rockes, where shee was nourished by Birds: of which Birds (called in their language Semiramis) shee receiued that name. The Shepheards after espying this hospitalitie of the Birds, found the childe, and presented her to Simma the Kings Shepheard, who brought her vp as his owne daughter. The mother (not able to swallow her shame and griefe) cast her selfe into the lake to bee swallowed of the water, but there by a  new Metamorphosis, was turned into a Fish, and hallowed for a goddesse; and (for company) the fishes of that lake, and the Birds of that Rocke were canonized also in this deifying deuotion.
In Ascalon was a Temple of Apollo: and Herod Father of Antipater,Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. 1. Grandfather to Herod the Great, hence called Ascalonita, was seruant to Apollo's Priest. At Accaron was worshipped Ballzebub, that is, the Lord of Flies, either of contempt of his idolatrie, so called; or rather of the multitude of Flies, which attended the multitude of his sacrifices, where from the sacrifices of the Temple at Ierusalem, as some say, were wholly free: or for that hee was their Larder-god (as the Romane Hercules) to driue away flies: or for thatD. Chytr. onomast. forme of a Flie, in which he was worshipped, as Nazianzene against Iulian reporteth. He  was called Swinthius, and as some say, Myiodes, and Myiagrus, howsoeuer one of these names commeth from Mice, and the other from Flies: such mouse-eaten, flie-blowne diuinity did they professe. Nec Muscam quarent deum Accaron, saith Nazianzene, of this Baal or Beelzebub. The ArcadiansPausan. Arca sacrificed and prayed to Myiagrus, and by that meanes were freed from danger by Flies. PliniePlin. l. 29 c. 6. vide Lil. G^ral. Syntag. 1. and Anno Gent. Heruet. in Clem. pag. 45. reporteth, that at the Olympian games, they sacrificed a Bull to My^^des; which done, clouds of Flies departed out of that territorie. And in another placePiln. l. 10.28. he sheweth that the Cyrenians sacrificed to the god Achor (haply the god Accaron here mentioned) when the multitude of Flies caused a pestilence, all which Flies thereupon presently dyed. The IewesDrus. prat. ad Mat. 10. Exsepher Misuoth gadol. Iupiter stercoreus. in detestation of this Idoll tearmed him Beelzebul, that is,  dung-hill, or dung-Iupiter. Yea Scaliger saith,Scal. notae in frag. Beros. the name Beelzebub was in disgrace also, and that the Tyrians and Sydonians did not so call him; Baal or Belus, being a common surname to their gods, which they distinguished with some addition, as Iupiter was named Beelsamen Lord of Heauen: but the Hebrewes (and not the Phoenicians) in contempt called him Beelzebub or fly-Lord. This was Iupiter Olympius. So I^no was intituled (...) or Heauenly. Shee was painted at Carthage sitting on a Lyon with a Thunderbolt in her right hand, in her left a Scepter. But for Beelzebub, he was there Aesculapius or Physicke-god, as appeareth by Ahaziah k who sent to consult with him in his sicknesse. And perhaps for this cause the blaspheming Pharisies,2. Reg. 1.2. rather applyed the name of this then any other Idoll to our blessed Sauiour,Math. 10.25. whom they saw indeed to performe miraculous cures, which superstition had conceiued of Baalzebub: and if any thing were done by that Idoll, it could by no other  cause bee effected but by the Deuill, as tending (like the popish miracles) to the confirmation of Idolatrie.
What the deuill had at Beelzebubs shrine to this end performed, blinded with rage and malice, they imputed to the miracles of Christ, which, in regard of the Efficient, were more excellent then could be Satans impostures, as countermaunding him and all his proiects: for the matter, were meerely supernaturall, in the Forme were acted by his will, signified by his naked word: and for the end (which isDeut. 13.2. the onely touch-stone for vs to trie all miracles) were to seale no other truth then was contained (for substance) in the Law and the Prophets, which hee came not to destroy, but to fulfill. If an Angell from heauen, yea with heauenly miracles, (if it were possible) should preach vnto vs o^herwise, Paul biddeth vs to hold him accursed:  and cursed be that deuill of Hell, that vnder colour of miracles (one of Antichrists ensignes)2. Thes. 2.9. hath taught the Wolrd to worship theLipsij virgo Halensi. etc. Lipsian,Historia Lauretan. Turselini. Mat. 4.10. Lauretan, and I know not what other Ladies: not that Virgin, on Earth holy, in Heauen glorious; but their Idol-conceits, and idol-blockes of her. Our Lord hath taught vs plainly in Matthew, to serue God only, without sophisticall distinctions.
As for the Heathenish and Popish, and all those other packets of miracles, which we receiue by the Iesuits annuall relations from the East and West Indies; I esteeme them with Doctor Hall (a hall of Elegance) That they are either falsly reported, or s^lsely done,D Hall dec. 1. Epist. 6. or falsely miraculous, or falsely ascribed to Heauen. But I know not how (pardon it Reader) I am transported to Hale, Zichem, and Loretto, from our Phoenician ports. The name of Beelzebub hath  beene occasion of this parenthesis. But the power of Beelzebub (I feare) hath induced BellarmineBell. de notis Ecclesiae sic Tho. a Iesu l. 8. alij. to fall downe, and thus to worship him, for his purple aduancement. For amongst the Notes of the Church, he hath reckoned for one, this of miracles, maius ipse miraculum, a
 greater miracle hee, that now will not beleeue without miracles that Gospel, which at first was thereby sufficiently proued. We reade that theMat. 12.38. Iewes seeke for signes, and are therefore called,Mat. 24.24. an euill and adulterous generation; and not onely false Christs and false prophets, and Antichrist himselfe, but the heathens had their Legends of miracles: as the whole course of our Historie will shew. Goe now and reckon a Catalogue of miracles through all Ages, euen to the time of blessed Ignatius and his Societie: and aske of vs miracles for proofe of our doctrine. Our doctrine hath alreadie by the Apostles and Prophets (Pen-men of holy Scriptures) beene prooued that way;August. Tract. in 10.13. and we leaue to you the stile of Mirabiliarij Miracle-mongers, which Augustine for like bragges of things miraculously wrought by them, giueth the Donatists. With vs, Miracles must be prooued by the Truth and the Church, and not  they by miracles. But let vs come backe to Phoenicia.
The Phoenicians are accounted first Authors of Arithmeticke and Astronomie; as also of the Art of Nauigation (Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus, saith Tibullus) and obserued the North-starre to that Sea-skill. The Sydonians are reputed first authors of Weights and Measures.Herod. Terpsi. Herodotus affirmeth, that the Phoenicians, which came with Cadmus into Greece, taught the Graecians both other Sciences, and also LettersPhoenices primi, famae si credimus ausi, Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris. Lucan. Haec gens literas prima, and didicit and docuit. Curt. vnde. and ab Ausonio C^dmi Nigra filia vocantur. which before that time they knew not. These letters after changed their sound and forme, being by the Ionicks principally learned, who called them Phoenician, and called their Skinnes or Parchments biblos (haply of Biblos in Phoenicia.) Hee saw the Cadmean letters engrauen in a Temple at Thebes, much like the Ionike, then the onely Greeke letters, out of certaine old inscriptions,  much resembling the present Latine Letters; and the auncienter Phoenician (I may say with him, the auncientest) vsed by the Canaanites and Hebrewes of old, and by the Samaritanes at this day: For those which the Iewes now vse, he affirmeth to be new, corrupted from the Syrian, and these from the Samaritan. His learned discourse thereof were worthy the reading, but here would be too prolixe.
Aminad. in Euseb Chron. pag. 103. and d. ad 113.Heurnius (I know not by what authoritie) saith, that the Phoenicians before the Israelites departed out of Aegypt, vsed Hieroglyphicall letters, which hee thinketh they learned of Abraham, the same with Seth and Henoch had vsed before. Moses (if yee beleeue it) receiued the first Alphabetary letters in the table of the Decalogue: and from the Hebrews the Phoenicians.Otho Heur. Caldaicus. Out of an old booke he citeth these verses which I thought not vnworthy  the transcribing, concerning the first Authours in inuenters of letter.

Moses inuented the Hebrew letters, the Phoenicians the Artike, Nicostrata the Latin, Abraham the Syrian (he meaneth the Phoenician) and Chaldaean, Isis the Aegyptian, Gulfila the Gotish.Moses u primus Hebraicas exarauit literas:
Mente Phoenices sagaci condiderunt Atticas:
Quas Latini scriptitamus edidit Nicostrata:
Abraham Syras and idem reperit Chaldaicas:
Isis arte non minore protulit Aegyptias:
Gulfila prompsit Getarum quas videmus vltimas.

He addeth also that the ancient learning which the Phoenicians had receiued from the  Hebrewes and Chaldees, passed into Europe by Cadmus who founded Thebes, and into Affrica by Elissa (after her selfe-inflicted death called Dido, i. Virago, a woman of resolution and courage) who fleeing Pigmalion, first seyzed on the Iland Cothone, and nine yeeres after tooke Tharsus, which the posteritie of Gomer had there built, which she called Karthada, that is,Karthage. halfe citie, because the one halfe thereof were Phoenicians: to which agreeth the testimony of Saluianus, that Carthage had in it Schooles of liberall Arts and Philosophie. Hee citeth Aristotles testimonie of Hog a Phoenician Philosopher, whom hee thinketh to bee that King of Bashan which Moses conquered. Dyctis Cretensis (if his testimonie be authenticall) testifieth that the Graecian Gallants which besieged Troy,Dyct. Cret. lib. 1. chose Agamemnon for their Generall,Q. Septim. Rom. writing his name in Punike Letters. And this storie was also written in Punike  letters, as the Interpreter affirmeth.
P. Aemyl. in L. Crasso.But how the posteritie of Letter-inuenters were by letters circumuented, it will not bee an vnwelcome stratageme to our Reader. When the Christian forces in the time of Ludouicus Crassus besieged Tyrus by sea and land, a Doue was seene to come flying, and deemed by expert men which had seene experience of the like, to carry letters to the besieged: wherupon a terrible shout was raised through the armie, which rent the aire with such violence, or else so amazed the seely Doue,They carrie Doues from their houses or Loouers into farre places, and fastning a letter let them fly Drus. in Amos. that downe shee fell; They tooke her letter from her, wherein was contained that the Tyrians should be of good courage, and shortly reliefe should be sent. This tooke away and fastned another of contrarie tenure to this swift carrier, which presently conueyed the same to her home at Tyrus, and with her counterfait  newes caused the Tyrians to yeeld. Dionys. Alexandrinus called Tyrus (...) for the Antiquitie. The Greekes, because they could not pronounce the letter Tsadi, called it Tyrus, for Sur, or Tsur, as it is there called.

Of the Phoenician Kings here might be inserted a large Historie; but I feare tediousnesse. Their Catalogue is thus in ScaligersCan. Isagog. l. 2. ex. M.E. Canons; first Abibalus, two yeeres; Hierom, the sonne of Abibalas 38. yeeres; Leazaros, 7. Abdestarius, 9. the Nurces sonne 12. Astartus Dalaeastri F. 12. Aserymus, 9. Pheles, 8. moneths; Ithobaal, the Priest of Astarte, 32. yeers; Badezorus, 6. Margenus 9. Pygmalion, 47. In his time Dido fled into Libya. A long time after this raigned another Itobalus, 19, yeeres; Baal, 10. and then Iudges ruled: Ecnibalus, 2. moneths; H^lbos, 10. moneths; Abbarus, the high Priest, 11. moneths; Balator, 1. yeere; Mytgonus and Gerestratus, 6. Merbal (sent from Babylon) 4. Hierom his brother, 20. Thus much out of the Phoenician Antiquities: the rest of their Historie is for substance, the same  with the Syrian before handled.
IoppeP. Mela lib. 2 c. 11. Plin. l. 5. cap. 13. (saith Mela and Plinie) was built before the Floud; and Cepheus raigned there, witnesse certaine ancient Altars, there obserued religiously, and bearing titles of him and his brother Phineus. They shew monstrous bones, the Reliques of the Whale, from which Persens freed Andromeda. Mount Casius had in it the Temple of Iupiter Casius, and Pompeys tombe. Albertus Aqu^nsis relating the exploits of the Westerne Christians in that inuasion of Godfri^ of Buillon, saith that in the parts of Tyre and Sidon they were stung with a kind of Serpent called Tarent^, which caused them with intollerable burning, swelling, and thirst to perish. The remedies are strange, the touch of some Chieftaines, in the armie vpon the wound, or this, vt vir percussus coiret cum muliere, cum viro mulier.



CHAP. XVIII. Of Palestina, and the first inhabitants thereof, the Sodomites, Idumeans, Moabites, Ammonites, and Canaanites, with others.
PHoenicia is stretched by some (as you may reade) euen to Aegypt, all alongst  that Sea-coast, and in that respect partly, and partly because they obserued some neerenesse in Religion, I haue adioyned the Philistims to the Phoenicians: howbeit, others doe confine Phoenicia betwixt the Riuer Valania and Mount Carmel. Thus hathBrocard. descript. Terrae sanctae, Maginus Geogr. Brocard written, and after him Maginus; who doe reckon vnto Palaestina, Galilaea, Samaria, Iudaea, and Idumaea, leauing out Phoenicia, bounded as aforesaid, to make a part of Syria by it selfe. Of this Region I purpose to make larger discourse in the next Chapter; here intending to take out of their dust the ancient Nations which inhabited this Land, before the Israelites were Lords thereof. The Sodomites sometimes inhabited a pleasant and fertile valley, watered by Iordan, which Moses comparethGen. 13.10. to the garden of the Lord, and the Land of Aegypt, for pleasure and  plenty. To the Sodomites I reckon also those other Cities partakers of the same both fertilitie and vengeance, Gomorrha, Adma, Zeboim, and little Zoar, saued at the request of Lot. Their Kings and their Warres are mentioned, Gen. 14. Their wickednesse in many places of Scripture; which EzechielEs. 16.49. reduceth to these foure heads, Pide, Gluttonie, Idlenesse, and Crueltie or hard-heartednesse. Their Iudgement both Moses and others, and the place it selfe doe record. Their Religion was an irreligion, and prophane contempt of God and man. Europe (I would I could not say England) can now yeeld the like: sauing that in our subtile, and more warie age, Policie, hauing eaten vp Religion, hath with the bloud thereof dyed her cheekes, and would seeme more shame fac't then those former Sodomites. Thus didEs. 1.10. Esay speake to the Princes of Sodome (in his time) and the people of Gomorrha,  in respect of that their wickednesse, which suruiued them, and hath fructified vnto vs, among whom yet the Lord of Hoasts (as with them) hath reserued a small remnant from this worse plague then Sodoms brimstone, a Reprobate sense. The difference betwixt ours and them is, that they were more open, ours more close, both in like height, but not in like weight of wickednesse, our darkenesse excelling theirs both in the sinne, and in the punishment, in as much as a greater light hath shined, which we with hold in vnrighteousnesse. And if you will haue the maine character of difference betwixt these and those; the one are beastly Men, the other are Deuils in the flesh.
First, from a sparke of Hell Concupiscence, (guided by Sensuall Lust, attended byPro. 1.32. Ease and Prosperitie, and further inflamed and blowne by the Deuill) an vnnaturall fire (which stil beareth the name of Sodomie) was kindled, which gaue coales to a supernaturall flame, rained  by the LORD in Brimstone and fire from the LORD out of Heauen, and burning euen to Hell againe (the Alpha and Omega of wickednesse) where they suffer, (saith Iude)Iude v. 7. the vengeance
 of eternall fire. This2. Pet. 2.6. is written for our learning, on whom the ends of the world are come, their ashes being made an example vnto them that should after liue vngodly. Let not any obiect the Preacher here, and require the Historian, seeing that Historie builds no castles in the ayre, but preacheth both ciuill and diuine knowledge by examples of the passed, vnto the present Ages. And why should not I preach this, which, not my calling alone, but the very place it selfe exacteth? Discite iustitiam moniti, is the quintessence of all Historie.
They being dead, yet speake, and the place of their buriall, is a place to our memorie, being turned into a Sea (but a Dead SeaIordan runneth into the Dead Sea, and there stayeth without issue to the Ocean.) which couereth their sinnes, that it may discouer ours; which, as astonished at their vnnaturalnesse, hath forgotten her owne nature. It drowneth the Earth, which it should haue made (as whilome  it did) fertile: it st^^es it selfe with wonder and indignation, and falling in a dead swowne, sincketh downe with horrour, not wakened, not mooued with the windes blustering; refusing the light of the Sunne, the lappe of the Ocean, the Commerce of strangers, or familiarity of her owne, and (as it happeneth in deepe passions, the colour goeth and commeth, changing three times euery day: it gaspeth foorth from her dying entrailes a stincking and noysome ayre, to the neere dwellers pestiferous, sometimes voyding (as it were excrements) both lighter ashes, and grosse Asphaltum: The neighbour fruits participate of this death, promising to the eye toothsome and wholesome foode, performing only smoake and ashes. And thus hath out GOD shewed himselfe a consuming fire, the LORD of anger, to whom vengeance belongeth; all Creatures mustering themselues in his sight, and saying,Ioseph. de bel. Iud. l. 5. c. 5. Cornel. Tacit. hist. lib. 5. These two describe it at large. Also Strabo, lib. 16. Plin. lib. 5. c. 16. besides the moderne and elder Christians. Ptolemey placeth the middest thereof in 66. 50. and ^1.10. l. 7. c. 16.  at his first call to execution, Loe, we are heere. That which I haue said of these miracles, still liuing in this dead-Sea, is confirmed by testimonie of many h Authors. Brocard telleth of those Trees with ashes growing vnder Engaddi, by this Sea; and a vapour, rising out of the Sea, which blasteth the neighbour-fruits; and theGen. 14.10. slimie pits on the brinkes of the Sea, which hee saw. Neither strangers nor her owne haue accesse there, where Fishes (the naturall inhabitants of the Waters) and Water-fowles (the most vsuall ghests) haue no entertainment; and men, or other heauie bodies cannot sinke. Vespasian prooued this experiment, by casting in some bound, vnskilfull of swimming, whom the waters (surfetted with swallowing her owne) spewed vp againe. This is mentioned by AristotleArist. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 3. also, who saith that the saltnesse there of is the cause why neyther man nor beast (though bound) can sinke  in it, nor any fish liue therein; which yet in the salt-sea wee see no otherwise. The Philosopher could see no further then reason, nor all that neither: but Moses guideth vs beyond Philosophie to diuine vengeance, which thus subuerted Nature, when men became vnnaturall. The Lake, Iosephus saith, is fiue hundred and fourescore furlongs in length, (Plinie hath an hundred myles) the breadth, betweene sixe and fiue and twentie myles. Strabo telleth of thirteene Cities still, whereof Sodome was chiefe, of threescore furlongs compasse; wherof some were consumed by fire, or swallowed by Earth-quakes and sulphurous Waters, the rest forsaken: some Remainders (as bones of those carkasses) then in his time continuing.L. ver. l. 1. c. 9. Vertomannus saith, That there are the ruines of three Cities on the tops of three Hils:  and that the Earth is without water, and barren, and (a greater miracle) hath a kinde of bloody mixture, somewhat like red waxe, the depth of three or foure cubites. The ruines of the Cities are there seene still. Georgius Cedrenu^ in his Greeke History written aboue fiue hundred and fiftie yeeres since, writeth, that hee had seene this dead-Sea, and reckoneth thereof these maruells: That it produceth no quicke Creature; that dead carkasses sinke therein; a liuing man can scarcely diue vnder water; lamps burning swimme, but being put out, they sinke; there are fountaines of Bitumen; allume also and salt, but bitter and shining. Where any fruit is found, nothing is found but smoake. The water thereof is holesome to such as vse it, but differing from other waters in contrarie accidents. Not long after his time Fulcherius Carnotensis (in the beginning of the Westerne kingdome in these parts) testifieth the vntolerable saltnesse of this sea from his owne taste: And that neere  the same is a hill, which in diuers places thereof is likewise salt, shining therewith like ice, and hard as stone: and ghesseth that the saltnesse of this sea proceedeth partly from that cause, partly from the intercourse which vnder the earth it holdeth with the greater sea. Compassing this lake on the South side, we came to a Village which they say is Segor, abounding with Dates, where the Inhabitants were blacke. And there (saith he) did I see apples on the trees, which when I opened, I found blacke and dustie within. * The like is read Sap. 10.7. Of whose wickednesse euen to this day, the waste Land that smoketh is a testimony, and plants bearing fruits that neuer came to ripenesse, and a standing pillar of Salt, is a monument of an vnbeleeuing soule. They left behind them to the World, a memoriall of their foolishnesse, etc.  And Moses, Deut. 32.32. their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the vine of Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, etc. Which allegorie must haue his foundation in the naturall disposition of those places and fruits. Later Trauellers (as William Lithgow,
 and I haue heard the like of Master Eldred) which haue seene these parts, say; there are now no such fruits: which may come to passe by that alteration which so long space may cause, or else, because they visited not those parts which Fulcherius mentions. Lithgow addes, that the water of this dead Sea (contrarie to the former report) beares nothing on the top, no not the weight of a feather. The water is blackish, and at sometimos presents terrible shapes; perhaps of bituminous matter congealed. There growes neither bush nor tree neere to Sodome by many miles: and in his Iourney thither they passed such sands, that their Mulets could not beare them, and lighting they waded therein sometimes to the middle, and sometimes ouer head and eares, the Arabs also at the same time molesting them  with arrowes shot from places of more secure footing.
Idumaea lieth Southward from Iudaea: it had name of Edom, the sir-name of Esau, sonne of Isaak. The historie of this people, and the Horites, whom the children of Esau expelled, succeeding in their inheritance, is related byGen. 36. Deut. 2.22. Moses. It was subdued by Dauid, according to the prophecie, The elder shall serue the younger. They rebelled vnder Ioram, the sonne of Iehosaphat; as Isaak had also prophesied. From that time they continued bitter enemies to the people of GOD,Ios. Antiq 13. till Hircanus, the sonne of Simon compelled them to accept both the Iewish Dominion and Religion: after which they were reckoned amongst the Iewes. Of the Idumaeans, were the Amalekites,1. Sam. 15. destroyed by Saul. They were South from Iuda.Io^. 2.11. Eliphaz the Themanite, it seemeth, was of Esau his generation, and of the  right Religion. The Idumaeans, Moabites, and Ammonites, are by some placed in Arabia, of which I will not contend: I here mention them, as both borderers and subiects to the Israelites; of which wee reade much in the Scripture; little else-where that maketh to our purpose. South from Amalek was Kedar, a Countrey abounding with flockes of Sheepe and Goates. But I may not now dwell in the Tents of Kedar, till I come to the Ismaelites.
OnMoabites and Madianites. the East-side of the Lake of Sodome, is that Region which the Moabites (so often in Scripture mentioned) sometimes inhabited: and before them the Emims, which were Giants, tall as the Anakims, Deut. 2.10. The Moabites were the posteritie of Lot, by incest with his daughter.Arias Montanus. Moab had on the East the Mountaines of Horeb; on the  West the salt Sea, and part of Iordan; Arnon on the South, and the North border stretched from Iabbok to the Mountaines of Pisga. That part of their Countrey, betweene Iabbok and Arnon, Sihon King of the Amorites had taken from them, and lost againe to the Israelites. Balac their King fearing to lose the rest, sent for Balaam the Wizard to curse the Israelites; who yet, by Diuine power, was forced to blesse them. Yet the lustre of Balacs promises so dazeled his eyes, thatApoc. 2.14. hee taught Balac to put a stumbling blocke before the Israelites, and by sending amongst them their women to draw them to carnall and spirituall whoredome; so to prouoke the wrath of GODS iealousie against them. But the zeale of Phineas stayed it; and Balaam, in his returne homeward to his Countrey of Mesopotamia, was slaine by the Israelites among the Madianites, partakers with the Moabites in Balaams  idolatrous proiect. These Madianites descended of Abraham,Abrahams children by Keturah were authors of the Nations called Filij Orien^is, the children of the East, which inhabited the parts of Arabia betweene the Moabites, Ammonites, and the Persians, and Chaldaeans, from Mesopotamia to the Persian gulfe. Ar. Mont. Canaan. by Keturah, and dwelt in a part of Arabia, neere to the Moabites, on the East. Some of them dwelt neere to Mount Sinai, Exod. 2.15. and in the Desart, on the East side of the Red Sea. Their mightie Armie was miraculously destroyed byIudg. 7.20. the Sword of the LORD, and Gedeon. The Moabites were subiected to Israel by Dauid, and so continued to the Kings of Samaria, till, that State being rent, they freed themselues. It seemeth they worshipped the Sunne: as the names Kirchereseth, Beth-Baalmeon, and Balacs high places doe shew, and wee haue obserued before in the worship of Bel and Baal. Chemosh was another Idoll of theirs, to which Salomon built an high place. Pehor also, and Baal-pehor, and the rest, whose Rites are now rotten, and the memorie worne out. This his name, it seemes, was borrowed of the hill  Peor, mentioned by Moses, Where it is likely he had his Altars and Temple.Orig. in Num. hom. 20. Origen saith, the name Baal-peor signifieth filthinesse, but what filthinesse hee knew not: Salomon Iarchi writeth, that they offered to him ordure, placing before his mouth the likenesse of that place which Nature hath made for egestion. Saint IeromeHier. in Ose. 4. Isid. Etym. l. 8. Deut. 34. Psal. 106. thought him to bee the same with Priapus, and worshipped of the women ob Obscoeni magnitudinem. And so Isidore. Moses mentions Beth-peor, whereby it appeares hee had a Temple. Dauid ascribeth to his worship the eating of the sacrifices of the dead: such it is like as the Heathen offered in memorie of the dead. But someSeld. de D. Syr. ascribe these conceits of dung-offerings to Iewish malice: and agree not to that Priapeian coniecture.
In their Rebellion against Iehoram King of Israel, hee and Iehoshaphat King of Iuda, with  the King or Vice-roy of Idumaea, went to recouer them by force. The Moabite, in despaire, offered a bloudie Sacrifice of his eldest sonne and heire; or, as Tremellius readeth it, The2. Reg. 3.27. King of Edoms sonne: which caused the Israelites to returne. The Ammonites and
 Moabites might not enter into the Congregation of GOD, vnto the tenth Generation, becauseDeut. 23.3. they met not the Israelites with the bread and water in their way, when they came out of Aegypt, and for hiring Balaam against them. Arias Montanus saith, That the Moabites were circumcised in imitation of the Israelites, but worshipped not their God, but their owne Idols.
TheThe Ammonites succeeded the Giants called Zamzummims. Deut. 2.20. Ammonites (their brethren in the euill both of Lot their father, and their owne) inhabited Northward from Moab; on the East were the hills Acrabim; on the West the Amorite; the hills Luith, Basan, etc. made it a valley. Their chiefe Citie was Rabbath, after called Philadelphia. These Ammonites had beene troublesome to the Israelites, in the times ofIud. 11.5. Iephte and of1. Sam. 11. Saul. And after, Dauid in iust reuenge, for violating the Law of  Nations, destroyed them. Moloch, or Melchon, was their Idoll, which is supposedP. Mart. in 2. Reg 2. Vatab. in Leu. 18. to be Saturne, whose bloudie butcherly sacrifices are before spoken of. The word signifieth a King: as Mithra signifies a Lord: and it is like, that these Easterne Nations intended, (as the Phoenicians also in their Adad) that One and Great GOD, Rex deorum: although as to the King of visible creatures, these mysteries were applied to the Sunne likewise. Certaine it is that these Moloch-sacrifices passed hence into Afrike, as there shall bee obserued. It was a hollow Image (saithLyra in Leu. 18. Lyra) of Copper, in forme of a man. In the hollow conc^uitie was made a fire, with which the Idoll being heated, they put a child into his armes, and the Priests made such a noise with their Timbrels, that the cries of the child might not moue the parents to compassion, but they should rather thinke the childs soule receiued of  the god into rest and peace: othersAret. in Act. c. 7. ex P. Fag. refert. l. White. adde, That this Moloch had seuen Roomes, Chambers, or Ambries therein; one for Meale; a second for Turtles; a third for Sheepe; the fourth receiued a Ramme; the fift a Calfe; the sixt an Oxe: if a man would offer sonne or daughter, the seuenth was readie for that crueltie. Some interprete Moloch and Remphan, Act. 7. to bee the Sunne and Moone. The TalmudistsLib. Sanhedrin. vid. P. Ric. praec. prohib. 40. and Rombam Moreh. Neb. l. 3. c. 38. would perswade men that they did not burne their children in this Moloch-sacrifice, but onely the father tooke his children and moued them to and fro thorow the fire, none otherwise then at this time on Saint Iohn Baptists day, when the Sunne passeth thorow Cancer, children vse to leape thorow bone-fires. But both Scripture and Heathen Authors write otherwise. Moloch is alsoIer. 19.5. called Baal.  
There was a valley neere Hierusalem (sometime possessed by the sonne ofP. Mart. in 2. Reg. 2. Chytr. Onomast. Hinnom) where the Hebrewes built a notorious high place to Moloch: it was on the East and South part of the Citie. It was also called Topheth, or Tymbrell, of that Tymbrell-rite, which those Corribantes and bloudie Priests did vse; or else for the spaciousnesse of it.Ier. 7.31, 32. Ieremie prophecieth, That it should be called the Valley of slaughter, because of the iudgements for the idolatrous high places in it. Vpon the pollution hereof, by slaughter and burials, it grew so execrable, that Hell inherited the same name, called Gehenna, of this place: first, of the lownesse, being a Valley: secondly, for the Fire, which heere the children, there the wicked, sustaine: thirdly, because all the filth was cast out of the Citie hither, it seemed they held some resemblance. The Ammonites also were (as Montanus affirmeth)Vt Aegyptij, Arabes, etc. circumcised.  
Canaan was the sonne of Cham, Father of many Nations, asGen. 10.15. Moses declareth, Sidon and Heth, Iebusi, Emori, Girgashai, Hivi, Arki, Sini, Aruadi, Zemari, Hamathi; the most of which were expelled their Countrey, slaine or made tributarie by the Israelites. Their border was from Sidon to Gaza West, and on the East side from Sodome to Lasha or Callyrrhoe.Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 3. cap. 7. Arrias Montanus is of opinion, that according to the number of the twelue Tribes of Israel, so were the people of Canaan: and therefore to those eleuen before rehearsed, he addeth their Father Canaan, who left his name to them all; and where he liued, retained a part to himselfe, betweene the Philistims and Amorites. Of those his sonnes, Sidon, the eldest, inhabited the Sea-coast: and Eastward from him Heth, vnto the hill Gilboa: of  him came the Hittites. Iebus went further, on the right-hand: Emor inhabited the midland Countrey Westward from the Iebusites. The Girgashite dwelt aboue the Hittite, next to Iordan, and the lake Chinereth (so called, because it resembleth the forme of a Harpe) after called Gennezareth. The Heuite or Hiuite inhabited betweene the Amorite and the Philistim. The Arkite possessed the rootes of Libanus. The Sinite dwelt beyond the Hittite, Eastward, neerer to Iordan. Aruadi enioyed the Countrey next to the Wildernesse of Cades. Zemari obtained the Hills, called of him Semaraim. The Hamathite possessed the Countrey nigh to the Fountaines of Iordan. As For the most notable Mountaines and Cities, which each of these Families enioyed, they which will, may reade further in the same Author.  
Of these and their ancient Religions and Policies wee find little or nothing but in the Scripture, where the Lord testifieth, that for their sinnes, the Land spued them out. Some of
 them (as some thinke) fled into Africa: where AugustineExposit ep. ad Rom. inch^at. saith, that the Countrey people, inhabiting neere Hippon, called themselues in their Punike Language Chanani.
Procopius, in the fourth booke of the Vandale warre, affirmeth, That all the Sea-coast, in those times, from Sidon to Aegypt, was called Phoenicia: and that when Ioshua inuaded them they left their Countrey, and fled into Aegypt, there multiplied, and pierced further into Africa; where they possessed all that Tract, vnto the Pillars of Hercules, speaking halfe Phoenician. They build the Citie Tinge or Tanger in Numidia, where were two Pillars of white stone, placed neere to a great Fountaine, in which, in the Phoenician tongue, was ingrauen: Wee are Canaanites, whom IOSHVA the Thiefe chased away. Which if it  were so, the name of Hercules might therefore bee ascribed to those Pillars, as accounted the chiefe Phoenician Idoll.
PhiloPseudo Phi^^s de Ant. Bib. (or the Author of those fabulous Antiquities) sayth, That the Israelites found among the Amorites, seuen golden Images, called Nymphes, which, as Oracles, directed them in their affaires, and wrought wonders: the worke of Canaan, Phut, Selah, Nebroth, Elath, Desvat, of admirable workmanship, yeelding light in the night, by vertue of certaine stones, which could not by mettall be broken, or pierced, or be consumed by fire, but must needs haue an Angell to burie them in the depth of the Sea, and there let them lie.
This people was not vtterly at once destroyed, but sometime, as in the dayes ofIudg. 4.2. Iabin and Sisera, conquered their Conquerors, and retayned some power and name of a People,  till the times of Dauid, who destroyed the Iebusites, and dwelt in the Fort of Sion, calling it after his owne name,2. Sam. 5.7. The Citie of Dauid. And in the dayes of Salomon, Pharao, King of Aegypt, tooke and burnt Gezer, and slue the Cauaanites that dwelt in the Citie, and gaue it for a present to his daughter, Salomons wife. And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hiuites, and Iebusites, whom the children of Israel were not able to destroy, those did Salomon make tributaries vnto this day, 1. King. 9.16, 20, 21. The posteritie of these seruants of Salomon are mentionedNehem. 7.60. among the Israelites, which returned from the Babylonian Captiuitie, and accrued  into one People with them.





OF THE HEBREW NATION, AND RELIGION, FROM  THE BEGINNING THEREOF TO OVR TIMES. THE SECOND BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The Preface of this Booke: and a Description of the Region of Palaestina, since called Iudaea, and now, Terra Sancta.
IN the former Booke we haue traced the foot-steps of Religion, following Her in Her wanderings from the Truth, and Her selfe through diuers Nations, till we came into this Land, sometime flowing with Milke and Hony; whose first inhabitants we last tooke view of. The Hebrewes were, by the Soueraign Lord of all, made heires of their labours, and possessed both their place and wealth: Houses and Cities  which they builded not, Vineyards which they planted not; and which is more, these were a type vnto them of the true and heauenly Countrey, which not by their merits, but by the meere mercy of the Promiser, they should enioy. These did GOD choose of all the Kindreds of the Earth, to make vnto himselfeExod. 19.5, 6. a Kingdome of Priests, a holy Nation, and his chiefe treasure aboue all people, though all the Earth be his: He made them the KeepersRom. 3.2. of his Oracles, bestowing on themRom. 9.4, 5. the Adoption, and the Glorie, and the Couenants, and the giuing of the Law, and the Seruice of God, and the Promises: of whom were the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God ouer all, blessed for euer, Amen. These things were not onely communicated, but appropriated  to them:Psal. 147.20. He shewed his Word vnto IACOB, his Statutes and his Iudgements vnto ISRAER: He dealt not so with any Nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Lawes: hee was their prerogatiue, and they his peculiar:Psal. 76.1, 3. In Iewrie was GOD knowne, his Name was great in Israel: In Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. And Christ himselfe ratified it, acknowledging himselfeMat. 15.24. sent to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel,Rom. 15.8. a Minister of the Circumcision, and said to the Cananite woman which besought him for her daughter, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to Dogs. Such, in spirituall reputation before GOD were all people, excluded (as vncleane Dogs) out of his heauenly Ierusalem, till thisEphes. 2.14, etc. partition wall was taken downe, and they which had beene farre off, were made neere by the bloud of Christ, who abrogated through his flesh that hatred, and made of twaine (Iewes and Gentiles) one new man in  himselfe. So that the Gentiles (the name of all the World, excepting this people) which had beene without Christ, and aliants from the Common-wealth of Israel, strangers from the Couenants of promise, had no hope, and were without GOD in the world; were now no more strangers and forreiners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of GOD; built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone. Let it not bee tedious to heare of this, which the Angels reioyced to learne,Ephes. 3.9, 10. a Mysterie which from the beginning of the world had beene hid in GOD: and vnto Principalities and Powers in heauenly places, was made knowne by the Church. But the Word (whereby we haue fellowship in this mysterie) came out of Sion, and the preaching began at Ierusalem. This (and not Rome) by the confession of Espensaeus, a learned PapistC. Espens. in 1. Tim. 4., was Emporium fidei Christiana, and Ecclesiae Mater: The Mart of  Christian faith, and Mother of the Church.Acts 13.46. Yea, it was necessarie that the Word of GOD should first be spoken vnto them, which they by incredulitie put from themselues, and gaue place to the Gentiles.Rom. 11.22. The fall of them became the riches of the World, and the diminishing of them the riches of the
 Gentiles, as a Glasse, wherein we may behold the bountifulnesse and seueritie of GOD, and in both the deepnesse of the riches of the wisedome and knowledge of GOD, whose Iudgements are vnsearchable, and his wayes past finding out. I may fitly compare them to Gideons Fleece,Iudg. 6. which receiued the dew, when all the Earth besides was drie, and after, it was drie vpon the Fleece onely, when the dew couered all the ground. Sometimes they alone receiued all those Dewes, Showers, Riuers, Seas of sauing Bountie, and all the world besides was a parched wildernesse. Now,Psal. 107.34, 35. he turneth the fruitfull Land into barrennesse, for the wickednesse of the Inhabitants; but that Wildernesse he turneth into Pooles of water, and the drie Land into water-springs. Hee hathRom. 9.24. called them his people which were not his people, and her beloued which was not beloued; and where it was said, Yee are not my people, there they are now called the children of the liuing GOD. Thus hath heeRom. 11.32.  shut vp all vnder vnbeliefe, that he might haue mercy vpon all, that his free election might appeare (not of works, lest any should boast themselues, but) of grace. Behold therefore, all Atheists, and wonder! The Iewes branded with iudgement, wander ouer the World, the contempt of Nations, the skum of People, the hissing, derision, and indignation of men, for refusing Him whom they expect, denying Him whom they challenge, hating Him whose Name is in life and death vnto them, the sweetest tune, and most melodious harmonie; still wayting for, and glorying in that Messias, whom (vnknowne) they crucified and slue: and still pursue with the deadliest hatred in all his followers: GOD they please not, and are contrarie to all men. Yet such is GODS manifold wisedome in his deepest Iudgements, that his enemies shall fight for him, euen against themselues: the MidianitesIudg. 8. shall sheathe their swords, which they  haue drawne out against GOD, in their owne bowels, and Christian Truth shall preuaile, and let ourDeut. 32.31. enemies themselues be iudges. Out of their premisses, which they maintayne, as earnestly as thou (O Atheist) securely deridest, which they will seale with that which thou makest thy heauen, thy GOD; we will and doe conclude, against thee and them, that, in which, with which, for which we will liue and die. Let the old Testament yeeld the Proposition in prophesie, and the new Testament assume in Historie, and euen be thou the Iudge, if that Reason, which thou hast as a man, and peruertest as a Deuill, will not by force of their scriptures, which they preferre before their liues, necessarily in the conclusion, demonstrate the Christian Truth. Neither (I appeale vnto our common Reason) canst thou more wonder at vs for beleeuing, things in thy seeming incredible, absurd, and impossible, then at them  (vpon such grounds which with vs they hold) notThe Iew is a witnes against the Atheist, that we faine not those prophesies of Christ, seeing the Iew holds the prophesies dearer then his bloud, and yet hateth Christianitie more deadly then the Atheist. Peior persecutor in Christian^s quam Ethnicus, ait Hieron. in Abd. 1. beleeuing.
For what beleeue we, but, for the maine and chiefe points of our Faith, are as plainly in their Euangelicall Prophets, as in our Propheticall Euangelists? All the Historie of Christ, in a more diuine way, seemeth rather told then foretold, a Historie, not a Prophesie; as is easie by conference of both to shew, and thou, if thou beest not idle, or wilfully malicious, mayest finde. That then which thou seest come vpon them, a spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and eares that they should not heare; which yet haue the light of the first Scriptures (had they not a veile ouer their hearts) the same see in thy selfe, that when greater light doth offer it selfe, willingly shuttest thine eyes, as though there could be no light, because thou liuest in, and louest thy darknesse. It is the same hand that giueth vp both thee and  them,2. Thess. 2. because yee will not beleeue the Truth to be saued, to strong delusions, that yee might beleeue lyes, and be damned. To me, and all Christians, let the Iewes bee both reall and verball teachers of the Truth, which they let fall, and we take vp; the one, in their Oracles of sacred Writ; the other, in their exemplarie iudgement. And to them, Let (O thou Lord of all, heare and grant it) let all Christians be that which Moses prophesied,Deut. 32.21. a prouocation to emulation, not of enuie and hatred, which hitherto hath beene in these, amongst all the Christian enemies, the most implacable and despitefull, but of imitation, that asRom. 11. their casting away hath beene the reconciling of the World, their receiuing may be life from the dead, which Paul seemeth plainly to fore-signifie.

THus much being premised as a preparation to our Iewish Historie, which, as of more importance then any other, deserueth more ample view; let vs in the next place suruey that Countrey which their Progenitors had, with those priuiledges, and their Posteritie (together with those priuiledges) haue lost.
This Countrey was firstThe name of the countrey. called the Land of Canaan, after that the Posteritie of Canaan, the sonne of Cham, had possessed it.Moses subdued the Kingdomes of the Amorites on the one side, Ioshua the rest on the other side of Iordan. Moses and Ioshua conquered it to the Posteritie of Iacob, of whom it was called the Land of Israel: after the diuision of the ten Tribes, from the house of Dauid, by Ieroboam, in the time of Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon, the name of Israel was more particularly appropriated to those ten rebellious Tribes, and the other two were knowne by the name of the Kingdome of Iuda. Yet Israel remayned in a generall  sense, the name of them all, especially in the new Testament. Paul of the Tribe of Beniamin,Rom. 11.1. and 2. calleth himselfe an Israelite: and all Israel, saith he in that Chapter, shall be saued.
 After the BabylonianIos. Antiq. 11.5. Iustin. Mart. Apol. 2. saith, they were called Iewes of Iudas the sonne of Iacob; but Elias in Thishi rad. Iehudi, deriueth this name rom the Kingdome of Iuda, when the ten Tribes rebelled, saying, that the two Tribes were then called Iewes, and their language Iewish, which is also the opinion of Saint Hierome, Com. in Ionam, c. 1. captiuitie they were called Iewes, of the chiefe and royall Tribe, and their Countrey Iudaea: It was also called Palaestina of the Philistims, which inhabited the Sea-coast. And after, in the times of the Christians, it was generally called the Holy Land, Phoenicia also being vnder that name comprehended. It is situated betweene the Mediterranean Sea, and the Arabian Mountaynes; PtolemeyPtol l. 7. c. 16. calleth it Palaestina Syriae, and Iudaea, abutting it on the North with Syria, on the East and South with Arabia Petraea, on the West with part of Egypt, and the Sea. Adrichomius, who hath bestowed a large Volume on this subiect, which he calleth the Theater of the holy Land, on the East confineth it with Syria and Arabia; on the South, the Desart Pharan and Egypt; on the North, Mount Libanus; on  the West, the Sea. Maginus, placeth a part of Phoenicia on the North; on the North-east, Libanus; on the South, and part of the East, Arabia; on the West, part of the Mediterranean Sea. It is extended from the South to the North, from the one and thirtieth degree, to the three and thirtieth, and somewhat more. Others set it downe in other words; but these and they agree for the most part in substance. It is commonly holdenHieron. Epist. c. 19. vix 160. mill. in longum spacio tenditur Pudet dicere latitud. etc. to bee an hundred and sixtie Italian miles in length, from Dan to Bersebee, and sixtie in bredth. An exact diuision thereof into twelue shires or shares, Ioshua setteth downe at large, with their Bounds and Cities, from the thirteenth Chapter of that Booke, to the one and twentieth, as they were by lot and diuine dispensation allotted to the twelue Tribes, the posteritie of Iacobs twelue sonnes; onely Ephraim and Manasses, the sonnes of Ioseph, constituted two  Tribes, and therefore had the double portion, descending of Iacobs eldest sonne, by Rachel his first intended wife: and Leui had no portion, but was scattered in Israel, to keepe Israel from scattering, and to vnite them in one Religion to one GOD, who disposed that curse into a blessing. Reuben, Gad, and halfe the Tribe of Manasses, had their portion on the East side of Iordan: the other halfe of Manasses, with Simeon, Iuda, Beniamin, Ephraim, Naphthali, Aser, Dan, Izachar, Zabulon, had their portions assigned betwixt Iordan and the westerne Sea. They which would be fully acquainted with their seuerall diuisions, may finde in Ioshua himselfe to satisfie them, and in the Commentaries which Andraeas Masius, and others, haue written on that Scripture. Laicstaine, More, Stella, Adrichomius, and Arias Montanus, haue in Maps presented them to the eye.  


HONDIVS his Map of Terra Sancta.
map of the Holy Land
TABULA CANANAEAE protit tempore Christi et Apostolorum divisa fuit



Neither in the whole World beside, is there (I thinke) found any Region, hauing more Cities in so small a space, then this sometime had, except we beleeue that which is told of the thousands ofSee l. 6. c. 2. Egypt. Some reckonAdrichom. Praefat. in each Tribe, these as royall Cities: in Aser, Achsaph, besides Sidon and Tyrus: in Beniamin, Bethel, Gabaa, Ierusalem, Iericho: in Dan, La^his, besides Acaron and Gath: in Ephraim, Gazer, Samaria, Saron, Taphua: in Gad, Rabba: in Isachar, Aphece: in Iuda, Arad, Bezec, Eglon, Hebron, Lebna, Maceda, Odolla, Taphua: in Manasse, 1. Dor, Galgal, Iezrael, Mageddo, Tanac, Thersa: in Manasse, 2. Astaroth, Edrai, Gessur, Machati, Soba, Theman and Damascus: in Nepthalim, Asor, Cedes, Emath: in Reuben, Heshbon, Madian, Petra: in Simeon, Dabir, Gerara: in Zabulon, Ieconan, Semeron. The like Catalogue hee maketh of Episcopall Cities in this Land, while it  was Christian. My purpose is not to write of all, but especially of such as are in some respect eminent.
And first let me dip my Pen in Iordan. This, saith Plinie,Plin. l. 5 c. 15. is a pleasant Riuer, and as far as the situation of places will permit, ambitious; prodigally imparting it selfe to the Inhabitants, and (as it were vnwilling) passeth to that cursed Lake Asphaltites, of which at last it is drunke vp, losing his laudable waters, mixed with those pestilent. As soone therefore as the Valleyes giue opportunitie, it spreadeth it selfe into a Lake, called Genesara, sixteene miles long, and sixe broad, enuironed with pleasant Townes; Iulias and Hippo on the East; on the South, Tarichea; and Tiberias on the West, made wholesome with his hot waters. The Fountaynes of this Riuer are two, calledEx fontis n^mine atque declini descensu Jordan d^ctus. Ar. Mont. Ior and Dan, which compounding their  Streames, doe also compound their Names, as Tame and Isis with vs bring forth (happy Parents) our Tames or Thamisis.Ac si dicas (ait Mas. in Ios. 1) descendens e Dan. sic etiam Talmud. Here was the Citie Dan, so called of the Danites, before Laish, Iud. 18.29. and Leshem, Ios. 19.47. But before this time, both the Riuer had the same name, Iordan, and the place it selfe at the foote of Libanus, whence the Fountayne springeth, was called Dan, Gen. 14.14. when Moses wrote; except wee beleeue Masius, that the Pentateuch and other Scriptures, were by Ezra after the captiuitie, digested into that forme with those names, which we now haue. Here was after built Caesarea Paneadis, called afterward of Philip the Tetrach, Caesarea Philippi; and after that by Agrippa, Neronia. This ioyning of Ior and Dan, is the beginning of the apparant streame: but the trueIos. Bel. Iud. l. 3. 18. Brocard. and first conception of it is in Phiale, one hundred and twentie furlongs from Caesarea, a  Fountayne of vnsearchable depth, which yet (like some miserable Churle) alwayes contayneth the waters in it selfe, till sinking, and as it were buried in the earth, those treasures being by Natures stealth conueyed vnder ground vnto Dan, or Paneas, who is liberall of that Vsurers wealth (for into that Phiale, powre as much as you will, it neuer increaseth or decreaseth) and thence it becommeth a Riuer. Philip the Tetrach of Trachonitis, by casting chaffe therein, which was paid, him againe at Dan, first found out this vnder-earth passage. The Saracens call that Phiale, in this respectOr, Maiedan Mas. in Ios. 1. Medan, that is, the waters of Dan. Before it maketh the Lake of Genezareth, it maketh another called Samachonitis. This is especially filled, when the snowes on Libanus are melted, which causethWelssenburg. and Trem. 1. Chro. 12.15. Iordan then to swell, and ouer-flow his bankes, in the first moneth, yeerly (and made the miracle in Ioshua'sIosh. 3. passage  thorow it the more miraculous) but in Summer, it is almost dried vp: and by reason of that matter which therein groweth, is a harbor for wild beasts. It is called the waters of Meron, halfe way betweene Caesarea Philippi, where the marriage betweene Ior and Dan is solemnized, and the Lake of Genezareth. Elias, and after his assumption, his cloke diuided these streames; Naamans leprosie was here clensed; and a greater Leprosie then Naamans is daily clensed in the Church by the lauer of Regeneration, first sanctified to that vse in this streame, where the holy TrinitieMatth. 3. did first yeeld it selfe in sensible apparition to the world, thereby to consecrate that Baptisme, whereby wee are consecrated to this blessed Trinitie, the Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost. In which respectVitrias. l. 1. c. 53. Adricom. Timberley. Pilgrims, in memorie thereof, doe still wash themselues in this riuer, spotting themselues further (I feare) by this washing,  with some myre of superstition.
I cannot blame this sacred streame, if it seeme loth, as Plinie sayth, to leaue so fertile a Countrey, and lingreth as long as it may inR. Dauid. Psal. 24. ait in terra Israel Maria 7. fuisse, quae ibi suis nominibus recenset. lakes by the way, not only for that salt Sea, or hellish Lake, which shutteth vp his guiltlesse waues in perpe^uall imprisonment, but also for those pleasures in the passage, the fruits of the earth, without exaction freely yeelded, as Roses, Sage, Rue, etc. of the trees, in Oliues, Figs, Pomegranates, Dates, and Vines (which last the Mahumetan superstition doth not cherish, and the Westerne Christians did so husband, that one VineBrocard. by their arte and industrie, yeelded three vintages in August, Septemb. October.) TheNum. 13.24. grapes of Eshcol, which could lade two men with one cluster, were not so famous as the Balme of GileadIerem. 8.22. and 46.11., which theGen. 37.25. Trem. Ios. Antiq. 15.5. first Merchants we reade of, from that Mart,  vented to o^her parts of the world. These Balme-trees grew in the Vale of Iericho, which being cut, yeelded this precious liquor; whereof, besides the admirable effects in cures,
 other wonders are told by ancient and later Writers, too long heere to relate. BelloniusBellon. lib. 2. cap. 39. will doe it for mee, if any list to reade his Obseruation. Hee is not of their mind, which thinke there is now no true Balsam in the World (these in Iudaea being perished) but thinketh in Arabia-Foelix it groweth naturally, from whence some shrubs he saw inDioscorid. sayth that it groweth in Egypt. Strabo also in Coelosyria, etc. Cairo. But I should be too tedious if I should insist on this Argument; That instance of such a world of people, in such a patch of the world, doth sufficiently declare the fertilitie, when as Dauid1. Chron. 21. See Tremell. notes on 2. Sam. 24.9. numbred them an eleuen thousand Israelites, and of Iuda, foure hundred seuentie thousand, or as in 2. Sam. 24.9. fiue hundred thousand which drew Sword; and yet Beniamin and Leui were not reckoned in this number: and in the dayes of Ieroboam,2. Chron. 13. Abija King of  Iuda, brought into the field foure hundred thousand, and Ieroboam eight hundred thousand, and on this part were slaine in one battell fiue hundred thousand all choice men; which Historie cannot bee matched with the like in all Ages and places of the world: that a Countrey, an hundred and sixtie miles long, and not aboue sixtie in bredth, should nourish at once, or lose in a battell such multitudes, not to speake of impotent persons, women and children. But this multitude by ciuill warres and inuasions of enemies decreased, till first the reliques of Israel, and after, the remnant of Iuda were by the Assyrians and Babylonians led captiue, and the Land enioyed her Sabbaths.
For the Kingdome of Israel consisting of ten Tribes, (some reckon Simeon also to Iuda, because of his portion mixed with Iudaes, as Beniamins was adioyning thereto, to whom  the Leuites2. Chron. 9.14. like wise, and Priests forsaking their Cities, and all the religious Israelites annexed themselues) forsookeA great part of Beniamin, and Simeon was subiect to Dauids posteritie. not the house of Dauid onely, but the house of the Lord, and set them vp Calues (Aegyptian superstitions) at Dan and Bethel, and made Priests for their Idolatrous purpose. This their rebellion and apostasie, GOD plagued with ciuill dissention and forren hostilitie, vntill at last, the Assyrians2. Reg. 17. remoued them altogether, and repeopled those parts with new Colonies. Such is the end of religion, which hath not GOD for the beginning, but is grounded on humane policie, a sandie foundation. Iuda could not take warning, but prouoking GOD by idolatrous courses, at last was carried to Babel, and thence after seuentie yeeres, returned. The historie of these things, so fully related in Scripture, I should but marre in the telling.
 After this their returne, the Land was not as before, named after the portions of the seuerall Tribes; but was called by a generall name,Ios. Antiq. 11.5. Iudaea, and the people Iewes, because the Tribe of Iuda had before inhabited those parts, or at least the principall of them, dilating themselues further, as they encreased in number and power. But more especially Iudaea was the name of onePalestina diuided into 3. parts
GalilaeaSamariaIudaea. third part of the Countrey by that name distinguished from the other two, Samaria and Galilea, which two last are sometimes referred to Phoenicia.
Galilaea was the most Northerly, confining on Libanus and Antilibanus toward the North, Phoenicia Westerly, Coelosyria on the East, and Samaria, with Arabia, inclosing her Southerly borders; Iordan parteth it in the middest. It was diuided into the higher and lower Galilee: the higher called also Galilee of the Gentiles, contayneth the springs  of Iordan, and those Cities which Salomon gaue to Hiram. The lower was also called Galilee of Tiberias, that Citie giuing name both to the Lake and Region: in which Nazareth was famous, and the hill Thabor.
Samaria is seated betwixt Galilee and Iudaea, much lesse then either of them. Iudaea is the most Southerly; betweene the Mediterranean and Dead Seas, Samaria and Idumea. PliniePlin. l. 5. c. 14. maketh Galilaea a part of it, and Peraea another part, separated from the rest by Iordan. The rest he diuideth into ten Toparchies; Ierico, Emaus, Lidda, Ioppe, Acrabatena, Gophnitica, Thamnitica, Betholene, Tephene, Orine, in which was Ierusalem farre the fairest of the Cities of the East, not of Iudaea alone: Herodium, with a famous Towne of the same name. Hee addeth vnto these the Region of Decapolis, so called of the number  of the Townes, and the Tetrarchies; Trachonitis, Paneas, Abila, Arca, Ampeloessa, Gabe. Those ten Townes of Decapolis, were Caesarca Philippi, Asor, Cedes Neptalim, Sephet, Corozain, Capharnaum, Bethsaida, Iotapata, Tiberias, and, Bethsan, otherwise called Scythopolis, and before Nysa, where Bacchus buried his Nurse. But these are parts of those former parts aboue mentioned; and so may wee say of the rest, sustayning in diuers respects, diuers diuisions, best fitting to the present polities, and little to our purpose.
Those things which of old were famous in those places, are mentioned in the Scripture: Those things which since haue beene more remarkable; I purpose in the next part of this Worke, of Christian Religions, to handle, and especially the rarities of Ierusalem, sometimes  the holy Citie, and Citie of the great King, now a Den of Theeues; an habitation of Mahumetans, or rather now not at all: for this which is now, is a new Citie, called by the Founder Aelia CapitolinaHieron. in Ezech. 5. and Epist. 129., built by Aelius Adrianus, who caused the plough to passe through, and
 salt to be sowne in the old, as testifying her eternall desolation, and fulfilling Christs prophesie to the vtmost, not leauing a stone vpon a stone, if Titus had not fully accomplished the same before. Arias Montanus in his Nehemias affirmeth, that Ierusalem was founded on threeDescription of old Ierusalem: this was sayth Hierome, in the midst of the world, and the nauell of earth: hauing on the East Asia, on the West Europe, Africa, on the South, Scythia, etc. on the North. hills; to wit, Sion, on which the Iebusites built their Tower; and which in Dauids time was further builded on, and called the Citie of Dauid. The second hill was Mount Moriah, which Dauid bought of Arauna, to erect thereon the Temple. The third was the higher Acra, called the Suburbe. These were compassed with one wall without, and within diuided with three walls, by which the Citie of Dauid, and Moriah, and the higher Acra, were seuered. In the circuit of the walls were nine gates. Hee that desireth further to reade, or rather to see the old Ierusalem, with her holy Fabriques, let him resort  to Arias Montanus his Antiquitates Iudaicae, where he both relateth, and in figures presenteth these things. It is supposed that Melchisedech built it about the yeere of the World, 2023. and called it Salem. Hierome in his 129. Epistle hath these words: Ipsa Metropolis tua prius Iebus, postea Salem, tertio Hierosolyma, and nunc Aelia; As if it were called Iebus, before it had the name of Salem, which is not so probable. Yea, Ierome himselfe in his 126. Epistle confutes Iosephus, and the vulgar opinion that Salem was Ierusalem: and sayth, that Salem was a Towne neere to Scythopolis which remayned to his time, where also were still shewed the ruines of Melchisedeks Palace, the monument of her ancient and antiquate splendor. The like Saint Ambrose in his Commentarie on Hebr. 7. The Kings thereof were anciently called Melchi-zedek, or Adoni-zedek, that is, Kings or Lords of Iustice, or of Zedek,  which some will haue the first name thereof, and Salem the second; this signifieth Peace. RighteousnessePsal. 85.11. indeed and peace did here kisse each other, when theIer. 23.6. Lord our righteousnesse here preached peace, and was made our peace and righteousnesse, the true Melchizedek, whose KingdomeRom. 14.17. is righteousnesse, peace, and ioy in the holy Ghost. It was after called Ierusalem by addition of the word Iereth, as some thinke, to the former name Salem. For so it is said of Abraham,Gen. 2^.14. when GOD tried his obedience in here offering his sonne, hee called the place Iehoua iereh, the Lord will prouide, from which and Salem by composition ariseth this name, so fitting both the Citie and mysterie. IosephusIos. de Bell. lib. 7. c. 18. sayth, it was first called Solyma, and by Melchisedech named Hierosolyma, of a Temple by him there built, as if (...) had beene the language of Ierusalem: elsewhereAntiq. l. 7 c. 3. he attributeth it to Dauid, from an  Hebrew deriuation, which and other like Etimologies haue caused MasiusIosephus and Philo vnskilfull in Hebrew. Mas in Ios. 10. Scal. Elench. Ser. to pronounce him ignorant of the Hebrew, and educated onely in the Greeke, as Scaliger somewhere affirmeth of Philo his companion in Nation, learning, and in that Grecian eloquence wherein they neuer had companions, neither of their owne, nor scarse of any other Nation. The Iebusites after possessed (and of them some deriue the name Ierusalem, quasi Iebussalem) till Dauid expelled them: who had before raigned in Hebron (called Cariatharbe, the Citie of foure men, say some, because of Adam, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, their both dwelling and buriall there; yet Adam, others say, was buried in mount Caluarie, with other speculations curious, and vncertaine.) Hee translated the highest seat both of spirituall and temporall Regiment to Ierusalem, where he raigned after, three and thirtie yeeres,  to whom succeeded Salomon, and the rest in order. It then contayned in circuit fiftie furlongs, compassed with a great ditch threescore foot deepe, and two hundred and fiftie broad. Nabuchodonosor destroyed it, Nehemias re-edified it, three and thirtie furlongs in circuit: The Machabees, Herod, and others, added to her excellence, till Titus befieged and tooke it; in which siege are said to haue perished eleuen hundred thousand people; and being now a Sepulchre of dead carkasses, was made a spectacle of diuine vengeance, for murthering the Lord of Life. But those struggling spirits, and small remnants of life, which remayned in this forlorne carkasse of the sometime Ierusalem, breathed a new rebellion, in the time of Adrian, and thereby breathed her last, as before is said. Bernard de Breidenbach sayth, he neuer saw any place which had a fairer prospect then Ierusalem, presenting  to the eye Arabia, the Plaine of Iericho, and the dead Sea. But what doe wee now in Aelia or the now Ierusalem: whose rarities the iournals of manyBeniam. Tud. Breidenb. Ludolph. Suth. Brocard. vel Borchard. B. de saligniaco, etc. testifie. Concerning the former, The Historie of this Citie the Scripture hath recorded; and where Diuine Historie endeth, Iosephus and Hegesippus (that I speake not of late Writers) haue largely supplied, especially concerning her latest fates, and as I may terme it, in her funerall Sermon.Iustin. lib. 36. Strab^, lib. 16. Strabo, Iustine, and others, haue written of this people, but not sincerely. But the fountaines are cleere enough to acquaint vs with their true originall, which commeth next to bee considered.




CHAP. II. Of the Hebrew Patriarchs, and their Religion before the Law: also of their Law and Politie.

 @. I. Of the Patriarchs, and Religion before the Law.
THe name of Hebrewes some deriue from Abraham, as if they were called Hebraei, quasi Abrahai. Arias MontanusMon. de Antiq. Iud. Canaan, vel lib. 3. cap. 9. and ante. eum Hieron. in Ion. 1. Idem Scal. Epist. ad Tomson. and ad Steph. Vbertum. telleth vs that this name of Hebrewes was not appropriate to any familie, but common to all such, as hauing passed ouer the Riuer Euphrates, fixed their Tents and abode betweene that Riuer and the great Sea. Hee gathereth this from the Hebrew word(...) transiens vel transmittens., which signifieth to passe ouer. Such an one first of all was Heber, seeking a life answerable to his name: whose example (sayth hee) Thare imitated: and after,  Abram for his twofold transmigration from Chaldaea, and from Haran, deserued that name, and left it to his posteritie. ButIos. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 6. Iosephus,Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 26. c. 13. Augustine and others, more fitly (in my mind) of Heber the fourth from Shem, the sonne of Noah, with whose familie, as wee haue sayd, continued the ancient Language of the world, called of his name, Hebrew: his sonne Peleg or Phaleg, bearing the name of that diuision, which at the time of his birth the rest of the world in their Languages sustained. This Peleg was grand-father to Serug, whom some affirme to haue beene the first maker of Idols, which were afterwards worshipped by Nahor his sonne, and Thare his Nephew, the father of Abram, who preached openly that there was butIos. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. one God, Creator, and Gouernour of all things; and by this doctrine prouoking the Chaldaeans against him, warned by Oracle, departed towards Canaan.
BellarmineBell. de N^t. Eccles. l. 4. c. 9. so eagerly swalloweth this opinion, that he taxeth Caluine of heresie, for attributing to Abraham the contrarie; namely, that Abraham, before GOD called him out of Vr, was an Idolater: an opinion so much more probable then the other, as hauing better authoritie. For IoshuaIos. 24.2. obiecteth to the Israelites their fore-fathers Idolatrie, and nameth Abraham amongst them. And GenebrardGenebrard. Chron. lib. 1. doth so interprete it; and MasiusMag. in Ios. 24. in his Commentaries on that place, both zealous and learned Papists: yea, LindanusLindan. in Panop. specifieth the Idolatrie, and calleth him a worshipper of Vesta.Suidas. Suidas sayth, that Abraham by the obseruation of the Creatures in his studie of Astronomie, lifted vp his mind aboue the starres, and by the glorie, and order of them, learned the knowledge of GOD, neuer ceasing that diuine search, till GOD appeared to him. Which opinion may reconcile both the former: that first he was,  and after ceased to be, an Idolater, before God appeared in vision to him. He alledgeth Philo for his Author, that at fourteene yeeres Abraham reproued Thara for seducing men vnto Idolatrie (moued by his priuate lucre) with Images: and seeing the Heauen sometime cleare, sometime cloudie, he gathered, that that could not bee GOD. The like hee concluded of the Sunne and Moone, by their Eclipses (for his father had taught him Astronomie.) At last, GOD appeared, and bade him leaue his Countrey. Whereupon hee tooke his Fathers Images, who (as before is said) was an Image-maker, and partly broke, partly burnt them, and then departed. Suidas further thinketh him the first inuenter of Letters, of the Hebrew tongue, and of the interpretation of dreames; which I leaue to the Authors credit. But for the fault of Abraham before his calling, and other blemishes after, in him and the rest of  the Patriarchs; whatQuasi vero non tanto illustrior sit Dei gratia, quanto ipse fuit sceleratior, etc. Mas. in Ios. 24. doe they else, but in abounding of mans sinne, set out the superabounding grace of GOD? and are profitable, as learned MortonMort. Ap. p. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3^. in his answere of this cauill, hath out of one of their owneSixtus Senes. Bibl. 7. c. 8. obserued against them, what he had obserued out of Augustine, to these foure purposes: Faith, Instruction, Feare, and Hope: the Faith of the Historie which flattereth, or concealeth the faults of none: Instruction to vertue, by seeing others faults taxed: Feare, for what shall Shrubs doe, if Cedars fall? and Hope, that wee imitate their repentance, by seeing their pardon.
But to returne to our Historie. Many of the Ethnike histories mention him: Berosus commendeth him for his iustice, and skill in Astronomie. Nic. Damascenus sayth, that hee raigned at Damascus, and that in his time, his house continued in Damascus, and was still  called by his name: Hecataeus wrote a booke of him, and Alexander Polyhistor telleth, that hee was borne in the tenth generation after the floud in Camarine (or Vrien) a Citie of Babylon. IosephusAntiq. l. 1. c. 8. addeth, that when famine draue him into AegyptGen. 12., hee disputed with
 the Priests, and most learned Aegyptians, in questions of Diuinitie; and in their diuided Sects, hauing confuted one by another, he communicated to them the truth, both in this, and in Arithmeticke and Astronomie, whereof before the Aegyptians were ignorant, Abram (sayth Master Broughton in his Consent) was borne sixtie yeeres later then the common account; as appearethSee the Chronologie, Chap. 11. by computation of Terahs age, who died at two hundred and fiue yeeres, and after his death,Gen. 12.4. Abram went from Charan into Canaan, the threescore and fifteenth yeere of his owne life; and therefore was borne in the hundred and thirtieth, and not in the seuentieth yeere of his father, in the three hundred fiftie and two yeere after the Floud; whereas the common opinion reckoneth the two hundred ninetie and two. To Abram GOD had giuen commandement, saying: Goe from thy Countrey, and from thy  Kindred, and from thy Fathers house into the Land which I shall shew thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, etc.
His Historie is fully related by Moses, and his progenie also; whereof Ismael his Sonne by Agar, and other his sonnes which he had by Ketura his second wife, he sent to inhabite the East Countrey (Arabia) in his life time; but Isaac was made his Heire, both temporall and spirituall: to whom Iacob succeeded in the promised blessing: who with his sonnes and familie went downe into Aegypt, where his posteritie multiplied exceedingly, and were called sometimes Ebrewes, of their ancient pedegree; sometime Israelites, of the name Israel, giuen to Iacob by the Angell, Gen. 32.28. Their whole Historie so largely and plainely in holy Writ recorded, I feare to makeSed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus. Martial. Mine, by euill reciting: Those Fountaines are more  open to all, then that any should neede ours, or others Brookes, mixed with some myrie earth (at least) in the passage: (and my intent is to bee largest in relation of those things which are not in the Scriptures; onely touching those things briefly for order sake.) Their Religion, meane while, was the best amongst the best, though stayned in some, as Rachel, which stale her father Labans Idols; and Iacob was forced to reforme his Familie in this respect; and after in Aegypt they were corrupted with the Aegyptian superstition, asEzec. 20.8. and 23.3. Ezechiel protests against them. The manner of Diuine worship was not so straitly limited, as afterwards to persons and places. By Reuelation and Tradition they receiued the religious worship, wherein they instructed their posteritie: vntill that in their extremest thraldome GOD sent Moses and Aaron to deliuer them: vnder whose conduct they passed  through the Sea and Wildernesse to the brinkes of Iordan, receiuing in theIt seemeth, in the Wildernes before the law giuen, they had some set place for the solemne worsh^p, as Betram obserueth, c. 4. de Pol. Iud. Ex. 16. and Ex. 18. and Moses at the first was King and Priest, hauing the first borne as in^eriour Priests vnder him. way that Law, which as a Tutor or Schoole-master, was in that their nonage to traine them vp, vntill that full and ripe age, whenGalath. 4.4. GOD sent his Sonne made of a woman, made vnder the Law, that hee might redeeme them that were vnder the Law, that wee might receiue the adoption of Sonnes.


@. II. Of the Law of MOSES, the twelue Tribes, and of Proselytes.  
OF this Law, although Moses hath giuen vs an absolute relation in Scripture, whereof he was the first Pen-man (of that at least which remayneth vnto vs) yet if wee shall out of him, bring them into their order, and ranke them vnder their seuerall heads, as SigoniusCar. Sigon. de Rep Hebr. Betramus de Pol. Iud. etc. and others haue done; it shall not be, I thinke, ouertedious to the Reader. The Law is diuided vsually, into theLex moralis aeterna, Iudicialis quoad suas circumstantias etc. iam mortua, Caeremonialis autem mortifera. Iun. de Pol. Mos. Morall, Ceremoniall, and Iudiciall, as parts of the same: the first deliuered on the Mount Sinai, by the dreadfull voice of the Almightie God, and by the finger of God, written after in Tables of stone, called Ten words, summarily abridged into two Commandements, by the Law-giuer himselfe;Mat. 22.38. The first and great Commandement enioyning the loue of GOD; the second, of our NEIGHBOVRS;  that God, who himselfe is Charitie, imposing nothing but the louely yoke of Loue and Charitie vnto his seruants. This Law is eternall, written first in the hearts of our first Parents, which being defaced, it was written againe in the stonie Tables of the Law, where it was but a killing letter, till Grace and Truth by IESVS CHRIST indited and indented it in the fleshy Tables of the Gospell, asIoh. 13.34. Christs new Commandement written it renewed hearts, and shall for euer be then grauen in those spirituall Tables, when wee that here are1. Cor. 15.44. Naturall men, shall rise againe Spirituall men; and shall be the Law of that holy Citie, the new Ierusalem; this being then perfected, when1. Cor. 13. Faith, and Hope, and this World shall bee finished. The other parts Ceremoniall and Iudiciall, were (for the particulars) proper vnto that Nation, the one respecting the manner of Diuine seruice, the other of ciuill Gouernment:  not giuen (as the other) immediatly to the Israelites by GOD himselfe, but communicated in the Mount to Moses, that hee might acquaint the people withall. In the
 death of Christ these died, and had their consumption with his consummatum est, the Iudicials remayning euer since dead, the ceremonies deadly: only they were as it were for their more honourable funerall after that their death, detayned some time aboue ground: and those ceremonies which before Christ were necessarie, in the times of the Apostles, till the Iewish Church might be instructed, became indifferent, but since meerely vnlawfull; neither can it now but be sacrilegious to violate the sepulchres of the dead.
This Nation was diuided, as is said alreadie, into Tribes, according to the number of Iacobs sonnes, amongst whom Leui had no portion (but the Lord was their portion, they seruing at the Altar, and liuing of the Altar) but eight and fortie Cities with their suburbs  assigned for their habitation, amongst other Tribes, that being so dispersed, they might disperse also, and preach the Law to the rest: and were reckonedIudg. 17 7. to that Tribe with which they dwelled: and whereas others might not marrieSome say that only heirs were tyed by that law: as though the death of diuers neerer might not make roome for others further of, to inherit., for feare of alienation of their inheritances, into another Tribe, this of Leui either had, or tooke libertie herein, as Iudg. 19. and 2. Chron. 22. Ioiada married the Kings sister; and thus Elizabeth, wife of Zacharie the Priest, might be Cousin to Marie the Mother of our Lord. The number of twelue remayned yet entire, in reckoning of these Tribes, because Ioseph had a double portion, and his sonnes, Ephraim and Manasses, made two Tribes. Neither were they alone reckoned Israelites, that naturally descended from some one of these twelue sonnes of Israel, but such also of other Nations as embraced their Ceremonies and Religion; being for distinction  sake called Proselytes. The HebrewAr. Montan. in Matth. 23. word which is interpreted a Proselyte, signifieth extracted, or drawne forth, because they esteemed such, drawne forth of Hell: whom yet they made the children of Hell, more then themselues, in burthening their consciences, not onely with those Ceremonies whereunto the Law and their Tradition tyed them, but with diuers others also. The name Proselite, as Drusius affirmeth,Drus. de 3. sect lib. 2. is either taken largely for any stranger, or strictly for a conuert to their Religion. A Proselyte was made with obseruation of three things, Circumcision, Baptisme or Washing, and Oblation. The first was a signe of the Couenant, in which they were receiued: the second as a badge of their cleannesse; (for all the Gentiles were vncleane) the third, for the atonement with GOD. This was while the Temple stood, and now is not in force: but whether Baptisme be still vsed,  I know not. Hee ought to be circumcised in the presence of three. And if by natureP. Ricius de Caelesti agric. l. 3. and ad prac. 117. or accident he were before circumcised, and wanted that fore-skin, yet did they cut him there, and made him bleede notwithstanding: and when his wound was whole, then before three witnesses was hee baptised, in which ceremonie they couered the whole body with water. This manner of baptising they vsed also in reconciling and receiuing penitents, which had giuen scandall by notorious offences, in token of repentance, and newnesse of life, hauing first before this washing testified their humiliation by fasting and prayer. Of this washing they were so scrupulous, thatClem. Alex. strom. l. 4. Clemens Alexandrinus testifieth, they were often washed in their beds. A woman Proselite was admitted by Baptisme onely, and the offering of two Turtles, or two Pigeons. Serarius sayth, Baptisme and Circumcision are still required: the  like is written by P. Ricius andMunster. in L. Praecept. Mos. cum expos. Rab. Et in Euangel. Matth. Hebr. Annot. cap. 22. Munster, who adde, that when any desireth to become a Proselyte, they propound to him the hardest things of the Law, with the promises of future happinesse, as of the Sabbath, not eating fat, etc. with some penances that hee should not after say, had I wist; and they would seeme to bee willing by these meanes, to driue them from their Religion, as being corrupted by such new commers; but Christ affirmeth otherwise.


@. III.  Of the Hebrew Politie and ciuill Gouernement.
THe gouernement of this people was, asBet. de P^l. Iudg. c. 5. Exod. 18. Betramus thinketh, (before Iethro's aduice had brought in those Gouernours of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens) vnder seuentie Elders, according to the number of persons, which descended withNum. 11.16. Iacob into Egypt: and that the seuentie assigned after to Moses for assistants in the gouernement, were continued in their former office with further ratification and encrease of gifts, and not newly instituted. Yea this number, hee sayth, gouerned in Egypt, howsoeuer Pharaohs tyrannie did afterward much eclipse their authoritie, and were by Moses and Aaron assembled together, Exod. 4.29. So that the thirteene Tribes consisted  of seuerall Families, according to the number of the chiefe heads thereof mentioned byNum. 3. and 26. Moses, to which the thirteene Princes of the thirteene Tribes being annexed, made vp the number. His reasons let such as will, learne of himselfe.

The gouernement in that time of Moses was mixt the Monarchy being in Moses, but qualified with an Aristrocratie in these seuenty, and the other Officers before mentioned; a Democratie also appeared in the Assemblies so often mentioned. In lighter matters the Chiliarchs, Centurions, Quinquagenarij, and Decurions iudged: in more weighty, the seuenty. Thus it continued in Ioshua's time, till they had conquered and inhabited Cities. And then each Citie had their Senate or Councell of the Chiliarchs, and other Officers beforenamed, proportionable to the greatnesse thereof.Ios. Antiq. l. 4. cap. 8. Iosephus numbreth seuen Elders, and two Leuites in euery City, which seemeth more to agree with his time then this former. Euen in Bethlehem the least of the thousands of Iuda, BoazRuth. 4.2. 1. Chron. 23.4. and 26.29. 2. Chron. 19.8. assembled ten Elders about the matter of Ruth. It seemeth that they had Leuites assisting in the iudgements and  Tribunals, as men learned in the Law: and so we reade of the times of Dauid and Iehoshaphat. But I had rather send my Reader for these things to the Scriptures, and to the labors of Betramus and Sigonius: from all which it is also apparant, that the State was after Moses and Ioshua, managed by Iudges of diuers Tribes, not by Election nor inheritance succeeding in that Office, but by appointment of God, till they desired a king, whereas before God was their king and by his Law partly, partly by Oracle ruled the State, being, as some thinke, an Aristocraty. There were also in the times of these Iudges, Princes of each Tribe, and the heads of Families: There was also a gouernement in each City by the Elders or Senate, exercised in the Gates thereof, as before is obserued. They had accordingly their Councels or Assemblies, either of the whole Nation, or of a whole Tribe, or of some  one Citie.
The kingdome of Israel, after it was diuided from the house of Dauid, continued the like forme of gouernement, as is most probable. After the Captiuity, it appeareth by the Histories of Hezra and Nehemiah, that the chiefe sway was vnder the Lieutenant or Deputie of the Persian king, according to commission from him. Other Offices happily receiued some alteration in regard of their numbers and estate, weaker and lesse then in those former times of prosperity, so that what Iosephus hath written of seuen Elders in each City, and those things which in the Talmud are written of their Politie, had now first (as someBetram. c. 13. thinke) their beginning. Concerning this, because it is not so common, let me haue leaue for a larger discourse out of the Talmudical Sanhedrin, which thus recordeth.Sa^hedrin lib. Tal. Iud. vid. Paul. Ric. de Tulmud and Galat. de Arc. l. 4. cap. 5. and 6. To these three Courts, Christ alludeth Mat. 5 22. Which place may hereby be vnderstood. Matters which  concerne goods are determined by three; criminall cases by a Councell of three and twenty. But such things as belong to a whole Tribe, a false Prophet, or the high Priest, by the great Councell at Ierusalem of seuenty and one. The high Priest iudgeth and is iudged: he sitteth at Funerals on a little Seare, all the multitude sitting on the ground. The king iudgeth not and is not iudged, giueth testimony against none, nor none against him. Hee maketh Warres, but not without consent of the Sanhedrin: he may not haue aboue eighteene wiues: he ought to haue the booke of the Law written, and hanging about his necke. In ciuill causes, each of the Litigants chooseth a Iudge or ArbitratorThese Arbitrators were not those three Iudges before mentioned, but others besides., and both these thus chosen choose a third. Of this Office are vncapable, Dicers, Vsurers, and such as practise dishonest courses for gaine: They also which are of neere kindred to the parties, may neither  be Iudges nor Witnesses. Their Companions or Aduersaries may giue testimony, but not iudgement. Women and Seruants might not be witnesses, Ios. Antiq 4.7. Nor a Thiefe, Robber, Vsuret, Publican, Child, or keeper of Doues. Ph. Ferdinand. This last Ricius doth not mention, but addeth a Gentile, Fool^, Deafe, Blinde. The ancientest witnesse is first examined: and that from his owne sight, or the debters mouth, or else it is nothing. Thirtie daies after sentence giuen, the Defendant may alleage what hee can for himselfe. The odde number is the casting voice. In criminall causes decided by three and twenty, one odde voice absolueth, but there must be aboue twelue of the three and twenty to condemne; and when sentence is giuen, nothing may be alleaged further for accusation, which for absolution is lawfull. And he which hath spoken for the accused, may not after speake against  him. Ciuill causes are examined in the day, and sentenced in the night; but criminallThey dealt oth^rwise with Christ, either for ^eare of the people, or that thus their tyrannie, and his iustice might appeare, such a worke of darknesse to extinguish the light of the world, best fitting the night. only by day: and sentence of condemnation may not be pronounced the same day, and therefore on holy-dayes Eeuens examinations are forbidden. Proselytes and Bastards may determine ciuill causes: Priests and Leuits with other Israelites, are required in criminall. These Iudges sate in a semicircle,One wrote the absoluers sentences, the other of theirs which condemned, whereto perhaps Christ alluded, Mat. 25.41. saith Drus. Praet. p. 52. hauing one Scribe or Register on the right hand and another on the left: In the Session-house were present besides, three orders of Students which sate on the ground according to their degree, out of which the number of the Senators were supplied when neede was, so that one of the first order being made Senator, another was chosen out of the second order into his place, and out of the third in the roome of the second, and out of the people into that third Order. The witnesses must testifie only from their own  sight, and that exactly, whatThey vsed also other questions and circumstances, which I for breuitie haue omitted. seuenth yeere of the Iubilee, what yeere of that seuenth, what moneth, what day of the moneth, and weeke, and in what houre and place hee saw it. For
 to saue or lose an Israelite, is asmuch as to preserue or destroy the frame of the World; if one witnesse be ignorant of any of those circumstances, or contradicteth another, his testimony is vaine. None of the Students which sit by may be suffered to accuse, if they can say any thing in defence of the partie they may. If they cannot finde sufficient to absolue him that day, the Senators or Iudges scanne that matter seriously, two or three together all night, vsing a spare diet. If twelue condemne, and the rest cleere him, they adde to the number of Iudges till they make vp seuenty and one to make further search. When sentence is pronounced, the condemned person is carried away, and brought againe foure or fiue times, to see whether hee or any other can say any thing for his purgation. And if nothing  bee alleaged sufficient to reuerse the sentence, he is led to execution,Ph. Ferd. reciteth eighteene crimes to be punished with stoning, ten with burning, sixe with strangling. P. Ric. 24. deadly vncleanenesses in the law, and twenty other by the Talmud. Ad. Praec. neg. 111. the Cryer going before him and proclayming the crime and sentence and accusers, that if any can then say any thing in his behalfe, he may speake. When he commeth within ten cubits of the place of execution, he is admonished to confesse his fault, and so hee shall haue part in the life to come: and if he know not the forme of confession, it is enough for him to say; Let death be vnto me the remission of all my sinnes. Being within foure cubits, he is stripped naked all but his priuities: if it bee a woman, shee is led forth in her cloathes. The stoning place was built twice the height of a man, from whence by one of the witnesses he was cast downe head-long, the ground beneath being set with flints; and if he died not with the fall, another of the witnesses smote him neere the heart with a flint, which if it did not finish  his death, the whole multitude cast stones at him. They might not condemne aboue one in one day, to death. He which was stoned, if he were a man, was presently hanged on a Gibbet, and after taken downe and buried with other persons which had before suffered in like manner. When the flesh was there consumed, his bare bones might bee laid in his owne, or his fathers Sepulcher. After this, his friends and kinsemen went to the Iudges and witnesses, and saluting them, acknowledged the iustice of their fact. Besides this punishment of stoning,He which was stoned for Blasphemy, was hanged til Sun set, and then his gibbe^ and he buried together. The stone which they vsed in his death, was also buried, likewise the Sword which they vsed in beheading and the linnen cloth vsed in strangling, were buried. Drus. praet. l. 4. p. 139. Hierom speaks of a punishment vsed amongst them, to drown them with a stone about their neck. in Math. 18. they punished with the fire, sword, or strangling. The manner of burning was, to put the condemned person in dung vp to the arme-holes, and one executioner on one side, and another on the other, graned him with a linnen cloth about his neck, pulling the same till they forced him to gape, and then a bar or rod of burning metall was thrust downe  into his body. The sword was vsed in beheading. Strangling was done with a course piece of linnen, pulled close about his neck, till he were dead. It would be too long to shewe what faults were appropriated to each of these kindes of execution. If a man had deserued two of them, he was to be punished with the most seuere. In some cases of homicide, the guilty person was put in a little-ease prison, where he was forced alway to stand, and was fed onely with Barly till his belly rotted, and his bowels fell out. Any one might presently slay him which had stolne any of the holy Vessels, or blasphemed the name Iehoua. The Priest which exercised his function, while he was polluted, was not brought to iudgement; but other Priests, chosen to that purpose, led him out of the holy place and knocked out his braines. From the Sanhedrin was no appeale: They were also called Mehokekim,  that is, Scribes or Law-giuers, because whatsoeuer they deliuered or writ was receiued for a Law.
Their Colledge, saith GalatinusP. Galat. de Arcanis lib. 4. cap. 5. and 6. Scalig. in Ep. ad Casaub. saith, that Galatinus his worke was a compendium of two huge volumes of Raimund. Sebon a Dominican, called Pugio fidei, yet extant in Collegeo Fuxensi Tolosano., (who from their fayling prooueth that the Messias is come) represented that Scepter, by the holy Ghost in Iacob promised to Iuda: and therefore not only vnder the Kings and Iudges did exercise iudgement, but also when there was no King or Iudge in Israel. Of their qualitie it is thus written. They appointed noneThey are ^aid to goe into Aegypt to lear^e Sorceries, to know them that they might beware of them. Isaac Leuita ad Epist. Rambam. (said R. Iohanan) but men of wisedome, stature, and of goodly presence, and of old age, and cunning in exorcismes, and vnderstanding the seuenty Tongues, that they might not need interpreters. Their Stature and comlinesse, Rabbi Selomoh saith, was required to acquire them reuerence; and skill in enchantment, to conuince such Wizards. There were required  the whole number of seuenty and one, in determining the going to Warre, in adding to a Citie, or the reuenues of the Temple, or in conuenting the ordinarie Iudges of the Tribes; To constitute one of this number, they vsed imposition of hands (R. Iudas saith) of fiue. A Wolfe, Lyon, Beare, Leopard, and Serpent, were to be slaine by the three and twent e.
The great Colledge called Sanhedre ghedola, consisted of seuenty and one, the lesse of three and twenty. That odde number aboue seuenty, was to supply the roome of Moses, which was ouer those first seuenty. Hereby Galatinus gathereth, that in the Councell that condemned Christ, there was the whole number of seuenty and one, which is true, if Herod had not before disanulled that society. The greater Sanhedrin ordained the lesse; for  those seuenty ordained all the Sessions of Judges, which in other Cities and Places ruled the people: and to this Court of the seuenty in Ierusalem they were all subiect. The place where they sate was called Gazith, that is, Carued, whereof this Court had the name (as
 the Starre-chamber with vs.) Other Courts or houses of Iudgement, they had diuers, of the three and twenty. OneThree Courts of Iu^ges in Ierusalem, of them sate in the Gate of the Mountaine of the Temple: another in the Gate of the Court: others in euery Citie. And when there was a controuersie, it was first brought to that Citie or Towne, and so to the rest, if occasion required (in order) to that in the Gate of the Mount, after to that in the Court-gate, and last to the Gazith Consistory, in which they sate from Morning till Night. On Sabbaths and solemne dayes they sate on the Wall.
But when Herod obtained the Scepter, he slew Hercanus and his sonne Antigonus, which had beene King and Priest, and also all of the seede Royall, and burnt the Genealogies of their Kings: And further to establish his Throne in blood, hee killed the Scribes and Doctors  of the Law, and caused all the Sanhedrin to be done to death. Because the Rabbanan (they are the words of the Talmud) had said according to Deut. 17. From among thy brethren thou shalt set a King ouer thee: He slew the Rabbanan or Masters, reseruing only Baba, the sonne of Bota, whose eyes hee after put out. And therefore the Sanhedrin perished: for, as is said, fiue, or at least after R. Ismal, three were necessary to the ordination by the imposition of hands. But there were by Herods permission, other Iudges instituted to be vnder the King, like the former Colledge, but had no authority of sentence in waighty and criminall causes: and therefore they said to Pilate, It is not lawfull for vs to put any man to death,De his vid. Er^sti theses, Betramum, Sigonium, and Drus. Praet. l. 4. pag. 147. Where is mention of a Priests daughter burned (for whoredome) with Vinebranches. Some say this power was taken away forty yeeres before the Citie was destroyed: but Scaliger hath 61. when Archelaus was banished. Scal. Annot. in Euseb. pag. 182. as some thinke. But others maintaine the contrary. Betramus taketh a middle course, that the Iewes might examine and condemne, but then were to present the condemned party  to the Roman Magistrate for execution: except in the cause of stoning, wherein they tooke more libertie, as in the Acts of the Apostles, by Stephen and Paules example appeareth. After their false sentence pronounced against Christ, they were expelled from the Consistory Gazith, fortie yeeres before the destruction of the Temple: and afterwards, by the commaundement of the Romanes, were all slaine. They being expelled Gazith, held their Consistory at Hamith, another place in Ierusalem; but, saith R. Abdimi, with the place they lost their power in criminall Iudgements, which might not bee giuen but in Gazith. So do the Rabbines interpret the words, Deut. 17.10. According to the words which they of that place shew thee, thou shalt doe. They had inferior punishments with the whippe for smaller offences: In which the Law had stinted them at forty stripes, and they abated one of that number  for feare of exceeding: as2 Cor. 10.24. Paul saith, Hee had fiue times receiued forty stripes saue one. TheDrus. Praet. Pag. 271. whippe was of Calues leather, as Drusius affirmeth. Betramus saith, that they had in each City seuen Iudges in money matters, whereof three were principall, two Leuites, and one of the rest, from whence the number is said to be but three. They had also ten Aediles, Taskers or Iudges of the Market, one of which was of the Priestly Stocke. They had in Ierusalem an vnder-Prouost, orBetramus de Pol. Ind cap. 13.2. Mac. 3.4. Captaine of the Temple. In other Cities of their dispersion, they had Synagogues and Magistrates, as at Alexandria, Antiochia, Sardis and other Cities, where they had obtained priuiledges and immunities.
That which is spoken of their threefold Consistory, consisting eyther of 3. or 23. or 71. Buxtorfius thus relateth, that thatBuxtorf abbreuiat. Heb. dic. (...) of 3. was appointed in such habitations, which had vnder  the number of 120. House-holders, and that it behooued alwaies two of the three to agree in their sentence. The other of twenty three was in greater Townes or Cities, and dealt in greater matters: the former in money matters, this in criminall, and in the Gates of the City, and was called the lesse Synedrium. The greater was at Ierusalem, where the wisest was chosen to bee President of the Councell, as successour to Moses, Caput Curiae (so they called him and Nasi) the wisest of the other 70. was adioyned as his Colleague, called Ab-beth-din, The Father of the Consistory. These two sate alone, somewhat separate from the rest which made a halfe circle, so that these two might see them all. The manifold mutations of their State by the Babylonians, Persians, Macedonians, Egyptians, Sytians, Romans, and ciuil wars amongst themselues, did both then change the face of Gouernement,  and haue made it now to vs obscure and vncertaine.


@. IIII. Of the Iewish Excommunications.
NOW concerning the Iewish Excommunications, DrusiusQuaest. Heb. lib. 1. and 2. hath obserued, that the Iewes had three kinds and degrees of Excommunications. Niddui, Herem, Samatha: the first signifieth a Remouing; the second, Anathema; the third, the same  which the Apostle calleth Maran-atha.Quod vocatur, (...) ait Elias in fine Thisb. ab co quod penetrat in 248. membra hominis. by the first they are made (...) (of which is an example, Gen. 4.4.) excommunicated from the Ecclesiasticall Assemblies. Hee
 which was thus Excommunicated was called Menudde, and the denouncers Menuddim. There were foure and twenty causes for the which it was inflicted. If any died therein without repentance, they iudged him worthy of stoning, and therfore stoned his coffin: whereof theyDrus. Praeter. lib. 4. pag. 136. and 2.3. lib. Musat. 121.2. giue example in one Eleazer the sonne of Henoch. They might enter the Temple when they were excommunicated; but that they might enter the Synagogue is vnlikely. Thus they write,Musar. 95.1. Salomon made two doores in the Temple; one for mourners and excommunicates, the other for the newly married: At this, if any entred, the Israelites which came on the Sabbaths, and sate betwixt those doores, said; He whose name dwelleth in this house, glad thee with children, If any entred at the other doore with his vpper lippe  couered, they knew that he was a mourner, and said; He which dwelleth in this house, reioyce and comfort thee: If his lippe were not couered, they knew that hee was Menudde, Excommunicate, and said; He which dwelleth in this house, put into thy heart to heare the words of thy fellowes, etc. When the Temple was destroyed, they decreed that the Bridegroomes and Mourners should enter the Synagogue, and the men which saw them reioyced with the one, and sate on the ground with the other. If they did not amend, they were excommunicated with a greater curse, or Anathema: And if they persisted obstinate, they did Samatize them. The word Anathema is sometimes taken generally, but heere for a particular kinde. Maran-atha signifieth. The Lord commeth; and so doth Sem-atha. For by Sem, and more emphatically, Hassem, they vsed to signifie the name, meaning that Tetragrammaton,  and ineffable name of God, now commonly pronouncedHoua dit. Drus. (Pr^terit. N T. in fine) peoniciem significat, and affinitatem habe cum Ioue Gentilium, corruptum etiam est exlectione corrupta, etc. ideoque putat neminem pium eo vti posse: vide eius Tetragram vbi aliquanto mollius agit and fortasse melius. Iehouah. It may also be compounded of Sama, after the Chaldee forme; or of Sam and mitha, which signifieth; There is death. Some Authors ascribe this to the institution of Henoch: which they gather out of Iudg. 14.



CHAP. III. Of the Religious places of the Israelites: their Tabernacle, Temples, Synagogues.
IN the discouery of their antient Religion, it seemeth fittest to discourse first of Places; secondly, of Times; Thirdly, of Rites; Fourthly, of Persons consecrated to Religion. And first of the first. Neither were the first men,Hospinian. de Templis cap. 1. nor first Hebrews very Religious in this point of dedicating Places to Religion; as appeareth in Histories both holy and Prophane: And if for some vision, made vnto them in some places, they did for a time hallow the same with Altars and Sacrifices: yet neither were they alway, or only thus esteemed. But Hee,  Whose is the Earth, and all that therein is, did by his Law appoint, as it were, a place of his residence amongst these, whom he had chosen for his owne people, And commanded them to erect a Tabernacle in the wildernesse, fitting that their peregrination. Afterward Salomon built him an house in Ierusalem: which therefore is called the holy Citie, and the Citie of the great King.
The TABERNACLE (a moueable Temple that might be taken asunder, and ioyned together againe) was, by Gods commandement, erected in the wildernesse, in the same manner, and of the same matter, which God had both commanded and shewed to Moses in the Mount; the matter and forme whereof, with all that thereunto appertained; the Arke; the Candlesticke, the Altar, etc. In the booke of Exodus are liuely declared. It was after (as we  reade in the booke ofIosh. 3.10.15. Ioshua) with great solemnitie carried miraculously thorow Iordan, by the Leuites deputed to that seruice: And, after their conquest of the Countrey,Iosh. 18.1. placed in Shilo, a Citie of Ephraim. There did Ioshua diuide the Land to her new Conquerors; there were their solemne Assemblies for State and religion. In the time of Heli they remoued the Arke from the Tabernacle into the Armie. which they had gathered against the Philistims, of whom the Arke was taken. The Tabernacle in the time of Saul, was carried to Nob; and, in the time of Dauid, to Gibeon, where Salomon offered a thousand burnt offerings. The Philistims forced by Diuine iudgements, sent backe the Arke, receiued by the Bethsamites, curious to their cost; It was after placed in Kiriath-Iarim, in the house of Aminadab, next of Obed-Edom, and then by Dauid in the place, which hee had fitted for the  same in Ierusalem: Whence it was remoued into the Temple, which Salomon had built; where it was till the time of the deportation: in which time2. Mac. 2.5. it was (saith the Author of the second booke of the Maccabees) hiddne by Ieremia the Prophet. But that Author is beholden
 to the Councell of Trent for his credit: the Iewes themselues in that point, not beleeuing him;R. Samuel in lib. Sanhedrim. Higrosol cap. Elluben haggol. Pet. Galatin. l. 4. Genebrard. in Chron. who affirme, that the second Temple came short of the former, by the want of the fire from Heauen, of the Arke, of the Vrim and Thummim, of the succession of Prophets, and the glory of God betweene the Cherubims,
The TEMPLE was built on Mount Moriah by Salomon, according to the1. Chron 28.11.12. patterne, which he had receiued of Dauid: to which worke he had gathered a greater masse of wealth, then easily we shall reade of in the Persian, Greeke, Romane, or any other Christian, Turkish, or Heathen Empire;1. Chro. 22.14. namely, one hundred thousand Talents of Gold; ten hundred thousand talents of siluer, and afterward three thousand Talents of Gold, and seuen thousand Talents of Siluer: to which was added, by the offerings of the Princes, ten thousand  talents of siluer, and more then fiue thousand talents of Gold, besides Iewels, and brasse, and iron, without weight, with Cedars and stones without number. The Gold amounteth after the common computation of the common talent, at sixe thousand crownes, to six hundred forty eight millions of crownes, and vpward: the siluer to about the same summe. But that which by vs is vnderualued (accounting to the talent but six thousand crownes, as some doe) Master Brerewood in his learned worke de ponderibus and precijs etc. raiseth to a higher summe; estimating the talent at foure thousand fiue hundred pound, so that the hundred thousand talents of Gold, which Dauid had prouided for that worke, amount to foure hundred and fifty millions of our pounds: and his million of siluer talents (each of which is three hundred seuenty fiue pound) to three hundred seuenty fiue millions: besides thirteene millions  and fiue hundred thousand pounds in gold, and two millions sixe hundred twenty fiue thousand pounds in siluer, afterwards by Dauid offered to the same purpose: and by his Princes twenty two millions fiue hundred thousand seuen thousand and fiue hundred pounds in gold; and three millions seuen hundred and fifty thousand pounds in siluer:The summe of all was eight hundred sixty and seuen millions, three hundred eighty two thousand fiue hundred pounds. That I speake not all other prouisions of iewels, metals and timber, and the rest. Now all that Cyrus got by thePlin. l. 33. c. 3. 1. Chron. 22.14. conquest of an Asia, is valued but at one hundred twenty fiue millions, if wee summe his fiue hundred thousand talents, after the Aegyptian account, which is a great deale more then Alexander found in the Persian Treasury (so much renowned) both at Susis and Persopolis, which (as Strabo hath numbred) were but thirty two millions, and seuen hundred and fifty thousand pounds. That summe of Dauid, I confesse, had often troubled mee, nor  could I euer finde satisfaction in that doubt. But in my opinion, Master Brerewoods coniecture is probable, that the Hebrew word in that place doth not signifie a Talent; or that the word Talent doth not alway signifie the same summe in Scripture: euen as amongst other Nations it also varied, and sometimes was vsed for a small summe, as hee sheweth out of Homer, Pollux and others. Howsoeuer therefore, I will not so vilifie this Talent here, as to esteeme it with someEupolem ap. Eus^b. Bud. de asse. but a shekel; yet I would take it (as the notation of the word may inferre but for some massie piece of metall.
This beautifull frame I should deforme with my description, if (after a double narration of all the parts, forme, and contents thereof in the History of the Bible) I should recite the particulars. This Temple, fleeced by some, repaired by others, continued in variety of state,  till the sacking and ruine of it, together with the City, by Nebuchodonosor. And after their reture, by the edict of Cyrus, and other the Persian Kings, it was rebuilded (but farre inferiour in glory) in the space, as the Iewes say,Iohn. 2.20. vnto Christ, of six and forty yeeres: after others it was longer in hand, by reason of impediments from their cauilling, and malicious neighbours. But this error (if we vnderstand them of the building of Zorobabel) proceeded from the Iewish ignorance of the PersianVid Drus. Praet. prag. 150. Seder Olam. Rabba and S.O. Zuta reckon otherwise, with a greater absurditie, ascribing to Cyrus three yeeres, to Assuerus (who they thinke, succeeded) foureteene: and then Darius, etc Chronologie, which knew no other Persian Darius but one, attributing to Cyrus one and thirty yeeres, to Cambyses nine, to the Magi seuen moneths: and in the sixth yeere of Darius which followed (as they accounted) was the Temple finished: all which amount to six and forty. They confound Darius Nothus (to whose times the most and best of our moderne Chronographers, Scaliger, Iunius, Caluisius,  Liuely, and others referre this rebuilding of the Temple) with that former Darius the sonne of Histaspes, and from that second yeere of Darius Nothus, wherein the Edict was made for the Temple, dothScalig Em. Temp Ed. vlt. in Prolegom. and lib. 6. Scaliger beginne the reckoning of Daniels seuenty weekes and a halfe (as he interpreteth) accounting from thence to the destruction of this Temple, foure hundred fourescore and thirteene yeeres and a halfe. This second Temple hauing receiued accesse of magnificence in succession of times, was spoyled and polluted vnder Antiochus, who dedicated the same to Iupiter Olympius; but being freed and dedicated anew by Maccabaeus, it recouered great part of the former beautie; till, asIash. Antiq. lib. 12. Iosipp de bel. Iud. Iosephus saith, and his abbreuiator Iosippus, it was pulled downe by Herod, and built anew. Herein both that allegation of the Iewes of six and forty yeeres, is against this assertion of Iosephus, and the History also ofEgesip. lib. 1. Hegesippus,  who reporteth, that he onely compassed the circuit about the Temple with a wall, and beautified the same with costly buildings, erected from the foundatio^ the Porches about the Sanctuary,
 and fortified it with the Castle Antonia: but some account this Hegesippus a counterfeit.
ChrysostomeChrysost. in Ioan. Hom. 22. more probably vnderstands those words of the Iewes, Forty and six yeeres was this Temple a building, of the Herodian Temple: and hereinHospinian. de Temp. cap. 3. Caesar Baronius Tom. 1. Annal. An. 31. Scal. E. T. lib. 6. Scaliger, Hospinian, and the great Cardinall Baronius follow him: accounting exclusiuely from the eighteenth yeere of Herods raigne, which Funccius reckoneth An.M. 3947. to the yeere 3992. in which Iohn baptized, and Christ vttered these words: in all which they coniecture that some what was still a doing about the new building thereof, although the principall part thereof, was performed and finished by Herod, in eight yeeres. This they gathered by Iosephus his owne  Testimony, that the building continued till the time of Nero, and in another place, where he affirmeth that the East porch, which Luke calsAct. 5.12. Salomons Porch, was still remaining of the ancient building; in the dayes of Nero. For thus hee saith in the last booke of his Antiquities, speaking of the times of Albinus, fourescore and three yeeres after Herod began this worke, as Scaliger reckoneth. Now the building of the Temple was finished. The people therefore seeing eighteene hundred worke-men, which had before been wont to liue by that building, idle, and vnwilling that the money should be laid vp, lest it might become a prey to the Romans: carefull also to prouide for the worke-men: perswaded theAgrippa. King to re-edefie the East Porch, which closed vp the outside of the Temple, hanging ouer a deepe and narrow valley, borne vp by a wall of foure hundred cubits height, and the length of euery  stone was twenty cubits, the thicknes six; the worke of King Salomon which first built the Temple. But the King, to whom Claudius Caesar had committed the building of the Temple, seeing that it required much time, great expence, etc. refused. Thus it is apparent, that all the Temple was not demolished till the finall destruction thereof vnder Titus. Neither doe the Iewes in the Talmud speake of any third Temple: Nor can the Prophecy ofHag. 2.10. Haggeus be fulfilled; That the glory of the second Temple, should exceede the glory of the former; if Christ (of whose comming it is interpreted) had not by his presence, preaching, and miracles, not only supplied the defects (before mentioned) but made it surmount the other in effects of Maiesty and glory. And the zeale vnto this Testimony, not the meanest which the Christian veritieMorn. de vevit. Christ. Relig. vrgeth against the Iewish Incredulitie and Apostasie (which is necessarily demonstrated  and euinced, whilest yet they continue their vaine hopes of a Messias, so many Ages after the desolation of that Temple whereof Aggee prophecied) hath caused me to vse so many words in this matter. But to satisfie the fancies of great men, their great workes are commonly made greater: For howsoeuer it was very great in it selfe, that Herod should haue, eight yeeres together, many worke-men at worke (which Iosephus numbreth for some part of the time ten thousand and a thousand Priests) yet sustaining, no doubt, some intermission after his time, either wholly, or in part, it could not be so great as to haue accomplished it wholly from the foundation, wherein Salomon spent seuen yeeres: and besides, what any of the naturall Israelites performed in this worke, hee imployed an hundred three and fifty thousand and six hundred worke-men of the Strangers, or Forrainers found in the  Countrey. And whereas the second Temple was but halfe the height of the former, perhaps it is true, that (according to Iosephus) he perfected it to that height of an hundred and twenty Cubits, whereof twenty cubits sanke downe in the settling of the foundations. If any yet will rather thinke this Temple the worke of Herod, then Zorobabel, as a thing which Iosephus by his owne eyes might obserue; Scaliger doth neuerthelesse salue that prophecy of Aggee. by distinction of the Building, and of the(...). Continuall Sacrifice: Saying, that if it had beene ten times reedified, yet the continuall Sacrifice continuing, causeth that there is no interruption, and that it should still be called but one Temple. It was builded by Herod of white stones, fiue and twenty cubits long, eight thick, and twelue broad. He that would further reade the particulars, let him haue recourse to Iosephus, in his fifteenth booke of Antiquities.  This Temple was burned by Titus, in the sack of the City, the same day that before it had beene fired by the Chaldaeans. Adrian the EmperourDion Eicaeus in Adriano. did after destroy the Reliques thereof, that a stone was not left vpon a stone; and there, in the same place, dedicated another Temple to Iupiter, that former being ouer-whelmed with earth. Iulian gaue leaue to the Iewes to re-edifie the Temple, in despight of Christian Religion, and contributed frankly thereto: but Ammianus Marcell.Amm. Marcellinus, lib. 23., a Heathen Writer, witnesseth; That fire issued out of the Earth,Metuendi flammarum globi prope fundamenta crebris assultibm erumpente, fecere locum exustis aliquoties operantibus in accessum. and burned both worke and worke-men: when as an Earth-quake (which had before, saithSozomen. lib. 5 Zozomen, killed a great many, in the very attempting of this Worke) could not deterre them from proceeding in their purpose: And Crosses, miraculously fallen on the garments of many, did both teach them to forsake their Iudaisme, and to become  Christians.
ChrysostomeChrys. Hom. 3. contra Iudae^s. mentioneth this, and saith, That vnder Adrian the Iewes sought to recouer their liberty, and lost their Countrey. Vnder Constantine they attempted the like, who
 therefore cut off their eares, and branded their bodies for Rebels, as the elder of you (saith hee to his Auditors) doe know. And in our daies, about twenty yeeres since, Iulian the Emperour was at great expences, appointed Officers, sent for worke-men from all places, thinking to frustrate Christs Prophecie concerning the Temple, and to bring the Iewes to Idolatrie. But so soone as they had attempted this businesse, and bared the foundation, had drawne foorth the Earth, and were now ready to beginne their building; a fire burst forth from the foundations, and burned many, which caused them to cease. And if you now goe to Ierusalem you may see the foundations naked: hereof we all are witnesses. Neither did this happen vnder Christian Emperours, lest any should impute it to the Christians, but vnder an Ethnick, when Christianitie was persecuted. Thus much in effect, Chrysostome, Gregorie  NazianzenGreg. Naz. Orat. 1. in Iulia^. also testifieth the same, affirming that the Earth (as it were taking a vomit from the Diuine hand) spued out the stones, which yet till this day had continued therein, and dispersed them to the great damage of the neighbour-buildings.
Other holy places they had, which the Scripture mentioneth as high places, which were high hills, or other open and lofty places, shaded for the most part with Trees: The Prophets enuey against them, andDeut. 12.3. they were commanded to be destroyed, together with the Groues: some yet were permitted, either by extraordinary command for a time, as to GedeonIudg. 6.24. and to ManoahIudg. 13.19.; or because of the Tabernacle at Gibeon, or of the Arke at Ierusalem. The not reforming this toleration of high places is reckoned as an eclipse of Iehosaphats and Asas glory; which Ezekiah and Iosiah quite remoued and polluted. These high  and open places it seemeth were consecrated. as fitting to the celestiall bodies; to which, and to Baal (who is interpreted the Sunne) they vsed for the most part on them to Sacrifice. They had also their Houses and Temples for Baal, in Israel and Iuda; and Dan and Bethel were by Ieroboam dedicated to his Aegyptian Idolatrie: and Gilgal was a place of request in this kinde. Salomon also built Temples or houses for his Idolatrous wiues. And to reckon euery particular in this kind, were a worke endlesse; in the 2. Reg. 17. and 23. and other places enough is of them recorded.
Two other Temples were erected of some reputation: one by Sanballat at Samaria, on Mount Garizin, by licence obtained of Alexander the Great, whose part he followed, rebelling against Darius his true Lord. The occasion was, because Manasses, brother of Iaddi  the High Priest had married, contrary to Gods law, NicasoIos. Ant. l. 11. daughter of Sanballat, and was forced either to leaue his Priestly function or Heathenish bed. Whereupon Sanballat, hauing obtained licence to build that Temple aforesaid, constituted him the High Priest thereof, many other Priests for the like fault, resorting thither to him. But of these Samaritanes wee shall haue fitter occasion to say more, when wee come to handle their Sects.
Ptolemaeus PhilometorIos. Ant. l. 13.6 granted licence to Onias (the sonne of the high-Priest Onias, whom Antiochus had slaine, who for the same cause had here shrowded himselfe) to build a Temple, indueed hereunto by a false interpretation of the Prophecy of Esay at Leontopolis, in the shire, as I may tearme it, or Nomus of Heliopolis: hauing Priests and Leuites ministring  therein,Esay. 19.19. and other things answering in some sort to that of Ierusalem. When the Temple of Ierusalem was burnt by Titus, this Temple was shut vp also by Lupus the Deputie, three hundred and thirty yeeres after it had beene builded: and after by his successor Paulinus vtterly despoyled both of the wealth and the Religion. The Citie was called of Onias, Onion.Ios. l. 7. c. 30. de Bel. Iud. It had a Tower and an Altar like that of Ierusalem, but in steade of a Candlesticke, a Lampe of gold hanging on a chaine of gold; enriched by the Kings with large reuenues.
SynagoguesCalled also Proseuchae: so Iuuenal, in qua tequaero proseucha? An Oratorie. the Iewes had many, both in Ierusalem, where are said to haue beene foure hundred and fourescore, and all Cities of Iudea, and among the Gentiles where the Iewes were dispersed. When they first began to be builded, is vncertaine. Cornelius BetramusCor. Bet. de Po^. Iud. c. 16. and 18.  thinketh; That the eight and forty Cities of the Leuites had their fit places for Assemblies, whence Synagogues had beginning. In these Synagogues the Archisynagogi were in place of Leuites and Prophets, sometimes diuers in the same Synagogue, as Sosthenes and Crispus in that of Corinth. which on festiual daies did performe the publique pryers, and read the Law and the Prophets, expounding the same themselues, or authorising others hereunto; so that they which first were called Prophets, were afterward Scribes and Lawyers, and in the Synagogues Archisynagogi. They had authority also, as it seemeth, of Iurisdiction in punishing offenders. The Cities of the Leuites were as Nurseries of learning, and Vniuersities for the studies of Diuinitie. And in the reformation of Religion by Elias and Elisha,2. Reg. 6.1. the Schooles of the Prophets were as Colledges, and the sonnes of the Prophets students  of Diuinitie, which had a Rector ouer them, as may seeme by 2. King. 6. and other places: where also their gesture in hearing their Lectures appeareth to be sitting; and therefore
 their Schooles or Academies were called Sessions. In their Synagogues also they kept both their Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall Courts. The Synagogues of ForreinersAct. 6.9. at Ierusalem were also Colledges of Students.Car. Sig. l. 2. c. 8. Sigonius coniectureth, That their Babylonian exile ministred occasion to them to helpe themselues with these Houses of Prayer and instruction. The word SynagogueErastus de excommunicat. Thesis. is taken both for the Assemblies, whether in this place, or out of it, and for the place it selfe; hauing a Ciuill as well as a Religious vse. And these Synagogues they haue in the place of their dispersion vnto this day. The order they obserued in their Synagogues was this; They disputed and preached sitting: theAmbros. in 1. Cor. 14. Elders sate in Chaires which were set in order, of which Christ saith, They loue the chiefe seates in Synagogues; those of meaner  sort sate in seates, and the meanest of all on the floore vpon Mats: and not onely one did dispute or interprete, but others in order, not of the Elders alone, but of the inferiour rankes also, if any thing were reuealed to them: which Tradition of theirs, Saint Paul saith, hee applied to the Christian Assemblies of those times. They vsed to pray in their Synagogues standingVid. Drus, praet. pag. 19., as did also the Primitiue Christians.
Besides these Temples and Houses consecrated to God, Ambition, the Ape of deuotion, founded some of other nature. Herod the Great, erected a sumptuous Temple and Citie in the honour of Caesar, which sometime had beene called Stratonis turris, and after Caesarea. The Temple of Caesar was conspicuous to them which sailed farre off in the Sea, and therein were two Statues, one of Rome, the other of Caesar. The sumptuousnesse of Herods ambition  in this Citie, Temple, Theater, and Amphitheater, etc. Iosephus amply describeth.Ant. l. 1^.13. He built another Temple at Panium, the fountaine of Iordan in honour of Caesar; and lest this should stirre vp the peoples hearts against him to see him thus deuoutely prophane, and prophanely deuout, he remitted to them the third part of the tributes. Hee consecrated Games, after the like Heathenish solemnitie, in honour of Caesar, to be celebrated euery fifth yeere at Caesarea. He built also the Pythian Temple at Rhodes of his owne cost. Hee gaue yeerely reuenue to the Olympyian Games, for maintenance of the Sacrifices and solemnity thereof: Quis in rapacitate auarior? Quis in largitione effusior? He robbed his owne to enrich (or rather vainely to lauish out on) others. He spared not the Sepulchers of the dead. For the Sepulchre of Dauid had lent before to Hyrcanus three thousand talentts of siluer;  which filled him with hope of the like spoyle; and entring it with his choise friends, hee found no money but precious clothes; and whiles he in a couetous curiositie searched further, he lost two of his company, by flame (as fame went) breaking out vpon them. Herevpon he left the place, and, in recompence, in the entry of the Sepulchre, built a monument of white Marble.
He built alsoIos. de Bell. Iud. l. 1. c. 16. Sebaste in the Region of Samaria, wherein hee erected a Temple, and dedicated a Court of three furlongs and a halfe of ground before it, to Caesar. Thus Caesar was made a God by him, who would not allow Christ a place among men, but, that hee might kill him, spared not the infants of Bethleem, no not his owne sonne am^^gst the rest, as this his god ieasted of him,Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. saying; That hee had rather bee Herods  Swine then his Sonne. For his Iewish deuotion prohibited him to deale with Swine, but not Religion, not Reason, not Nature could protect those Innocents from slaughter.


CHAP. IIII. Of the Iewish computation of time, and of their festiuall daies.
 THE day amongst the Iewes was (as amongst vs) Naturall and Artificiall: this from Sunne-rising to Sunne-setting, to which is opposed Night, the time of the Sunnes absence from our Hemisphere: that comprehended both these, called of the Greekes (...), containing one whole reuolution of the Sunnes motion to the same point of the Horizon or Meridian, in twenty foure houres. This NaturallPlin. l. 2. c. 77. Fabrit Paduani. Catena temp. an. 28. Scal. de Emend. Temp. l. 1. day the Babylonians began at the rising of the Sunne, the Athenians at the setting, the Vmbrians (as the Astrologians) at Noone, the Egyptians and Romane Priests at Midnight. The Iewes agreed in their reckoning with the Athenians, as did the Galli inCaesar. Com. l. 6. Caesars time, reporting Pluto to be the author of their Nation; and some relickes hereof is in our naming of time by a seuen-night, and a fort-night; although  otherwise wee reckon the day betweene two midnights. The most naturall computation of this naturall day, is, to follow that order of Nature, wherein darkenesse had the prioritie of time,G^n. 1.5. and the euening and the morning were made one day, or the first day: which
 (saithHospinian. de fest Ethnic. l. 1.1 Hospinian) the Italian and Bohemian Clockes doe yet obserue. The day was not diuided of the first Hebrewes (before the Babylonian captiuity) into houres, but was distinguished by Vigiliae, orIunius in Exo. 12. plane haec and plene. Watches, of which they had foure; the first began at euening, the second at mid-night, the third in the morning, the fourth at noone. Neither is there any Hebrew word signifying an houre, although some interpret the degrees of the Dyall of AhazEsa. 38.8. to be houres: some (as Tremell.) halfe houres. Afterwards it was diuided into houres, twelue in the night, and as many in the day: not equall as ours, but longer or shorter, according to so many equall portions of the day or night; so that with them the first, second, third, fourth, fift, sixt, seuenth, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleuenth, and twelfth houre, was answerable with our houres of seuen, eight, nine, ten, eleuen, twelue, one, two, three, foure,  fiue, and sixe, if we consider them in the Equinoctiall; otherwise they differed from our equall houres more or lesse, according to the vnequall lengthening or shortning of the daies, but so that an easie capacitie may conceiue the proportion. These houres sometimes they reduced into foure, the first containing the first, second and third, or with vs, the seuenth, eighth, and ninth houres: the second; the fourth, fift, and sixt, or after our reckoning, ten, eleuen, and twelue of the clock, and so forwards. This was the Ecclesiasticall Computation according to the times of Prayers and Sacrifices, imitated still in the Church of Rome in their Canonicall houres. Thus is Marke reconciled to the other Euangelists,Marc 15.25. and 33. vid. Bez. annot. ib. in relating the time of Christs passion, the first calling it the third houre when they crucified him, or led him to be crucified, whereas Iohn saith, That it wasIohn and 19. about the sixt houre when Pilate  deliuered him. Thus may the parable of the Labourers in the Vine-yard bee vnderstood, Matth. 20. and other places of Scripture. The night also was diuided into foure Watches, each containing three houres accordingly, They had three houres of Prayer, the third, the sixt, the ninth, as both the Iewish andAct. 2.10. and 3. vid. Drus. praet. in Act. 3.1. and 10.3. Euangelicall Writers mention: the first of which they say Abraham instituted, the second Isaac (it began when it was halfe an houre past the sixt houre, and continued till halfe an houre after the ninth: at this houre the Disciples of the Wisemen tooke their meate, which before this Prayer tasted nothing) the third began when the former left, and continued till the Euening. And this was obserued both for their publike and priuate Prayers, although it bee not likely that the whole time was that way spent, especially in priuate deuotions; for then their particular callings had beene frustrate,  and cancelled by this exercise of the generall.
Seuen daies were aSeptimana, tes omnibus quidem Orientis populis ab vltima vsque Antiquitate vsitata: nobis autem Europaeis vix tandem post Christianismum recepta. Scal. de Emend. T. l 1. Antiquiorest appellatio dierum septimaa^ subnominib. 7. Planetarum quam horarum. Horae noua appellatio, a Graecis, etc. lib 7. and causab. ad Athen. l. 1. aliquanto post Aristot. tempora. weeke, whereof the seuenth was called the Sabbath; others had no particular name, but were called the first day of the weeke, or the first day of (or after) the Sabbath, and so of the rest. The Christians called themScal. E T. l. 7. pag. 730. Feriae, as the first second or third Feria, for Sunday, Munday, Tuesday: the reason whereof was, the keeping of Easter weeke holy. For that being made in their Calender the first weeke of the yeere, and by Law being wholly feriata, freed from working, and sanctified to holy vses; therefore the daies also of other weekes receiued that name from this first weeke. Touching which there is a Law of Constantine the great, to keepe both it and the weeke before it also (...), without working, which for the later was by custome obtained, and by a CanonCan. 66. in Trallo. enioyed, to spend it  wholly in the Church with Psalmes and Hymnes and spirituall Songs. Yea, the antient Christians obserued a continuallAmb. Ser. 61. Instar. dominicae tota 50. dierum curricula celebrantur, etc. Vid. Hospin. de Fest. Christ. festiuall from Easter to Whitsuntide, in which they neither kneeled nor fasted.
Their Moneths, as with vs and the Grecians, tooke their name of the Moone, and with them also their measure, reckoning the order of their daies according to the age of the Moone, and by course they contained, one thirty dayes, the next twenty nine, and therefore were constrained euery second or third yeere to intercale, or adde, as in a Leape-yeere one moneth of two and twenty daies, and in euery fourth yeere, of three and twenty daies. This they calledVeadar, that is, and Adar, or Adar doubled. Veadar, because it followed the twelfth moneth Adar, for the supply of ten daies, one and twenty houres, and two hundred and foure scruples, which the twelue  moneths of the Moone came short of the yeere of the Sunne. And this they were forced to doe for the obseruation of the Passouer, and their other feasts.Hosp: de fest. Scal. Em. T. l. 1. Before their Babylonian thraledome, foure onely of these moneths were knowne by proper names; the first called Ethauim, the second Bul, the seuenth, which after was made the first, Abib; the eighth Zif: but afterwards the rest receiued names, which had beene before distinguished only by order, and the former names also were altred; that being reckoned the first moneth of the yeere, in which befell the fifteenth day of the Moone, after the Equinoctiall Vernall, and their names follow, Nisan, Iar, Sinan, Thamuz, Ab, Elul, Thischri, Marcheschuan, Cisleu, Tebeth, Schebath, Adar. Thus Hospinian; but Scaliger and Ar. Montanus in his Daniel, or ninth booke of Iewish Antiquities, say, That the antient yeere had twelue moneths, as appeareth  by the Historie of Noah: but those moneths had no proper names, but of their order, the first, second, third moneth, etc. Those names, which after they were knowne by,
 were Chaldean; and so Elias in Thesbi. They were all Chaldean or Persian names, not mentioned in any of the Prophets before the captiuitie, and they also name but seuen. But in Thargum Hierosol. they are all expressed in their order. The Iaponites, Chinois, and Indians, haue no names yet for their moneths, but name them by their order and number. The Romanes also named some of their moneths by their order; others after their Emperours, as Iulius and Augustus, to which Domitian added, Germanicus for September, his owne name for October, Commodus made an Edict, for the naming of August Commodus, September Herculeus, October Inuictus, Nouember Exuperatorius, December Amazonius.
The Hebrew yeere before Moses, beganHospinian, Ar. Montanus in his Daniel and others begin the world in Autumne; but our English yeere doth (as also Scaliger did, who in the last Edition of Em. T. hath now altred his opinion, and agreeth with the former) suppose the world was created in the Equinoctial vernall. And of this opinion is R. Iehosua, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Beda, Isidorus, Damascene, and other later Diuines, and Astronomers, whose reasons Hospinian Iaboreth to confute and adhuc sub iudice lis est. at the new Moone next before the Autumnall  Equinoctiall, that being supposed by some to be the time wherein the World was first created, euery Plant and Tree hauing the fruit and seede ripe: and this reckoning of the yeere in ciuill affaires, is obserued of the Iewes vnto this day: and from hence they began their Iubilee and seuenth Sabbatticall yeere, lest otherwise they should haue lost two yeeres profits, not reaping the fruit of the olde yeere, nor sowing in the next. Their Ecclesiasticall or festiuall yeere began at the Spring, as wee haue said afore, by the commandement of GOD, at, and in remembrance of their departure out of Egypt at the same time, Exod. 12. as with vs wee haue an Ecclesiasticall yeere moueable, according to the fall of Easter, differing from the Ciuill beginning at our Lady, as with others at Christmasse, or New-yeeres day.
Ios. Scal. de Emend. Temp. l. 4.Scaliger thus obserueth concerning the Iewish yeere. The Iewes (saith he vse a double reckoning of their yeere; one after the course of the Moone, the other after the Tekupha's, or course of the Sunne. TekuphaTekupha is the fourth part of a yeere. Sic Ionathan Paraph. Chal. Gen. 8. vlt. Sementis in Tekupha Tisri, messis in Tek. Nisan frigus in Tek, Tabeth, aestus in Tek. Tamuz. anciently was that moment, in which the passed yeere ended, and the following began. But the later Iewes diuided the yeere of the Sunne into foure equall parts, each whereof consisted of ninety one dayes, seuen houres and a halfe. And they diuided the said yeere into twelue equall parts, each containing daies thirty, houres ten, and thirty minutes. They began at the fifteenth of Aprill, moued by the authority of R. Samuel, an antient Criticke, who ascribed the first Tekupha to that moneth which before they began in Autumne: the reason was, because at that time Moses led the Israelites out of Aegypt. The moderne Iewes are so superstitious in the obseruation of their Tekupha's, that  they esteeme it danger of life to alter their reckoning of them. They also attribute to each of them his proper Element, as to the Tekupha Tamuz (the Summer Solstice) the Fire; and he which should drinke or eate in the moment of that Tekupha, they thinke should bee taken with a burning feuer. Tekupha Nisan, is on the fifteenth of Aprill, Tekupha Tamuz, on the fifteenth of Iuly, Tekupha Tisri, on the foureteenth of October, Tekupha Tebeth, on the fourteenth of Ianuarie. In times past they obserued superstitiously the beginnings of euery moneth, thinking, that then the Sun entred into that Signe which was attributed to that moneth. Now they onely obserue the foure Tropicall Signes. Such is their folly, as though now the entrance of Aries were not more then fiue and thirty dayes before the Tekupha of Moses. But their leaden braines know not what Tekupha is, not why, nor when it was instituted.  So much Scaliger.
If the new Moone happened afternoone, then the moneth and their New-Moone-Feast began the next day, and the yeere likewise, which began at the New-Moone. They were so scrupulous concerning the Moone, that Clemens Alexand. out of another Author obiects the worship thereof vnto them. They thinke (saithStrom l. 6. ex Petri Praedicationis libro. he) that they alone know GOD, not knowing that they worship Angels and Arch-angels, and the Moneth, and the Moone; and if the Moone appeare not, they keepe not that Sabbath, which they call The first, nor the New-Moone, nor the Vnleauened, nor the Feast, nor the great Day. This fabulousScal. prolegom. in Em. Temp. Edit. vlt. Author cited by Clemens vnderstood not himselfe, saith Scaliger; for they still obserue the appearance or first sight of the Moone, not to ordaine the solemnitie thereby (which was done by  a certaine rule) but to sanctifie it: and therefore as soone as they saw the New-Moone, they say Good lucke (or a good signe) be it to vs and to all Israel. The same also do the Muhamedans obserue. By the first Sabbath he meaneth the New-yeeres day, called a Sabbath, because it was holy-day: by the Feast, Pentecost; by the great-Day, that of Tabernacles. Although in regard of vse, some daies were more holy then other, yet had euery day appointedExod. 29.38. Num. 28. Leuit. 23. sacrifices morning and euening.
Their Feasts were either weekely, of which was the Sabbath; or monethly, euery New-Moone; or yeerely, of which were the Easter or Passeouer, Pentecost, or Whitsuntide, the Feast of Tabernacles. These were chiefe, to which were added the Feast of Trumpets of Expiation, and of the GreatThe Octaues at the end of the Feast of Tabernacles, which was, saith Rambam, to accomplish therein those kinds of ioy which required houses, and could not be done in Boothes. Moreh. Neb. lib. 3. cap. 44. On the next day was the Feast of the Law, called also Blessing, because they reade then the last Chapter but one of Deutronomie. See Nehem. 9. Congregation. To these we may reckon the seuenth yeeres Sabbath, and

 the yeere of Iubilee. These Feasts GOD had prescribed to them, commanding, that in those three principall Feasts, euery male (as the Iewes interpreted it, that were cleane and sound, and from twenty yeeres of their age to fiftie) should appeare there where the Tabernacle or Temple was, with their offerings, as one great Parish, Deut. 16. hereby to retaine an vnitie in diuine worship; and a greater solemnitie; with increase of ioy and charitie; being better confirmed in that Truth, which they here saw to be the same which at home they had learned, and also better strengthened against the errors of the Heathen and Idolatrous feasts of Diuels. To these were after added vpon occasions, by the Church of the Iewes, their foure Feasts, in memory of their calamities receiued from the Chaldeans, their Feast of Lots, of Dedication, and others, as shall follow in their order,  
They began to celebrate their Feasts at Euen: so Moses is commanded,Leu. 23.32. From Euen to Euen shall yee celebrate your Sabbath; imitated in the Christian Euen-songs, on holy Euens; yet the Christian Sabbath is by some supposed to begin in the morning, because Christ did rise at that time. As for the causes of Feasts, many they are and great: That the time it selfe should in the reuolution thereof, be a place of Argument to our dulnesse; This is thePsal. 118.24. day which the Lord hath made, let vs reioyce and be glad in it. And what else is a festiuall day, but a witnesse of times, light of truth, life of memory, mistresse of life? A token of publike thankfulnesse for greatest benefits passed, a spurre to the imitation of our Noble Ancestrie, the Christian Worthies; a visible word to the Ethnicke and ignorant, which thus, by what we doe, may learne what we beleeue; a visible heauen to the spirituall man, that in festiuall  ioyes doth, as it were, open the vayle; and here fides is turned into a vides, whiles in the best exercises of Grace, he tasteth the first fruits of Glory, and with his Te Deums, and Halleluiahs, begins that blessed Song of the Lamb; whiles time it selfe puts on her festiuall attire, and acting the passed, admonish the present ages, teacheth by example, quickneth our Faith, strengthneth hope, inciteth charitie, and in this glimpse and dawning, is the day-starre to that Sunne of Eternitie, when time shall be no longer, but the Feast shall last for euerlasting. These the true causes of festiuall Times.


CHAP. V. Of the Festiuall dayes instituted by God in the Law.
AS they were enioyned to offer a Lambe in the morning, and another in the Euening euery day, with other Prayers, Prayses, and Rites: so had the SABBATH a double honour in that kinde, and was wholly sequestred and sanctified to religious duties. Which howsoeuer it was ceremoniall, in regard of that seuenth day designed, of the Rites therein prescribed, of that rigid and strait obseruation exacted of the particular workes prohibited, and of  the deadly penaltie annexed; yet are we to thinke, that the Eternall Lord, who hath all times in his hand, had, before this, selected some time proper to his seruice, which in the abrogation of CeremoniesSee l. 1. c. 4. Legall, is in Morall and Christian duety to be obserued to the end of the World: euen as from the beginning of the World he had sanctified the seuenth day to himselfe, and in the Morall Law (giuen not by Moses to the Iewes, but by GOD himselfe, as to all creotures) is the remembrance of that sanctification vrged. Friuolous are their reasons, who would renue the Iewish Sabbath amongst Christians, tying and tyring vs in a more then Iewish seruitude, to obserue both the last and first dayes of the weeke, as some haue preached, and of the Aethiopian Churches is practised. Neither can I subscribe to those, who are so farre from paying two, that they acknowledge not the debt of one vpon  diuine right, but onely in Ecclesiasticall courtesie, and in regard of the Churches meere constitution; and haue thereupon obtruded on many other dayes as Religious respects o^ more, then on this (which yet the Apostles entituled in name and practice, The Lords day) with the same spirit whereby they haue equalled traditions to the holy Scriptures.
Thus CardinalTolet. Instruct. lib. 4. cap. 24.25. Tolet alowes on the Lords day iourneying, hunting, working, buying, selling, Fayres, Fencing, and other priuate and publike workes by him mentioned: and saith, a man is tyed to sanctifie the Sabbath, but not to sanctifie it well; (a new kinde of distinction) the one is in hearing Masse, and ceasing from seruile workes; the well-doing it, in spirituall contemplations, etc. AnotherBellarm. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. cap. 10. Cardinall is as fast as he is loose, affirming, That other holy daies also binde the Conscience, euen in cases voide of contempt and scandall, as being  truely more holy then other daies, and a part of diuine worship, and not onely in respect of order and politie.

But to returne to our Iewish Sabbath. Plutarch thought, that the Sabbath was deriued of (...), which signifieth to keepe Reuell-rout, as was vsed in their Bacchanals of (...), which is interpreted Bacchus, or the sonne of Bacchus, as Coelius RhodiginusCoel. Rhodig. Lect. Antiq. l. 4. c. 15. sheweth out of Amphithaeus and Mnaseas; who is therefore of opinion, That Plutarch thought the Iewes on their Sabbaths worshipped Bacchus, because they did vse on that day to drinke somewhat more largely (a Sabbatizing too much, by too many Christians imitated, which celebrate the same rather as a day of Bacchus, then the Lords day.Apoc. 1.10.) Bacchus his Priests were called Sabbi,Plutarch. Sympos. lib. 4. (...) of this their reuelling and misse-rule. Such wide coniectures we finde in others, whereas the Hebrewes call it Sabbath, of (...), which signifieth To rest,  because of their vacation to Diuine Offices, and not for idlenesse or worse imployments. And for this cause all the festiuall solemnities in the ScriptureEzek. 20:12. are stiled with this generall title and appellation, as times of rest from their wonted bodily seruices. Likewise their seuenth yeere was SabbathicallLeuit. 25.2., because of the rest from the labors of Tyllage. In those feasts also, which consisted of many daies solemnitie, the first and last were Sabbaths,Leuit. 23. in regard of the strictnesse of those daies rest.
LukeLuc. 6.1. hath an obscure place, which hath much troubled Interpreters with the difficulty thereof, (...), our English reades it; The second Sabbath after the first.Isid. in Thom. Catena. Isidore saith, it was so called of the Pascha, and Azyma comming together. Chrysostome thinkes (as Sigonius cytes him) it was when theCar. Sigon. de Rep. Heb. l. 3. c. 13. New-Moone fell on the Sabbath,  and made a double Festiuall. Sigonius, when they kept their Passeouer in the second Moneth.Stella. in Luc. c. 6. Stella takes it for Manipulus frugum, alledging Iosephus his Author.Ambr. in Luc. Ambrose, for the Sabbath next after the first day of the Easter Solemnitie.Hospin, de fest. Iudaeor. c. 3, Hospinian, for the Octaues or last day of the same:Maldonat. in Matth. 12. Maldonatus, for the Feast day of Pentecost, which was the second of the chiefe Feasts: But Ioseph ScaligerScaliger. Can. Isag. l. 3. saith, That the second day of the Feast was called (...), (being the sixteenth day of the Moneth, called Manipulus frugum) and the Sabbaths which fell betwixt that and Pentecost, receiued their denomination in order from the same; Secundo-primum, Secundo-secundum, etc. And hence doth Luke call that first Sabbath which fell after that (...) or second day of the Feast (...). Of this we shall haue occasion to say more when we come to the Samaritans.Infra. cap. 9. The  name Sabbath is also taken for theInfra. cap. 9. whole weeke.Luc. 18.12. bis in Sabbat. But I list not to stand on the diuers significations of the Word.
Ios. de Bell. Iud. l. 7. c. 24. Inter Arcas and Raphanaeas. Plin. l. 31. c. 2. in Iudaea.Iosephus and Plinie tell of a Riuer in Syria, in the kingdome of Agrippa, called Sabbaticus, which on other daies ran full and swift, on the Sabbath rested from his course. Petrus GalatinusP. Galat. de Arcan l. 11.9. alledgeth the ceasing of the Sabbaticall streame, for an argument of the abrogation of the Iewish Sabbath.
The Iewes were superstitiously strict in the obseruation of their Sabbath: Ptolomey without resistance captiuating their Citie, and themselues by this aduantage, as did Pompey afterwards. And in the dayes of Matathias, father of Iudas Maccabeus; a thousand were murthered without resistance, till that by him they were better aduised: Which appeared  by the Pharises, that cauelled at the plucking and rubbing of a few eares of Corne, by the hungrie Disciples, and at their Master for healing on that day, though by his Word: which their superstition, the Iew that fell into a Priuie at Maidenbourg. An. 1270. on his Sabbath, and another at Tewksburie, 1220. (and were the one by the Bishop of the place, the other by the Earle of Glocester constrained to abide the Christian Sabbath, whence on their owne they would not be freed) testified to the world by a stinking penance, and the later leauing also his stinking superstitious soule behinde to seale his deuotion. They added of their owne, fasting that day till noone, their Sabbath daies iourney, which was (saith Saint Ierome)In vita Iosephi. by the institution of Barachibas, Simeon and Hellis, (Rabbines) not aboue two thousand paces,Drus. saith two thousand cubites, his Authors are the Chaldee paraphrast. Iarius. Theophil. Oecumenius giueth the reason, because the Arke and Tabernacle did so farre go before the people. See Trem. in Syr. trans. Act. 1.12. or two miles. Thus did this holy ordinance which GOD had  instituted for the refreshing of their bodies, the instruction of their Soules, and as a type of eternall happines, vanish into a smoky superstition amongst them. The Sacrifices and accustomed rites of the Sabbath are mentioned, Num. 28 and. Leu. 23. and 24. Where we may reade, that the daily burnt-offering, and meate-offering, and drinke-offering, were doubled on the Sabbath, and the Shew-bread renued, etc.
The sanctification of daies and times being aHooker l. 5. Ecclesiast. Polit. token of that thankefulnesse, and a part of that publike honor which we owe vnto GOD, he did not onely enioyne, by way of perpetuall homage the sanctification of one day in seuen, which GODS immutable Law doth exact for euer, but did require also some other part of time, with as strict exaction, but for lesse continuance; besides, accepting that which being left arbitrarie to the Church,  was by it consecrated voluntarily vnto like religious vses. Of the first of these (the Sabbath) we haue spoken: of the Mosaicall Feasts, the New-Moones are next to be considered. The institution hereof we reade, Numb. 28. and the solemne Sacrifice therein appointed; so
 to glorifie GOD the Author of Time and Light, which the darkened conceites of the Heathens ascribed to the Planets and bodies Coelestiall, calling the Moneths by their names. Besides their Sacrifices, they banquetted on this day, as appeareth by1. Sam. 12.5. Dauid and Saul, where the day after was festiuall also, eyther so to spend the surplusage of the former daies sumptuous Sacrifice, or for a further pretext of Religion and Zeale, as MartyrP. Mart. in 1. Sam. hath noted: SigoniasSigon. de Rep. Heb l. 2. c. 4. maketh these New-Moone daies to bee profestos, that is, such wherein they might labor, the Sacrificing times excepted: but those couetous penny-fathers seeme of another minde.Amos 8.5. When (say they) will the New-moone be gone, that we may sell Corne, and the Sabbath, that we may sell Wheate? And Esay 1. the Sabbaths and New-moones are reckoned together.  
Their PASSEOVER called of them Pasach, so called of the Angels passing ouer the Israelites in the common destruction of the Aegyptian first-borne. For Pasach, the Grecians (as some note) vse Pascha, of (...) to suffer, fitly in regard of the body of that shadow Christ himselfe, who1. Cor. 5.7. was our Paschal Lambe, in his suffering sacrificed for vs.
The institution of this Feast is set downe, Exod. 12. as Hospinian hath noted in the yeere after the creation of the world 2447.Scaliger and Caluisius, account 2453. Lydyat. 2509. others otherwise. after the stoud. 791. after the promise made to Abram 430. It was celebrated from the fifteenth to the one and twenty day of the moneth Abib or Nisan, those two daies being more specially sanctified with a holy Conuocation and abstinence from worke, except the dressing of their meate: the other being obserued with vnleauened bread: and the foureteenth day being the Parasceue, or preparation: in the euening  of which foureteenth day, as some men hold opinion, after Sun-set in the twy-light; others in the fourth houre, or fourth part of the day, as containing three houres space, before the going downe of theIos. de Bell. 7.17. saith, a nona vsque ad vndecimam hostias coedunt. Sun, the Paschal Lambe was slaine: about which time (the ninth houre) Christ the true Pascha yeelded vp the ghost,Proleg. in E. T. Ed. vlt. Scal. hauing eaten the Passeouer on the night before, which was the true time, and was then altred by the Iewes: which corruption continued to the destruction of their Temple, Christ suffered (saith Scaliger) on the third of Aprill, the fourth yeere compleate after his Baptisme. From which ninth houre the Iewes began their Vespera or Euening; and therefore it was inioyned them inter duas VesperasHae duae fuerunt Vesperae vna dici inclinantis ab hora nona altera noctis ineuntis, ab hora dici vltima. Iun. in Ex. 12., to kill the Passeouer. In these Vespers, as also in the Eeuen of euery Feast and Sabbath, after the euening Sacrifice they which do any worke, saith the Iewish Canon, shall neuer see good  signe of a blessing: which was the cause that they hastened so much the death of the theeues which were crucified with Christ.
This Lambe or Kidde was chosen a male of a yeere old, the tenth day of the Moone, which they kept till the foureteenth day tyed (after their traditions) to the foote of some bench or fourme, so to minister occasion to their children, of questioning about it, to themselues of Preparation and Meditation, and to espie in this meane while, if any default were in the Lambe. It was first a priuate Sacrifice, to be performed in euery house, after in that place onely, where the Tabernacle or Temple was; they were dispersed by companies, according to Iosephus, not fewer then tenne, sometime twentie in a companie; with Christ there were thirteene, and of these sacrifices and companies in time of Cestius, were numbred  two hundred fiftie six thousand and fiue hundred, so that reckoning the least number, there were ten times so many, besides those that by diseases or other manifold lets were not partakers thereof: and in regard of this Feast being assembled thither through GODS iust iudgement, their whole huge multitudes were couped or caged together in the wals of this Citie to destruction, vnder Titus.
The bloud of the Lambe they were to receiue in a vessell, and to sprinkle the same with a bunch of Hysope on the doore posts, and to eate it in the night, which was the beginning of the fifteenth day, roast with fire, with sowre hearbes and vnleauened bread; both the head, feete, and purtenance; girded, shod, with staues in their hands, in haste, standing, burning whatsoeuer was left of the same. After the eating the Sacramentall Lambe standing, they  had other prouision which they eate sitting,Lipsius. or after their manner of lying at Table, in remembrance of their libertie, as appeareth by Iohns leaning on his brest, and Iudas his sop at Christs supper. In the Law it was commanded that they should eate the Passeouer standing; which they onely practised in the first celebration in Aegypt. For so the Iewes set forth the difference of the Paschall night from other nights,Scal. Em. T. l. 6. p. 536. in their twice washing, which on other nights they do but once: in their vnleauened: in their Endiue or sowre hearbes: And whereas on other nights, they sit or lie, now they lie onely, in token of their securitie. The washing was therfore necessarie, lest they should defile the beds whereon they lay with their dusty feete. In which respect thePlautus, Persa, locus hic tuus est, hic accumbe, serte aquam pedibus. Luk. 11. Luk. 7. Gentiles also vsed to wash their feete: the Iewes their whole bodie. And the Pharise maruelled at Christ, (...) that he was not thus  baptized or washed before he sate downe. Some contented themselues onely with washing of the feete; the want of which Office Christ obiected to another of his Pharisaicall hostes.

But in the Paschall rite a double washing was requisite, because of their double Supper; which in the flourishing state of the Iewes, was also vsed in other their chiefe solemnities of the Pentecost and Tabernacles. In the former they eate their Sacrifices, in the later certaine Prayses were sung, and it was called the supper dimissorie. But this second Paschall Supper differed from that in other solemnities, wherein they vsed iunkets, which in this were forbidden; and instead therof they had Endine and wilde Lettice, mingled with Vinegar, and other things, which now they make as thick as mustard. The Housholder first dipt his vnleauened soppe therein and eate it, and then tooke from vnder the carpet or cloth another, which he brake into as many pieces as he had Communicants in his company, euery piece  being as big as an Oliue, which was giuen to each of them in order. When he eate that sop, first he said, Blessed be thou, Lord our God, King of the world, which hast sanctified vs with thy Commandements, and hast giuen vs the precept of vnleauened bread.
And when he had eaten, he said (as he distributed to the rest) This is the bread of affliction, which our fore-fathers ate in the land of Aegypt. Euery one which is hungry, come and eate: euery one which hath neede, come and obserue the Passeouer. After the destruction of Ierusalem, they added these words; Now we are here seruants, but hereafter wee shall be in the land of Israel: now we are here seruants, hereafter in the land of Israel free. After this, he tasted of the Cuppe, and deliuered to the next, and he to the third, and so on through the company. This was called the Cup of thankesgiuing, or of singing the Hymne,  which he deliuered with these words; Blessed art thou O Lord our GOD King of the world, Creator of the fruite of the Vine. Then did they sing a Hymne and depart; for the Canon forbad them to eate or drinke any thing after the Hymne. These were the Paschall rites in the time of CHRIST, who also vsed that reiterated both washing (saith Scaliger) and Supper, and also the Hymne. They were in the Eeuen of the foureteenth day to purge their houses of leauen, and that throughout the Land, where the Lambe might not be eaten. All the Israelites were inioyned this dutie: And they which by occasion of iourneying or vncleanenesse, could not now celebrate the Passeouer, were to obserue it the next moneth, Numb. 9.
The day after, or second day of this Paschall Feast, they were to bring to the Priest a  Gomer of the first-fruits of their Corne, and a Lambe, with other duties for a burnt offering to the LORD: before which time they might not eate of the new yeeres fruites, which at that time in those Countries beganne to ripen, and so to acknowledge GOD the giuer thereof.Philo. Iud. de vita Mos. l. 3. Philo saith, That each priuate man, which otherwise brought in his Sacrifice to the Priest, Sacrificed or slew this Sacrifice with his owne handes: And else whereIn Decalog. hee affirmeth the same. Eleazarus,Hospin. de festis. Iud. c. 3. Maldonat. in Mat. 26. or as other say, the Synedrium, ordayned three hundred and fiftie yeeres before the birth of Christ, that the Passe-ouer should not bee solemnized on the second, fourth, or sixt day of the Weeke: And therefore when it fell on the sixt day, which wee call Fridaie, it was deferred to the seuenth, at the time of Christs Passion, and he with his Disciples ate it the night before, according to the Law of God.
 This Eleazarus ordained, that the feast of Lots should not be celebrated on the second, fourth, or seuenth: or Pentecost on the third, fift, or seuenth; Or that of the Tabernacles, on the first, fourth, and sixt: Or the Fast of Expiation, on the first, third, or sixt: Or their New-yeeres day, on the first, fourth, and sixt, which decree is extant in the booke of Gamaliel Pauls Master, which they did superstitiously, to auoide two Sabbaths, (in so strict a rest) together, and carrying boughes on the Sabbath, if that Feast fell thereon, and on other such reasonlesse reasons.
After this sixteenth day of the moneth, or second day of the vnleauened bread, in which first of all, sickle was thrust into the Haruest, to offer the first fruits thereof vnto GOD, were numbred seuen intire Weekes, and the next day, which was the fiftieth (accounting inclusiuely)  was celebrated the feast of PENTECOST, receiuing his name of that reckoning of fiftie: And Schefuoth, that is, of Weekes, because of this reckoning of seuen weekes, it is called also the Feast of the Haruest of the first fruites: theExod. ^3.16. Act. 2.4. rites thereof are prescribed, Leuit. 23. The institution was in respect of the Law then giuen on Mount Sinai, and a type of that Euangelicall Law, which Christ, hauing ascended vp on high, did write not in Tables of stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart, when (at the same time) hee gaue the holy Ghost to his Disciples, as a remembrance also of the Author of their Haruest-fruits, and of their possession of that land where they had seede-time and haruest, which in the wildernesse they wanted.
As the seuenth day in the weeke, so the seuenth moneth in the yeere, was in a great part festiuall:  fittest for that purpose, as the fruits of the Earth being now inned.
The first day of this moneth was, besides the ordinarie Kalends or Festiuall New-MooneThese New-moone feasts, or Sabbaths, it seemeth Horace Serm. l. 1. Sat. 9. hodie tricesima Sabbata: vintu Cartis Iudaeis oppetere?, the Feast of Trumpets, in respect of that rite then obserued of sounding Trumpets, being their
 New-yeeres day, after the ciuill account: the institution is read, Leuit. 23. and Num. 29. Whether, as some of the Rabbines will haue it, for Isaaks deliuerance, that in remembrance of that Ramme, these Rams-horne Trumpets should be sounded, or in regard of the wars, or in respect of that spirituall war-fare which continueth our whoie life, or that this was so festiual a moneth, or the beginning of their yeere for ciuill accounts, and for the Sabbaticall and Iubilee yeeres, or for some other cause, let the wiser Reader iudge.
On tht tenth day of this moneth was the Feast or Fast of Reconciliation or Expiation, a day of publike penance, fasting and afflicting themselues, described in Leuit. 16. throughout the Chapter, and Chap. 23. wherein is liuely in that type shewed the Office of Iesus Christ, the eternall high-Priest, who hath alone wrought our atonement, entred into the Holy place of  Heauen, and laid our sins on the Scape-Goate, bearing them, and satisfying for them in his owne person on the Crosse, and by the sprinckling of his blood sanctified vs for euer to God his Father. Paul, Heb. 9. doth vnfold the misterie of this dayes rites, wherein onely, the high Priest alone might enter into the holy-place, and himselfe alone performe the other Offices of Expiation. The Iewes thought, that this fasting and afflicting themselues, was in respect of their Idolatrie with the golden Calfe, and therefore it seemed, that in Theodorets time they did not afflict themselues, but sported rather in obscure and prophane manner. The Sacrifices are set downe,Theodoret. qu. 32. in Leuit. Num. 29.8, 9, 10, 11.
The next Feast was that of Tabernacles; in remembrance that howsoeuer they now dwell in strong Cities, goodly houses, etc. yet their fathers liued in Tents in the wildernesse, where  GOD by a cloude in the day time, and fire in the night protected that people. It is expressed Leu. 23. Num. 29. Deut. 16. It was obserued from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth, the first and last of them being (as at the Passeouer) more solemnely festiuall, with abstinence from labor, and a generall Conuocation. They were the first day to take boughes and branches of Trees, and to make therewith Booths, and to dwell in booths seuen daies. This was neglected from the time of Iosuah, till the dayes of Nehemiah,Nehem. 8. when he and Ezra solemnized this feast seuen dayes with booths on their house-tops, and in their Courts and streetes, with Lectures euery day out of the Law, and a solemne assembly on the eight day. The Hebrews report that they made them bundles of that matter, which they carried, euery day of the seuen, vp and downe in the morning before they might eate, whereupon it was called the  Feast of Palmes or Willowes. The seuenth day, saith Paulus Fagius,Fag. in cap. Leu. 23. they compassed the Altar with these boughes seuen times, in remembrance of the fall of Iericho. Andrew Osiander affirmethAnd. Osiand. Annot. Harmon. Euan. l. 3. c. ^6. that they vsed this carrying about boughes euery day, especially the seuenth, in which they obserued a kinde of Procession or Letanie, singing, Ana Iehoua Hosanna ana Iehoua hatz elicha-na: first reckoning vp a great number of the names of God, then of his attributes: thirdly, of the things which they wish to be saued, then of themselues and other things, interlacing euery particular of these with singing Hosanna, like their Ora pro nobis in the Popish Letanie. Then they altar it in another forme, Pray redeeme the Vine of thy planting, Hosanna, etc. then in another, As thou sauedst the strong in Aegypt, when thou went'st out for their deliuerance, so Hosanna, etc. Then in a longer forme of prayers, with this foote  of the song Hosanna: and lastly all rings Hosanna, Hosanna: and hereupon the later Iewes called this feast Hosanna, as also those bundles of boughes: and although that the later Iewes haue now added much, the Iewes of Italie differing from them of Germanie, yet in Christs time the acclamations of Hosanna, when he came riding on an Asse into Ierusalem, testifie some such obseruation then amongst them.
The Sacrifices of euery day are designed Num. 29. The first day, thirteene bullocks, the second, twelue, and euery day one lesse to the seuenth: in all seuentie (as the Rabbines interpret it) according to the number of the seuentie languages of the Nations, which shall be subdued to the Messias; and ninetie eight Lambs, in respect of so many curses in the Law, against the transgressing Israelites.  
Iob. 7.37. Num. 29.35.The eight day was the Feast which they called, Haaziph and Azareth, that is, Collection, called also the great day of the feast, in the two and twentieth day of this moneth Tisri. In this they were to contribute to the continuall Sacrifices, and publike thanksgiuing was made for the stuites of the Earth, and the first fruites of the latet fruites were offered. IeroboamHospin. de fest. cap. 7. in an irreligious policie remoued the feast of Tabernacles from the seuenth moneth to the eight, from Tisri to Marchesuan.
The seuenth yeere, was appointed a Sabbaticall yeere, wherein they were neither to sowe nor to reape, but to leaue that which should voluntarily grow in their fields and yards to the poore; and secondly, should not exact debt of their brethren of the same Nation, but remit it, Deu. 15. Exod. 23. Leuit. 25. and the obseruation hereof is expressed in the time of  Nehemiah.Nehem. 10.31.
After seuen times seuen yeeres which make fortie nine, they were to reckon Iobel or
 yeere of Iubilee, Leu. 25. beginning on the day of Reconciliation: Wherein seruants were freed, debts remitted, possessions, that had beene alienated, returned, the law allowing no further sales, proclaimed with sound of a Trumpet of a Rammes-horne, and therefore called Iobel, which signifieth a Ramme, or Rammes-horne.
Touching this yeere of Iubilee is much controuersie. The ancient Authors account it the fiftieth yeere. ScaligerIos. Scal. animad. in Euseb. pag. 13. refuseth their authoritie herein. Many moderne writers hold the same opinion, asHospin. de Temp. and de Fest. Iud. Hospinian,Melan. Chron. lib. 5. Melanchton, FabritiusFab. Pad. Catena temp. annul. 40. Paduanus, etc.Caluis. Isagoge cap. 23. Caluisius hath at large disputed this question against Crentzhemius and Bucholcerus, by diuers arguments prouing that the Iubilee was but fortie nine yeeres complete, and that the fiftieth yeere was the  first onwards of another Iubilee or Sabbath of yeeres: Yet is this space reckoned by fiftie, as Ouid calls the Olympiad, quinquennis Olympias: Aristophanes,Aristo^h. in Pluto. and Ausonius,Ausonius de ludis. affirming the like: and yet the Olympiad is but foure yeeres complete, and reckoned from the fift to the fift exclusiuely. Otherwise they should haue had two Sabbatticall yeeres together, namely, the fortie ninth being the seuenth yeere, and the next which was the fiftieth yeere. As for the later Writers, they might be deceiued by following the streame, and beguiled by the Popish Iubilee, which Boniface the eight, before called Benedictus (and yet neither was good sayer nor doer) instituted Anno. 1300. to be obserued euery hundreth yeere: and Clement the sixt abridged to the fiftieth; as Auentinus, Trithemius, Crantzius, and others haue written. Whether they were Heathenish in imitating the Ludi seculares, or Iewish, in  following the legall Iubilee: Certaine it is, Rome thereby becomes a rich Mart, where theApoc. 18.11. Marchants of the Earth resort from all places of the Earth to buy Heauen: and BabylonV. 16. the great Citie is cloathed in fine linnen and purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold and precious stone and pearles, with the gaines of her Wares, giuing in exchangeV. 13. the soules of men, washed from their sinnes; A thing more precious to Christ then his most precious blood. But his pretended Vicars haue learned to effect it (the filling of their purse) with greater ease: deuout Pilgrims from all parts visiting Saint Peters staires, whence they goe truely Saint Peters heires (Act. 3.6. Siluer and gold haue I none) and yet finde their Pardons too cheape to be good. But to returne to our Pilgrimage, and to obserue the obseruation of the Iewish Iubilee; This feast was partly ciuill in regard of the poore, of the inheritances, of the Israelitish Families,  specially that of the Messias, and of the computation of times, as amongst the Greekes by Olympiads, and amongst the Romanes by Lustra and indictions: partly also it was mysticall in regard of the Gospell of Christ, preaching libertie and peace to the Conscience, the acceptable yeere of the LORD.
And thus much of those Feasts which GOD himselfe instituted to this Nation; which how the Iewes of later times haue corrupted, and doe now superstitiously obserue, instituting others also of their owne deuisings, shall bee handled in due place. Wee are next to speake of those Feasts, which vpon occasions they imposed vpon themselues before the comming of CHRIST: to which wee will adde a briefe Kalender of all their  Fasts and Feasts.


CHAP. VI. Of the Feasts and Fasts, which the Iewes instituted to themselues: with a Kalender of their Feasts and Fasts through the yeere, as they are now obserued.
 THE Prophet Zacharie, in his seuenth and eighth Chapters mentioneth certaine fasting daies, which the Iewes by Ecclesiasticall Iniunction obserued. One in the tenth day of the tenth moneth, because, on that day Ierusalem began to bee besieged, 2. Reg. 24. A second Fast was obserued on the ninth day of the fourth moneth, in remembrance that then the Chaldeans entred the Citie,
A third Fast they held on the ninth day of the fift moneth, in respect of the Citie and Temple burned on that day. First, by Nabuchodonosor; Secondly, by Titus on the same day: Which the Iewes doe yet obserue with strict penance, going bare-foote, and sitting on the ground, reading some sad Historie of the Bible, and the Lamentations of Ieremie  three times ouer.
Their fourth Fast they celebrated on the third day of the seuenth moneth, in remembrance of Godoliah slaine by Ismael, Iere. 41.42.2. Reg. vlt. To these are reckoned the Fast
 of Easter, in the thirteenth day of Adar, their twelfth Moneth; and on the seuenteenth day of the fourth moneth, in the remembrance of the Tables of the Law broken by Moses: the institution whereof seemeth to be late, seeing the Scripture doth not mention it. In this moneth the Aegyptians kept the Feast or Fast of their Osiris, lamenting for him, which seemeth to be the same that is mentioned, Ezech. 8. Where women are said to mourne for Tamuz, whom Plutarch calleth Amuz, and from thence deriueth Iupiters title of Ammon. Of him was this fourth moneth called Tamuz.
On theEster. 9.21. foureteenth and fifteenth daies of Adar, they kept the feast of Phurim, or Lots, instituted in remembrance of that deliuerance from Haman; by the authoritie of Ioachim the high-Priest,Caluis. 3477. as Functius relateth out of Philo, An. M. 3463. Antonius Margarita, a christened  Iewe, reporteth that on these daies the Iewes reade the Historie of Ester, and so often as Haman is mentioned, they smite on their seates with their fists and hammers, otherwise spending the time of this feast in Bachanall riots and excesse.
They also had the feast of Wood-carrying, called (...), mentioned byIoseph. de bello Iud. li. 1. c. 17. Iosephus, in which the custome was for euery one to carry Wood to the Temple to maintaine the fire of the Altar.
The Feast of Dedication, otherwise called the feast of Lights, and the institution thereof is largely described, 2. Maccab. 4. in remembrance of the institution of Diuine worship and Sacrifice in the Temple, which had beene by Antiochus polluted, and sacred to Iupiter Olympius, all the seruices appointed by the Law being abolished. By Iudas Maccabeus, the Temple  and Altar, and other holy instruments, were dedicated the same day three yeeres, after their first pollution, called therefore the feast of Lights, as I thinke, saithIos. Ant. 12. c. 2. Iosephus, because so vnexpected a light shon forth vnto them. But Franciscus Iunius, in his Annotations vpon the Syrian translation of the tenth of Iohn, where this Feast is mentioned, alleageth out of the Tallmud, another cause as followeth. When on the fiue and twentith day of Cisleu they entred into the Temple, they found not pure oyle, except in one little vessell, which contained sufficient for the Lamps but one day, of which Oyle they lighted the Lamps in order, which lasted eight daies, till they pressed out of the Oliues cleane Oyle. And therefore the wise-men of that time decreed, that yeerely those eight daies, beginning at the fiue and twentith of Cisleu, should be daies of ioy, and that euery one in the doores of their houses euery euening,  during those eigh daies, should light Lamps, for declaration of that miracle, wherein they must not fast nor lament.
Likewise 1. Mac. 13. is ordained festiuall the three and twentieth day of Iar, for the expiation of the Tower of Ierusalem, by Simon Mac.
On the last day of the feast of Tabernacles, they finish the reading of the Law with much ioy and solemnitie, calling it the feast of the ioy of the Law. The next Sabbath begins their Reading of the first Parasch or Section, which was also read that day they made an end of the last, lest they should seeme weary of it, and glad it were ended. These Paraschs or Sections of the Law (as our Lessons in our Seruice) were ancient, as appeareth Act. 15.21. in number fifty foure, for twice they put together two short ones. When Antiochus burned and  prohibited the Law, they reade in stead of Moses, the Prophets: and after Antiochus his death they continued both, as the first and second Lesson with vs. That of the Prophets they called haphtara, that is, a dismissing, because after it the people were dismissed, euen as the name Missa, for like cause was giuen to the Christian holies. They reade Moses not onely on the Sabbaths, but also on Mundaies, and Thursedaies; which by them that would seeme more holy, were fasted also, as Luc. 18. appeares by the bragges of that supercilious Pharise, I fast twice in the weeke.
Sigonius reckoneth also the feast of Iephta, in the end of the yeere, which yet is not like to haue continued in succeeding ages:De fest. Iud. vid. Phil. Ferdinand. and of the fire that we find mentioned in 2. Mac. 1. and the feast of Iudith, for killing Holofernes: and on the fourteenth day of Adar, for the victorie  against Nicanor, Ios. l. 12. Their later feasts I shall mention, and declare their seueral ceremonies, when wee come to speake of their later times, and of the present Iewish superstition. In the meane time I thinke it not amisse to set downe here out of Scaliger, a view or Kalender of their moneths,Ios. Scal. Can. Isag. l. 1. c. 6. TISRI habet diet 30. with the Feasts and Fasts, as they are obserued therein at this day.
Tisri plenus. die. 1. Clangor Tubae 3. Ieiunium Godoliae, qui cum Iudaeis occidebatur in Mazpa, Ier. 41.5. Ieiunium. Moriuntur 20. Israelitae. Rabbi Akiba filius Ioseph conijcitur in vincula vbi moritur. 7. Ieiunium. Decretum contra Patres nostros, vt perirent gladio, fame, ac peste, propter vitulum fabricatum. 10. Iejunium Kippurim. 15. Scenopegia. 21. (...) 22. Octaua Scenopegias. 23. Festiuitas Legis.  
Marches. 29.Marches. Cavus. 7. Ieiunium. Excaecarunt ocules Sedekiae, etc. post 29. Intercalatur dies vna in Anno pleno.

Casleu plenus. 25. Encoenia. 28. Ieiunium:Casleu. 30. Ioiakim combussit volumen quod scripserat Baruch dictante Ieremia. 30. Eximitur dies in Anno defectiuo.
Tebeth Cavus. 8. Ieiunium, Scripta est lex Graece diebus Ptolemaes Regis,Tebeth. 29. Tenebrae triduo per vniuersum orbem. 9. Ieiunium. Non scripserunt Magistri nostri quare ea dies notata 10. Ieiunium. Obsidetur Ierusalem a Rege Babylonis.
Sebat plenus 5. Ieiunium: Moriantur Seniores qui fuerunt aequales Iosuae filij Num. 23.Sebat. 30. Ieiunium. Congregati sunt omnes Israelitae, contra Beniaminem propter pellicem and idolum Micha. 30. Locus Embolismi.
Adar Cavus. 7. Ieiunium. Moritur Moses Magister noster qui in pace quiescit. 9. Ieiunium:Adar. 29.  Scholae Sammai and schola Hellel inter se contendere coeperunt. 13. Festiuitas decreta: interficitur Nicanor. 14. Mardochaeus Phurim.
Nisan plenus 1. Ieiunium. Mortui sunt filij Aaron. 10. Ieiunium. Moritur Mariam.Nisan. 30. Eligitur agnus Mactandus 14. die. 14. PASCHA. Exterminatio fermenti. 15. Azyma. 16. (...), Manipulus frugum, (...), 21. Solennitas finis Azymorum. 23. (...). 26. Ieiunium, Moritur Iosue filius Nun. 30. (...).
Iiarcavus. 7. (...). 10. Ieiunium.Iiar. 29. Moritur Eli Pont. Max. and ambo filij eius: capitur arca testimonij, 14. (...).  21. (...). 23. Solennitas. Simon Gazam capit. 28. (...). Ieinnium: Moritur Samuel Propheta: plangitur ab omni populo.
Sivvan plenus, 6.Sivvan. 30. (...). 23. Ieiunium. Desistunt ferre primogennita and primitias Ierosolyma in diebus Ieroboam filij Nabat. 25. Ieiunium. Occiditur Rabban Simeon filius Gamaliel, Rabbi Ismael, R. Hanania secundus a pontificib. 27. Ieiunium. Combustus est Rabbi Hanina filius Tardion vna cum libro legis.
Tamuz Cavus 17, Ieiunium. Franguntur Tabulae legis Cessat (...).Tamuz. 29. vrbs fissa Epistemon cremat librum legis. Ponit statuam in templo.
Ab plenus. 1. Ieiunium. Moritur Aharon Pontifex. 9. Ieiunium.Ab. 30. Decretum contra patres nostros ne ingrederentur in terram Iudaeam. Desolati^ Templi prioris and posterioris. 18. Ieiunium. Extincta est Lucerna vespertina in diebus Ahaz.
Elulcavus. 17. Ieiunium. Moriuntur Exploratores qui diffamaverant terram. 22. Xylophoria,Elul. 29.
As for the Sabbaths, New-moones, and daies not solemnized with feasting or fasting, I haue passed ouer this Kalender, as impertinent or needelesse.


CHAP. VII. Of the ancient Oblations, Gifts, and Sacrifices of the Iewes: of their Tithes, and of their Priests, and Persons Ecclesiasticall, and Religious.

@. I. Of their Oblations, Gifts, and Sacrifices.
 ALthough Moses doth handle this matter of their Rites and Sacrifices, and is herein seconded and interpreted by the succeeding Prophets, so fully, that it may seeme a powring of water into the Sea, to speake needelesly, or by our Discourse, to obscure, rather then illustrate, that which is so largely and plainely there expressed; yet because of that subiect which we haue in hand, I cannot altogether be silent (at least of the kindes and heads) referring the desirous Reader; for his more perfect satisfaction in particulars, to those clearer propheticall fountaines. Their Rites for time and place we haue already described: The next intended part of this Iewish relation shall be of their Oblations, which were either Gifts or Sacrifices. Their Sacrifices were such oblations, wherein the thing offered was in whole or  part consumed in diuine worship, for the most part by fire or shedding of blood. These were of eightCar. Sigon. de Republ. Heb. l. 4. sorts. Burnt-offerings, Meate-offerings, Peace-offerings, Sinne-offerings, Trespasse-offerings, the offerings of the Consecration, Cleansing, and Expiation.Philo de Sacrif. Philo reduceth them to
 three: Burnt, Peace, and Sin-offerings, according to the three causes of sacrificing; The worship of God, the obtayning of good things, and freedome from euill.
The Burnt-offerings were by fire consumed, the Rites and manners hereof are expressed, Leuiticus 1. the fire was to be perpetuall on the Altar, being that which GOD miraculously sent from heauen to consume Abihu sacrifice; for neglecting which, and vsing other, his two sonnes Nadab and Ahsbu were stricken by a reuenging fire from GOD. The Meate-offering was made of fine flowre, without hony or leuen, and with oyle and incense on the Altar, or frying pan, or ouen, or caldron, according to the rites prescribed, Leuit, 2. partly sacred to the Lord by fire, the rest to be the Priests. The Peace-offerings are with their proper ceremonies enioyned, Leuit. 3. and 7; the fat and kidnies were to be burned on the Altar  (the fat and blood being vniuersally forbidden them for foode) the brest and right shoulder was the Priests: the rest to the Sacrificer, to be eaten the first, or at furthest on the second day: or else on the third to be burned with fire. The Offering for sinnes of ignorance, for the Priest, Prince, People, or priuate man, is set downe, Leuit. 4, and 6. The Sinne-offering, in case of contempt, where the sinne is committed against God and man willingly, with the due manner thereof is expressed, Leuit. 6. To these were adioyned Prayers and Prayses, with musicall voyces, and instruments, Cymbals, Viols, Harpes, and Trumpets resounding, For he is good, for his mercy endureth for euer. The sixt kinde of Sacrifices was proper to the Priests at their consecration, recorded, Leuit 6.20. The seuenth mentioned Sacrifice is of Purification or cleansing, as of a woman after childe-birth, Leu. 12. or of a Leper, 13.14. or for vncleane  issues of men and women, chap. 15. The eight is the sacrifice of Expiation or Reconciliation, on that festiuall or fasting-day before spoken of, Leuit. 16. Hereunto may we adde the lights and the daily offerings of incense, morning and euening, Exod. 30. on a golden Altar, whereunto the Priests only had accesse, with such perfume only as is there prescribed.
The Gifts which we haue reckoned a second sort of Oblations that were not as the former in whole, or in part consumed in their offering, but preserued whole and sound, were giuen, either according to the Law, or by Vow, or of free will. The Law prescribed, First fruits and Tithes, and the personall halfe shekell, The first fruits of Man, of beasts, and of the fruits of the Earth, the law exacteth, Exod. 22.23. and are assigned to the Priests, Num. 5. and 18. which, of men and vncleane beasts, were to be redeemed, of others to be sacrificed.  


@. II. Of Tithes and their manner of Tithing.
OF Tithes, when we consider the assignement of them to the Tribe of Leui, we must so farre acknowledge them Leuiticall and Ceremoniall. But considering the paying of them to a Priest, so soone as we reade of a Priest, in Scripture, and that by the Father of the Faithfull, which the Apostle vrgeth against Leuiticall Ceremonies, in  that Leui himselfe in Abraham payed them; and his Nephew Iacob vowed the payment thereof, so soone as God should giue him whereof to pay Tithes: and that God required this dutie of Tithe, Exod. 22.29. before the Leuites were called to the seruice of the Tabernacle; which are not so much as named, till Exod. 38.21. the Scripture also speakes of them as anciently due, nor hath it any originall commandement for giuing Tithes to GOD: yea, the law of Nature taught it the Heathens, which paid them to their Idolls: and the first times of the Christian Church excepted,Rebuffus de decimis, item Tindari Tract. de Dec. Rebuffus statuit de iure diuino dictante ratione naturali, decimas inuentas. q. 1. @. 12. a iure vero canonico formam and declarationem esse factam. Tindorus @. 25. praeceptum (ait) decimarum partim est morale, partim iudiciale, etc. wherein there was no such settled order for things of this and like nature, Tithes were constantly paid to the Church, vntill the Arch-enemie of God and his Church, in his Antichristian supremacie robbed the Ministers of that due, which in GODS right they before held, impropriating the liuing of the Altar to them that  liued not at the Altar, but yet ordinarily leauing them to the Church, as they then accounted the Church: Some cannot so easily subscribe to that opinion, perhaps more common then true, which disanull diuine right for the paying Tithes, as being then a Iewish and Leuiticall Ceremonie. But I leaue the Reader to discusse this matter further, withCarleton of Tithes due by Diuine right, and Roberts. D. Carleton Mr. Roberts and others, in Treatises of that argument, not to speake of the Canonists. And let me here mention also that little book full of great learning, and sauoring of great pietie, of S. Henry Spelman Knight, a true Knight of the Temple, that thus engaged himselfe for the Temples right; that whereas the Temple and Ruines of the Church hath raised so many Knights and  cruell Gentlest at haue pill'd and spill'd the men and meanes of the Church; the Church in that Order hath found a Champion, a Spelman in name and deede, who out of Godspel (so was the Gospell and holy writ significantly stiled by our Religious Ancestours) and man-spell, that is, the learning of men, in the reasons and authorities of Fathers, Councels, Doctors in
 seuerall ages, hath shewed himselfe a Spelman, an Oracle or man of hidden knowledge, as Verstegan interprets and spels this word spell. These shew also another argument (besides this of the Nature and practice of Tithes) almost beyond cauillation, namely, that Tithes are due to Christian Ministers by Vow: Christian Common-weales, and Councels hauing consecrated them to GOD and his Church, wherein our Kings, Parliaments, and Ecclesiasticall Lawes haue added their confirmations: neither is it now time after the Vowes to enquire, andD. Downam. and Leuit. 27.28. without Diuine dispensation to alter it, without satisfaction sufficient. But leauing this sore too tender to be touched, and yet little touching and mouing some Consciences pretended tender; let vs view the Tithes, as they then were, Iewish. In Leuit. 27.30.  is a declaration of the Lords right, All Tythes are the Lords; and an assignation of the same, Numb. 18.21. Behold, I haue giuen the children of LEVI all the tenth, etc. SaintHierom. super Ezach l. 14. c. 45. and Num. 18.26. Hierome reckons foure sorts of Tithes: first, that which the people paid to the Leuites: secondly, that which the Leuites hence paid to the PriestsDeut. 14.22.: thirdly, that which they reserued for expence in their solemne Feasts when they went to the Tabernacle or TempleDeut. 14.28. The fourth was a third yeeres Tenth, which was then laid vp for the Leuite, and the poore amongst them.Ios. Scal. diatriba de decimis in Opusc. The practice hereof Nehemiah restored in the reformation of Religion, Nehemiah 10. when the First-fruits and Tenths were brought to the treasurie or chambers of the house of GOD.
Drus. Praet. ad Math. 23. ex lib: praecep. 145. Idem and Hier. in Ezec. 45.Ioseph Scaliger hath written a Treatise of Tithes, the summe wherof is this. Euery thing  which was foode for man, and was laide vp for preseruation, if it receiued increase from the Earth, was subiect to offerings, and consequently to first fruits and Tithes. Garden-herbes were not exempted: they tithed Mints and Annise. (ButTheruma, id est, leuatio (...) res sesiarata. Drusius saith this was of tradition, and not of the Law: for the Law required onely the tenths prouentus tui, of the encrease: vnder which name (saith he) those came not.) Out of these they first paid the first fruites: secondly,Deut. 18.4. This Theruma seemeth a second kinde of first-fruits: for the first were an offering in the Eare, etc. as appeareth, Leuit. 23.10. S. Hierom. vbi sup. calles it primitiua. Theruma: thirdly, a two fold Tithe, and these all in their due order. The Husbandman might not touch any of his increase before these deductions. First fruits of Corne, Grapes and Oliues were offered in the basket: but the Theruma and Tithe onely of the kindes already dressed and prepared, as wheate fanned, oyle and wine, corne in the eare, and so the rest was called Tabal: after they were made readie, the Theruma, was takenNum. 18.12.25.26.27.28. from the  heape, and giuen to the Priests: this was called the great Theruma, and was not defined by Moses, but the ancient Lawyers determined that it might not be lesse then the fourtieth or fiftieth, or at least the sixtieth part: the first they called the Theruma of a good eye, the second indifferent, the last of an euill eye, and niggardly. When this was taken away for the Priests, the rest of the heape was tithed for the Leuite:Tob. 1.7. this was called the first TitheNum. 18.26.; and the tenth part thereof the LeuitesWhich made it twelue of an hundred. Deut. 14.24. Leuit. 27.51. gaue to the PriestsSome interpret Nehemiah, Neh. 10.38. To the high Priest alone, for the maintenance of his state, and partly so perhaps to establish the Papall challenge since. which was called the Tithe of the Tithe, or the Theruma of the Tithe. For the former Theruma they named the great Theruma, because it was more then this. After this deducted, the Leuites might freely vse the other nine parts of the Tythe (which before they might not) whether in, or out of Ierusalem. The Husband-man or Lay-man, was yet to pay another called the second Tithe, namely, the tenth  part of that which remained to him after the first Tithe: and this also was holy, nor might be spent, but before GOD in the Court of the Temple. And therefore it was to be carried to Ierusalem, or if the way were long or tedious, they might be fold, and a fiftP. Ric. ad pr. aff. 133. ex Deut. 18.4. Ait harum primitiarum quantitas elargienets arbitrio relinquitur. Talmudei tamen 50. partem statuunt. part was then to be added: with this money they were to buy Wine, Oyle, Sacrifices, and other necessaries at Ierusalem, wherewith the Husband-man and the Leuite were to feast in the Temple. After this second Tithe paid, they might (and not before) vse the rest a lay chattells (to borrow: the word of my learned friend Master Selden) Scaliger giues them a Latine name, Pollucta, that is, exposed, viz. to common or prophane vse. For better view hereof: if the husbandman had six thousand measures of wheate, wine or oyle, he must pay a fortith or fiftith or at least a sixtieth part, that is, an hundred in the name of hisR. Ab, ben Kattan praec. 87. Theruma. Of the fiue thousand  and nine hundred remaining, the first Tithe will deduct fiue hundred fourescore and ten, of which the Leuites must pay to the Priests, fiftie nine; as Tithe of the Tithe. Now out of the fiue thousand three hundred and ten yet remayning, the husband-man is to pay the second Tithe, which come to fiue hundred thirtie and one, and then there remayne to his owne vse, exposed or lay chattels foure thousand seuen hundred seuentie and nine. So that the first and second Tithe were in proportion as nineteene of the hundred, besides the greater Theruma; all these out of the Corne readie fanned: before which also they paid the first fruits in the eare. Further,Scaliger saith, that the Leuites obserued their courses herein, according to their foure and twentie families, as the Priests had their foure and twentie Luke. 1. the husband-man was bound to carry them to Ierusalem, and there to deliuer them to the Treasurers, which were LeuitesTob. 1.7.8. deputed in diuers offices, to the custodie of these things, as fully appeareth, 2. Chron. 31. And if he did not carry them himselfe,  he must send them by his Delegates: touching whom, the La^^ exacted that they should not
 be of the Gentiles. (This opinion is reiected by others, and seemes impossible, that the Tithes of so spacious a Countrey, should with much lobor, cost, and losse, be carried to Ierusalem, which might with more ease, and conueniencie euery way, be receiued at home in the seueral cities of their tillage, as it is written, Neh. 10.37.) As for the second Tithe, they might redeeme it, with adding a fift part ouer and aboue the price. Tobit is a perfect patterne of this: The first Tithe of all increase (they are his own words) I gaue to the sons of Aaron, who ministred at Ierusalem, the second Tithe I sold, and went and spent it euery yeere at Ierusalem: And the third I gaue vnto them to whom it was meete. The vulgar Latine reades this last, So that he ministred euery third yeere, all his tithing to the Proselites and strangers. And it ought, faith Scaliger, rather to be called the Tithe of the third yeere, then theIoseph Antiq. lib. 4.7. calleth it the third Tithe of the third yeere, which, saith he (besides the two yeerely tithes, one to the Leuite, the other for Sacrifices and Feasts) was for the poore, etc. euery third yeere. third Tithe: for this was no other but the first Tithe, so that  what was paid in the first and second yeere, and in the fourth and fift of that weeke of yeeres, or seuen yeeres space (the seuenth whereof was alway Sabbatticall, and freed from tillage, first fruits, Theruma and tithing in the name of the first tithe; the same in the third and sixt yeeres were not carried to Ierusalem, but laid vp in the barnes and store-houses of the husband-man, who to vse the words of Moses,Deut. 14.28, 29. was to lay them vp within his Gates: And the Leuite, because he had no part nor inheritance with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherlesse, and the widow, which are within thy gates shall come, and shall eate and be satisfied. Thus Ioseph Scaliger. But others hold it due euerie yeere, but onely of such things as were vsefull for mans meate, as being imployed in Feasts, and no other then that which Scaliger calls the second Tithe, before mentioned. The remainder of the surplusage (to vse the words of Master  Mountague) the three feasts ended, serued for those Priests and Leuites, that dwelt at Ierusalem, and had no abiding in the Countrey, and for those that in their courses came vp, and serued at the Temple, for want of which Malachie complayneth, and in Nehemias time, the Leuites fled to their Land, viz. where he had maintenance, by payment of the first Tithe. Euery third yeere, they added a third Tithe, to be distributed to the poore and Leuite, besides the former two for the Leuites, and for Feasts, as Iosephus hath obserued. Thus in all there were foure payments, or Tithes, as is before obserurd out of Saint Hierom. What I haue said of the Tithes of Vegetables, I vnderstand also (though some gainesay) of the Tithes of all they possessed, Luke 18. Mat. 23. euen of Cattell in like payments as the former, as of all other things for mans vse. Scaliger proceedes: The Iewes still in all places of  their habitations obserue the seuenth yeere Sabbatticall, and therefore pay not then any first fruits or Theruma; as for Tithes they were not to be, as Scaliger holdeth, paid but at the Temple, Which is now destroyed: neither haue they any certaine stocke of Priests or Leuites (howsoeuer many are so named) and therefore being asked of vs, saith Scaliger, if they might repaire the Sanctuarie in Mount Moriah, whether they would offer any Sacrifices; they answeeed, no, because there is now no Priest-hood in Israel. So desperate is their desolation. Now least any deceite might be vsed in tithing, there were officers appointed, which were called(...). Faithfull: these searched the houses suspected of non-payment: that increase whereof the tithing was vncertaine, was called Eamai. From the Dedication of Maccabaus, to the time of Iohn Hyrcanus, all paid their first fruits and Theruma, but fewe their Tithes,  because those Faithfull were vnfaithfull, and corrupted with gifts: But then the greater Councell decreed that none should be chosen to that Office, but such as were, as they were called. From thenceAbout one hundred and fiftie yeeres. to the destruction of the Temple they were truely paide. The First fruits, Therumoth and Tithes were not payed all at one time, but each kinde at their owne time, as Wheate in Siuan after Pentecost, Wine in Tisri, Oyle in Tebeth: and so of the rest. Thus farre Scaliger: For my owne part I hold that diuision of Saint Hierome the best: and that of those foure sorts of Tithes, the first is Naturall, Morall, Diuine tribute, equally due, though not alike exacted in all ages, and then Leuiticall onely by speciall designement of GOD, which appointed Leui for a time, to the worke and wages of his Priest. The second payd to the high-Priest by the Leuite, was (as that high Priest-hood it selfe) meerely ceremonial.  The Popes couetousnesse reuersing Christianitie, recalling Iudaisme, made it Canonically due to him, which since with vs is made Iudiciall or Statutarie: And whereas Aaron alone, and Leui once receiued, now they must, if not alone, pay perpetuall Tentes, besides ten times as much subsiduarie payments, as temporall men (all things considered) of their abilitie, when the publique neede requires, and that notwithstanding our owne inheritance is so many waies diuerted, peruerted, subuerted. This I speake not as grudging Caesar his due (for GOD and man loue a cheerefull giuer) but to satisfie the euill eye of them that haue euill will at Sion, and grudge the remaines of the ruines of Leui, willing euery way to further the Priests hindrances. Ceremoniall was the third Tithe, as dependant on the Temple and Feasts. The Fourth Iudiciall, as reliefe to the poore of that Iewish state, whether  Leuites or Lay-man, in their seuerall habitations. But if any lust to fill themselues with matter of this argument, let them reade what hath beene written by Master Selden, and his
 Antagonists, which maintaine the portion of Leui, in the Euangelicall Priest-hood, against his Historie of Tithes, seeming by way of Storie to vndermine it. Wherein. Sir Iames Sempills labours (that I mention not many of our owne more interessed) deserue honorable mention in all Leui's Tents, and to all his generations.


@. III. Of their Personall Offerings, and of their and our Ecclesiasticall  Reuenues.
BEsides First-fruits and Tithes, they payed to the Treasurie personall offerings, as Exod. 30.12. Euery man payed halfe a shekel,Siclus babet 4. deuerios, denarius 6. obolos, obolus 16. hordea mediocria ponderat Drus. ex li. Mandatorum The Sicle was tetradrachmus, and weighed, saith Gerundensis, halfe an ounce of siluer, who saith he saw one at P^olemais, it had on the one side the figure of Aarons Almond-rod, on the other the pot of Manna, written about with Samaritan letters, on the one side was a Sicle of Sicles, on the other Ierusalem the holy. The price of a seruant, saith Rambam, was thirtie sicles (so they valued Christ) of a free-man it was twice so much. On the fiue and twentieth of Adar the Nummularij or money-changers sate in the Temple: that they which had not this halfe shekel readie, might haue it of them for other money, or for a pledge. It was in figure like the whole shekel. Tract. Thalmud. de sic. That which is said of the pot of Manna in this Coyne, seemed to mee in one which I saw, rather a pot or Vessell of perfume or incense with a smokie cloude aboue it. which the Hebrewes interpreted to be perpetuall for the maintenance of the Sacrifices; others temporarie, then onely put in practice. As for that collection, 2. King. 21. made by Ioas for the repayring of the Temple, and that after by Nehemiah, Chap. 10. the circumstances shew much difference. This Treasurie, in regard of this Poll-money, grew very rich, as appeared inIos. Antiq. 14.12. Crassus robbing the same often thousand talents at one time, besides a great beame of gold, which Eleazarus the Treasurer, vpon Crassus his Oath (afterwards violated neuerthelesse)  to redeeme the rest, deliuered to him, weighing three hundred Mina, euery Mina being two pounds two ounces, and a quarter Troy. TullyCic. Pro Murena. and other Authors mention these Oblations of the Iewes to their Treasurie yeerely. These Gifts and offerings the Law exacted: they performed many other also, either of their free-will, or of Vow, otherwise little differing from the former, Leuitici vltimo. Many other Ceremonies of their meates, garments, fastings Trumpets, and in other cases, I hope I shall haue leaue to omit in this place, and remit him that would further know of them to the Scripture it selfe, hauing pointed out the principall.
But by this is apparant, which Doctor DownamDownams Sermon of the Dignitie, etc. hath obserued, that all these being deliuered them in the Lords Treasurie; without their labour or cost, together with their eight  and fortie Cities assigned them, amounting to a farre greater proportion for the maintenance of that small Tribe: then all the Bishoprick, Benefices, Colledge-lands, or whatsoeuer other Ecclesiasticall endowments and profits in this Land, although the prophane Ammonites or hypocriticall Cloysters had neuer conspired to shaue off our2. Sam. 10. beards, and our garments by the Buttocks, not leauing toD. Smith, fer. Black-smith. couer our nakednesse, or their shame. And yet how sicke is Ahab for Naboths Vineyard? And would GOD we had no Iezabels to play the (too cunning) Physicians in this disease. Let me haue a little leaue to say no more then others (for the substance) in bookes and Sermons haue said alreadie: although those Bellies to whom we speake, haue no eares. The first stroke that wounded vs, and causeth vs still to halt, was from Rome, The mother of abominations and whoredomes. Here, as in the suburbs  of Hell, were founded the Churches Ruines: Our Bulls of Bashan (Abbey-lubbers, and Cloysterers) with the leaden hornes of those Romane Bulls, haue pushed downe our Churches (our Chauncels at least) and made them to fall into thoseApoc. 12.2. Cages of vncleane Byrds, the Popish Monasteries. Of nine thousand two hundred eightie and foure Parishes in England, afterCamden Britan. Edit. vlt. Master Camdens account, three thousand eight hundred fortie fiue were (it is properly termed) impropriated. And who knoweth whether those Appropriations did not supplant their Supplanters, and dispropriate them of that which in a iuster proprietie was giuen them in their first foundations, for that three-fold maintainance of themselues, of learning, and of the poore? yea, happily yet (if we obserue the course of Diuine Iustice) we may see many, whose former inheritances haue by the addition of these, as of a contagious g^rment,  beene infected, and haue either died, or beene sicke at the least of this plague. The Arke when it was in Dagons Temple (because imprisoned in an Idoll-Temple) brake Dagons neck: and when it was thence translated to their Cities, they also were filled with diseases. Our Arke hath thus dealt with the Temples, and cannot well brooke the Cities and Lay-hands which imprison, or if they will appropriate it. O that they would once send it home where it should be. How fitly and fully doe those words of HabacukHab. 2.9, 10.11.12. agree to the houses founded for Religion, by this and like irreligion peruerted, and at last subuerted?Gen. 31.47. They coueted an euill couetousnesse to their houses, they consulted shame to their owne houses, by destroying many people, and sinned against their owne soules. The stone hath cryed out of the wall, and the Beame

 out of the Tymber hath answered it; Woe vnto him that buildeth a Towne with blood, and erecteth a Citie by iniquitie. Thus we see, the stones haue cryed out of their walles indeede, and by their demolished heapes may receiue Labans name, Iegar schadutha, the heape of witnesse, their ruines remayning testimonies of GODS iudgements. A violent streame (saith MasterVbi supra. Camden) breaking through all obstacles, hath rushed out vpon the Ecclesiastick state of this Land, and ouerwhelmed, to the worlds wonder, and Englands griefe, the greatest part of the English Clergie, with their most beautifull buildings: and those riches which the Christian pietie of the English had from the time of their first Christianitie consecrated to God, were (as it were) in a moment dispersed, and (if I may so say) prophaned.
And let not our Temporall men pretend inheritances, and humane Lawes in these things  of diuine right. For how can Kyrkes (so called as (...), that is, the Lords houses, before giuen vp by solemne consecration into diuine possessions with their liuings) become humane, without surrender of the owner, or satisfaction to him? As the word since hath receiued a double aspiration, so the things themselues a doubling and deceiuing alteration, wherby we haue robbed our GOD as in MalachieMal. 3.8. he complaines: worse then the heathen, which he there iustifies; and which in that extreme AegyptianGen. 47.22. famine, alienated all Lay possessions, but wanted this Aura sacra fames sacri, left the Priests Lands inuiolated, which yet were very large, as in our Aegyptian Relations shall appeare. Poore Vzzah offered in a good intent (which I also thinke of many which were forward in suppression of Religious houses in the daies of King Henrie, and of other Church lands in King Edwards time) but GOD accepted  not such zeale, and he by his vntimely fates left the name to the2. Sam. 6.8. place Perez Vzzah vntill this dvy. Nor did King Henry long enioy that his Ecclesiasticall purchase; or long continue much wealthier by it, but was forced to base monies before his end; that I speake not of the short raigne of King Edward his sonne, that vertuous Prince, whose times rather then his holy hands, caused the desolations of the Chauntrie lands (and how many other vanished away in that cloude?) after the dissolution of the former. And doe not our eyes see (in other respects to the ioy of our eyes, but to him a iudgement) notwithstanding so many wiues, a Perez Henry, a rupture of the kingdome from his loynes, and that iust so many yeeres (as someS.H.S. haue obserued) after that his attempt, as the golden head of the Babylonian Monarchie continued in that familie after the Temple prophaned and the holy vessels  transported; when Belshazzar escaped not, though he could pleade prescription of possession, succession and inheritance as our proprietaries, with a deerer purchase by costly siege, then these things cost the first purchasers after the suppression. I might heere also end with the tragicall ends of those that were forwardest in those enterprises: But I spare their names, and referre the Reader to our Histories, which yeelde to vs examples many of Salomons rule (from Wolsey downwards) that itPro. 20.25. is a snare to deuoure that which is sanctified. So suddenly were they caught, so surely were they holden, in this snare; and as their zeale did eate vp Gods house (deuoured that which was sanctified, and got so many houses of God in the Land into Lay possession) so the diuine zeale of Gods House did eate vp them in bloody vntimely morsels. And let the present possessors heare and feare.  
Let none traduce me as a troubler of Israel, and a traducer of our Law and State, which haue thus both changed and settled these things. I enueigh against Absoloms conspiracie, and Achitophels deuices, which were the troublers of Israel, and so disturbed the iust heart of righteous Dauid, that on the sudden he a little forgat the exact rule: and commanded, Thou2. Sam. 19.29. and Ziba diuide the Lands. So (if losers may haue leaue to speake) our Parliament (perhaps with some extasie of ioy, for remouing the sinkes and stinkes of superstition) had in those busie times but negligent consideration of Mephibosheths right; and our Vicar-Mephibosheths, the Clergie then, did not much vrge it; yea, he would still say of these our halting Zibaes, Let them take allAnd all they challenge as theirs, driuing the poore Vicar to shew composition or prescription: They know who cast at all, Luke 4.7. and said, Mihi tradita sunt, (ye may English it here) they are betrayed to me, rather then we should want our Lord and his Gospell, to come home to vs in peace. And in peace let them rest which were Authors of this peace to vs; and let vs  pray that a worse generation of Vipers do not arise, and that theLet me haue the like liberty to inueigh against vices here, as Espensaeus was allowed among the Papists, who speaking of the Romish proceedings saith, Sedis Apostolicae summa iura, hoc est summae iniuriae, priuilegia, hoc est abusus, consuetudines, hoc est, corruptelae. I speake onely against abusers of Law and Right. Canker-worme eate not what the Grashopper hath left, and the Caterpiller the residue of the Canker-worme. I meane those Latron-patrons, and Patron-latrons, whereof these extend to the vtmost, whatsoeuer might, and whatsoeuer colour of right, in exemptions, Customes, Priuiledges and prauileges, whereby euery Iohn-a-stile shall intercept the Churches due, or by a weightier fee, force a composition, or wrangle out some broken Title, or breake the necke of the Case with a Prohibition: the other hauing a trust committed, maketh himselfe a Bawde, and selleth his Church (which cost no meaner price then the blood of Christ) for money. Oh Christ, ouerthrowe the Tables of these money-changers, and with some whip driue them, scourge them out of thy Temple, which supplant thy plantations, and hinder the gayning of Soules for gayne.  Withstand these Balaams, which for Balacks blessing, care not what curse they bring vpon Israel, which present for presents, and scrape to maintaine their carnall liuing, out of our spirituall
 Liuings; to bestow on their Hawks, their Hounds, their! But whether hath this passion or zeale (Truth I am sure) transported me? Truely, the fixed Starres in our Westminster firmament (and may not I so call it, where is such a Star-chamber, shining with the bright beames of Iustice?) I admire, and almost adore in silence; only those wandring Planets which selfe guiltines accuseth, doe I here accuse.
And for these and all the Churches enemies, Let GOD arise, and his enemies (or their enmitie) be scattered, that there be no more such1. King. 21. Ahabs, as I mentioned, which hauing more then enough, seeme to haue nothing, as long as Naboth hath something which they can long for: and that there be noNehem. 13. Eliashibs, which shall prouide Tobias the Ammonite a Chamber  in the house of the Lord: that neyther any abuse the profession of Law, directly; nor the possession of Patronage, indirectly; (for abuses onely I taxe) so to discouer our Churches nakednesse, that euery Cham (the prophane Atheist, and superstitious Papist) may espie and deride the same, wherein themselues are the most guiltie amongst vs; although none are more ready to2. Sam. 1.20. tell it in Gath, or publish it in the streetes of Ashkalon, that the daughters of Babylon may triumph.


@. IIII.  Of their First-borne, Priests, Leuites, and other Religious Persons.
AFter that we haue spoken of the Times, places and Rites sacred to God, order requireth next to speake of those persons, whose Office and Function it was to procure, and manage those Diuine and Religious affaires. And first, amongst the first Hebrewes, we finde no Priest named before Abrahams time, in which Melchisedech was interpreted by the most, to be Shem the sonne of Noah, Father both of this and other Nations: And Master Broughton hath written a whole booke in confirmation hereof. The heads of Families then exercised the Priestly office of teaching, praying, and sacrificing in their owne houshoulds, as we reade ofGen. 18.19. Abraham,Gen. 37. Isaac,Gen. 49. etc. and Iacob: After that, the  first borne of all the Tribes of Israel were consecrated to this businesse, when as God had destroyed the first-borne of Aegypt,Exod. 13.2, and 15. and these offered Sacrifices,Exod. 24.5. vntill that the Leuites were chosen in their roome;Num. 3.41. God turning the Propheticall curse of Iacob, ofGen. 49.7. scattering them in Israel, into a blessing, for the instructing of the Israelites. The cause of this their consecration was, because they,Exod. 32.29. in a zeale of GODS glorie had sanctified their hands to this ministerie in the blood of the neerest of their Idolatrous kindred, that had sinned in adoring the golden Calfe.
Now in the third of Numbers, where the first-borne of the Israelites, and the Leuites are numbred, appeareth a difficultie, which most of the Interpreters which I haue Read of that place, haue neglected: namely, that of the Israelitish first-borne there were found, from  a moneth-old vpward, two and twenty thousand, two hundred seuentie and three; and of the Leuites, but two and twenty thousand; so that therefore there must be fiue shekels apiece payed for the redemption of euery of those two hundred seuentie and three in surplusage more then the Leuites; whereas yet in the parcels of the Leuiticall account, are found more of the Leuites then of the Israelites, as appeareth; the family of the Gershonite, contayning seuen thousand and fiue hundred; the Kohathites, eight thousand six hundred; and the Family of Merari, six thousand and two hundred, which being added together, amount to two and twentie thousand and three hundred; and therefore are seuen and twentie more then the Israelites. To thisLyra in Num. Dionys. Carthus. Jun. addeth also in the number of Priests. Lyra, Dionysius Carthusianus, and Iunius (for the most are wholly silent) answere, that those three hundred ouer and aboue the two and twentie thousand  were first-borne themselues, and therefore in right of the former challenge of the first-borne, were the Lords already. And if it seeme as much wonder (which Authors obserue not) that of two and twentie thousand, were but three hundred first-borne;But one of 74. That their exploite of executing their kindred for Idolatrie (before mentioned) in which sinne, the first borne, as Priests, were likeliest to haue followed Aaron, a chiefe man of their Tribe, might answere for me. And that cruell EdictExod. 9. of Pharaoh, and their miraculous fruitfulnesse, may mae it lesse strange, that both in these Leuites there were so few first-borne, and in the other Israelites also, with whom amongst 603550. men from twentie yeeres olde vpwards, there were (though reckoning but from a moneth olde, as is said) but two and twentie thousand two hundred seuentie three; which is little more then one of seuen and twentie, besides  that inequalitie of the persons numbred. Likewise as Phil. Ferdinand hath obserued out of Abraham ben Dauid, if a woman first brought forth a female, neither that nor the sonne, if shee had any after, were of these sanctified first-borne. This excursion vpon this
 occasion, wherein I haue found diuers Interpreters mute, will (I hope) find pardon with the Reader, who happily himselfe may finde some better resolution.
To returne to our Historie; God had before appointed Aaron to be high Priest, and his SonnesExod. 28. Leuit 24.4. to be Priests, to whom the Leuites were assigned after (as we haue said) as assistants in inferiour offices of the Tabernacle. Aaron, from whom is reckoned the succession of the high Priests, in the same office, had appointed to him eight holy garments, a Brest-plate, an Ephod, a Robe, a broidered coate, a Miter, a Girdle, a Plate of gold, and linnen breeches. Also his sonnes had appointed to them Coates, and Bonets, and Girdles, and Breeches: Which their attire is described at large, Exodus 28. Iosephus writeth of the stones there mentioned; That that on the Priests right shoulder shined forth very bright,  when GOD was pleased with their Sacrifices, as did also those twelue in the brest-plate, when in the time of Warre GOD would assist them: Which ceased miraculously to shine two hundred yeeres before his time; or as the Talmudists say, from the building of the second Temple.
The consecration of the Priests, and Rites thereof are mentioned, Exodus 29. The conditions required in the high Priest, as that hee should not haue the bodily defects of blindnesse, lamenesse, maymednesse, etc. nor should vncouer his head, and many other such like, are expressed, Leuit. 21. His office was daily to light the Lights at the euening, and to burne incense at Morning and Euening, and once euerie Sabbath to set the Shew-bread before the Lord to Sacrifice, and once a yeere to make reconciliation in the holy-place, etc.  This office they executed till the captiuitie, after which they ruled also in the Common-wealth, and the familie of the Maccabees obtayned temporall and spirituall iurisdiction, being both Priests and Kings. But the state being vsurped by others, they also appointed high Priests at their pleasures: and thus were Annas and Caiphas high Priests, although Caiphas alone administred the office, which was abrogated to Annas, the name only remayning: and thus Iosephus saith, that Annas was most happie, who had himselfe beene high Priest, and seene all his sonnes in that office, whereas in the institution, and before the Captiuitie, this office continued ordinarily with their liues: which after they enioyed longer or shorter, at pleasure of the Conqueror.
Next vnto the high Priest, were the Priests lineally descended from Eleazar and Ithamar,  the sonnes of Aaron, as in number many, so in their Priestly rayments, Consecration, Condition, and Office, much differing from the former, as appeareth, for their Garments, Leuit. 28. their Consecration 29. their Conditions required in them, Leuit. 10. and 21. and their Office in some things, as Preaching, Praying, Sacrificing, not much vnlike to the former, but in degree, sometime assisting him in these things, sometime alone, and in some things, nothing participating, as in Moses plainely may be seene. These Priestly families, being of the house of Eleazar sixteene, and of Ithamar eight, which Dauid by Lot distributed into foure and twentie orders, according to the number of the heads of families, those foure and twentie men, chiefe of those orders, being to the high Priest, as Aarons sonnes were vnto him in their ministerie, 1. Chron. 24. and tooke turnes by courseThe course lasted from one Sabbath to the next, and so in order, being renued euerie Sabbath: from hence Scaliger gathereth by demonstration that Iohn Bap. was borne about the beginning of Aprill. Of their Academical times, studies, degrees, etc. See Iun. Academia. cap. 4. and 6. in performing of the same,  as Luke shewethLuke 1.5. in the example of Zacharie. IosephusIos. in App. and in vita. testifieth the same, and affirmeth, That in each of these rankes were more then fiue thousand men in his time: And in the Historie of his life, saith, that himselfe was of the first of these orders, betwixt which was no small difference, and the heads of these were also called Chiefe PriestsEz. 8. Mar. 14. Acts 4. in the old and new Testament.Vid de his Scal. Can. Isag. l. 3. pag. 298. It was by their Lawe forbidden on paine of death to any Priest or Leuite, to intermeddle in anothers Function. But at the three solemne Feasts any of the Priests, which would, were permitted to Minister, and to participate with those whose course it then was: Onely they might not offer the Vowes, or Free-will, or ordinarie Offerings.
The Leuites had the next place in the Legall Ministerie: all that descended of Leui, except  the familie of Aaron, being thus called: And Num. 3. according to the descent of the three sons of Leui had their offices assigned them, which so continued till the daies of Dauid. He distributed them according to their families vnto their seuerall functions, twentie foure thousand to the seruice of the Temple: six thousand to be Iudges and Rulers, foure thousand Porters, and foure thousand which praysed the Lord vpon Instruments. These were diuided vnder their Heads or Principals according to their1. Chr. 23.24. families. The Leuiticall Musicians, with their Offices and Orders are reckoned, 1. Chron. 25. and 2. Chron. 7. These in stead of the silken stole, which they ware, obtained in the daies of Agrippa, to weare a linnen one, like the Priests. The Porters are in the 26. of 1. Chron. described according to their families, orders, and offices. They kept, in their courses, the doores and treasures of the Temple: to  keepe the same cleane, and to keepe that which was vncleane, out of the same: and these all are ministred in their offices, 2. Chron. 35.

The Gibeonites, called after Nethanims, were at hand vnto the Leuites in the meanest Offices about the Tabernacle and Temple, Ios. 9.21. and 1. Chron. 9. assigned hereunto first by Ioshua, after by Dauid and the Princes, for the seruice of the Leuites to cut wood, and draw water, for the house of God, Ezra. 8. Besides these Ecclesiasticall persons in the ordinarie Ministerie of the Temple were other, which may no lesse be counted holy: either in regard of Vow, as theSee the institution of them Num. 6.2. Nazarites for a time: Sampson is an especiall example hereof, and Iames the Iust, brother of our Lord: or else they were Prophets by extraordinarie calling, as Samuel, Esay, Ieremie, and others: to whom God manifested his will by dreames, visions, and reuelations; whose ordinarie habite seemes to be a rugged hayrie garment, by the example  of2. Reg. 1.8. Isa. 20.2. Elijah, and the falseZach. 13.4. Prophets, and ofMat. 3.4. Iohn Baptist afterward. And thus much of those persons, which according to the Law were sacred to God: it followeth that wee should obserue their superstitious deuoting of themselues, according to their owne deuices and traditions, vnto a supposed seruice of God, in a more strict manner then ordinarie, or some-what in opinion and practice differing both from the Law, and the rest of the Iewish people. Of this kinde were many Sects; whereof we are next to speake.



CHAP. VIII. Of the diuers Sects, Opinions, and alterations of Religion, amongst the Hebrewes.

@. I. Of their ancient Diuisions and Idolatries.
IN this matter of Alterations, and altercations amongst them, about Questions  and practice of Religion, we are in the first place to obserue their often ApostasiesPhilasirius reckoning therein their Idolatries, numbreth 28. Iewish Sects: and as Scaliger obserueth, and the Scripture will beare it, might by that rule haue reckoned many other. from the truth of the Law to the Idolatrous superstitions of the neighbouring Nations: as the Reliques of the Aegyptian Idolatrie in the golden Calfe, Exod. 32. their often murmurings in the desart, the presumption of Nadab and Abihu, and after of Aaron and Miriam, the conspiracie of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Baalams stumbling-blocke, to couple them in Idolatrous seruice to Baal-Peor the Idoll of the Moabites: And after their possession of the Land, when Ioshua and the Elders were dead, they seruedIud. 2.12, 13. the gods of the people that were round about them, as Baal and Ashtaroth: Of the Idols and their Rites is before spoken. And although Gideon cut downe the groue, and destroyed the Altar of Baal,Iud. 6.27. yet he made an Ephod of the  carerings of the prey, and put it in Ophrah his Citie, and all Israel went a whoring there after itIud. 8.27, 33.: and after his death, made Paal-berith their God. They serued also the Gods of Aram, Zidon, Moab, Ammon,Iud. 10.6. and the Philistims: MichahIud. 17. and 18. an Ephramite made an house of Gods, an Ephod, and Teraphim, and consecrated one of his sonnes to be his Priest; and after set a Leuite, Ionathan, in his roome, the occasion of Apostasie to a great part of the Tribe of Dan, all the while the house of God was in Shiloh: besides, the corruption of state and religion by theIud. 19. Beniamites, and by1. Sam. 2.12. Hophni and Phinehas the sons of Eli.
In Rad. Theraphim.Elias Leuita describeth the forme of sacring or hallowing their Teraphim in this sort. They killed a man which was a first borne, wreathing his head from his bodie, and embalming the same with salt and spices: and then wrote vpon a plate of gold, the name of an vncleane  spirit, and putting the same vnder the head, set it vpon a wall, and burned Candles before it and worshipped the same. R. AbrahamAp. Pagnin. saith, they were Images of m^n made to receiue power from aboue, as the Idolaters conceiued of them.
But after the reformation of Religion by Samuel, Dauid, and Salomon (who yet became after an Idolater) befell their greatest Apostasie, to wit, of the ten Tribes; from God, their King, and Religion, by the our-wise policie of Ieroboam, which corrupted and subuerted both it and himselfe. He (lest those reuolted Israelites should, by frequenting Gods appointed worship at Ierusalem, re-acknowledge their former and truer Lord) consecrated two Egyptian Calues at Bethel and1. King. 12. Dan, and made an House of High Places, and Priests of the lowest of the people.
 Iudah also made them, in the same times, High Places, Images, and Groues, on euery high hill, and vnder euerie greene Tree. Yet had the kingdome of Iudah their entercourses of corruption and reformation, according as they had good or bad Kings; but in Israel the
 Common-wealth and Church receiued, by that sinne of Ieroboam, an vncureable wound and irrecouerable losse, vntill that in Gods iust punishment, they were carried away by the Assyrian Kings into Assyria, and into Hala, Habor, and the Cities of the Medes, as 2. King. 17. appeareth, where is recorded a summarie collection of these and other their Idolatries. Of these exiled Israelites (if wee beleeue the reports and coniectures of diuers Authors) are descended those Tartarians, which since ouer-tanne, with their Conquests, a greater part of Asia and Europe, then euer any other Nation, before o^ since: Of which, their Originall and Exploits, wee shall in fitter place further discourse. But it is farre more probable, that in, and after the Babylonish Captiuitie, the Israelites adioyned themselues in Religion to the other Iewes, at least, the greatest part of them. And though not many returned with  Ezra, yet those parts remayned full of Iewes, hauing their Vniuersities and some kinde of gouernment, till the Saracenicall deluge, and in some tolerable condition after, as Beniamin relates, which continued till the time of the Tartars, which had they beene of this Nation, they would haue preferred them; whereas euer since their times the estate of the Iewes hath beene more contemptible then before. I denie not, that many of them might mixe themselues with the Nations with whom they liued, and grow into one people with them: and that there might be in diuers places some remnants of this Israelitish dispersion, as Beniamin reckons some, and Trigaut in China, coniectures of others. But this Tale of the Tartars, and thatThe Iewes haue a tale of Alexander, opening certaine mountaines by magick, and therein inclosing a multitude of Iewes beyond Babylon in the hill Cappion, which haue a King ouer them, and are called red Iewes, etc. vid. Vict. Carbens. lib. 1. 23. other of the inclosed Iewes, seeme but idle dreames, without any good ground of truth or credit.  
The other Kingdome of Iudah, although it receiued sometime some breathing and refreshing vnder her more Vertuous and Religious Kings, yet for the most part, groning vnder Tyrannie and Idolatrie, was at last a prey to the Babylonians: From which seruitude being freed by the Persian Monarches, vnder varieties of aduerse and prosperous fortunes, it was afterwards rent and torne by the Macedonians, being made a common Stage for the Armes and Armies of the successours of Ptolemey in Aegypt, and Selencus in Asia, remayning meede vnto the Conquerour, and receiuing no small impressions and wounds in Soule as well as Bodie, in Religion as in Politie. But being after deliuered from Macedonean thraldome by the Familie of the Macchabees, the Gouernement, Ecclesiasticall and Temporall, became theirs, but the mindes of this Iewish people  was in those times diuided in diuersitie of Sects and Opinions, of which the Euangelicall and other Histories make mention.
One diuisionVid. Scal. in Euseb pag. 124. and Can. Isag. pag. 278. was of the whole Nation, not so much for opinion as for the differing habitation, which brought also some circumstances of other differences. The Iewes therefore were generally thus distinguished, The Hebrewes which dwelt in Palestina, and the scattered strangers,(...). 1. Pet. 1.1. as Peter calls them; to wit, the Graecians (these two sorts are mentioned by Luke, Acts 6.1.) and the (...), or the remainders of the deportation of Babylon, the Metropolis whereof was Babylon, while it remayned, and after Bagded. The Metropolis or head of theIob. 7.35. (...) or (...) was Alexandria, where also in Beniamin Tudelensis his time, there was a Synagogue of the Babylonian dispersion.  The Asian Iewes were most of this Babylonian sort; to these Saint Peter wrote from Babylon, which therefore he nameth not in the inscription. The Hellenists were so called of hellenizing or vsing the Greeke tongue in their Synagogues (in which they had the Scriptures translated) in Aegypt, Greece and Italie. By reason of this translationThe Hebrews ordained a fast in remembrance of the translation of the 70. the Hebrews and Hellenists often disagreed, (for the Hebrewes called it a backward reading, because it is read from the left hand to the right) which sometime brake forth into open violence. R. EleazarIn fine cap. Meghillah. assaulted the Synagogue of the Alexandrians at Ierusalem, and committed therein much outrage: And Christian Charitie could scarce combine them, as Luke mentioneth, Act. 6.1. This Greeke translation was vsed by them throughout Europe: they had it in Hebrew Letters, as Tertullian testifieth in the Serapium at Alexandria. Thus Philo and other  of these learned Hellenists, were ignorant of the Hebrew. Likewise of those Hebrewes, there was small reckoning had of the Galilaeans by their supercilious and superstitious brethren of Iudaea, as the Gospell hath taught vs.




@. II. Of the Karraim and Babbinists, and of the Hasidai.
THE opinions of the Iewes may be reducedD Halls Phari^^sme and Christianitie. Synagoga Judaic. cap. 2. into these two generall heads: the one were such as contented themselues with the Law of God, and were called Karraim, or Koraim, of which sort there are diuers at this day in Constantinople, and other where: The other Rabbinists, Supererogatorie (as Doctor Hall calls them) and Popish Iewes, called Hasidim, professing a more strict holinesse then the Law required. Yet at first these both pleased themselues, and did not by opposition of Science, displease  each other, and disagreeing in opinion, they yet in affection agreed. But when these voluntarie seruices beganne to bee drawne in Canons, and of arbitrarie became necessarie, they were rent into sundrie Sects. Of these and their originall, let vs heare Scaliger speake.
There wereIos. Scal. EElench. Trinae. Nich. Serar c. 22. He cals these two sects. cap 2. Karraim, of Kara, which signifieth the Scripture: and Rabbanim, which were the wisemen (...) after called Pharises. (saith he) before the times of Hasmonaei, two kinds of Dogmatists, men holding differing opinions, among the Iewes: the one onely accepting the written Law; the other Tradition, or the addition to the Law. Of the former kinde arose the Karraim, of whom came the Sadduces; of the latter, the Pharises. These Pharises were the issue of the Hasidees.
The Hasidees were a Corporation, Guild, or Fraternitie, which voluntarily addicted themselues to the Offices of the Law, 1. Macchabees, chap. 2. verse 42.Iunius translateth it Aschidaei, and saith they were such, as for religion were scattered and dispersed about for feare of the K^ng. Cont. Drus. and Serar. Triher. li. 3. c. 7. Their originall was from the times of Ezrah, or Esdras; Haggai and Zacharie, the Prophets, being Authors of  this Order. These, in regard of their institution, were called Holy, Hasidin; and in regard of their Combination; Hasidaei. And besides that which the Law enioyned (which is iust debt) they supererogated, and of their owne free accord disbursed vpon the Temple and Sacrifices. They professed not onely to liue according to the prescript of the Law, but if any thing could by interpretations and consequences be drawne thence, they held themselues bound to satisfie it, and when they had done all, to seeme to haue done nothing, but accounted themselues vnprofitable seruants notwithstanding.
Euery one paid a tribute to the reparations of the Temple, from the times of Esdras and Nehemias.Nehe. 10.32. The Hasidaeans added further (of their owne free-will) to the Sanctuarie, Walles, and Porches, neuer (almost) going from the Temple, which they seemed to hold  peculiar to themselues, and by which they vsed to sweare, By this Habitacle, or, By this house: Which the Pharises, their posteritie, also didMat 23.16. and 29., as likewise they learned of them to build the Sepulchres of the Prophets. They were therefore called Hasidim, either because their Colledge was instituted of the Prophets; or of their holy and religious workes, and the sacred buildings by them eyther repaired, or reared from the foundations. And therefore when wicked Alcimus had killed threescore men of this Corporation or Guild, the people thought their death was prophesied in thePsal. 79.2. Psalme, such reputation was there of their holinesse.
These Hasidaei were not in proper sense a Sect, but a Fraternitie, which euery day assembled in the Temple, and offered in daily Sacrifice a Lambe, which was called, the sin offering of the Hasidim. One day was excepted, the eleuenth of Tisri, in which that Sacrifice was omitted.  They offered not themselues (for they were not Priests) but the Priests in their name. Abraham ZacuthAbr. Zacuth. lib. Iohasin. saith, That Baba, the son of Buta, daily of his owne accord offered a Ram for a sin-offering, except one day, which was the day after the Expiation. And this was called, the Sacrifice of the Saints for Sin: And he sware, By this Habitacle, that is, the Temple. Of this kinde, or much like thereto, ScaligerScal. ibid. cap. 24. thinketh the Rechabites were, which IeremiaIer. 35.19. mentioneth, whose immediate father he accounteth Ionadab (not him which2. Reg. 10.15. liued in the daies of Iehu, but another of that name) and that their austere order began but a little before it ended (namely, in the same Prophets time) quickly ending, because of the captiuitie. After the Captiuitie these sonnes of Ionadab, renuing their former obseruations, were called Hasidaei, which went not from the Temple, and obserued the orders aboue mentioned: so Scaliger interpreteth  Ieremies Prophesie, that Ionadab should not want one to stand before the Lord, that is, to minister and attend holy duties in the temple, like to Anna the ProphetesLuke 2.37.. This, saith he, is the true beginning of the Hasidaei, which abstained from wine, as did also the Priests, as long as they ministred in the temple. Thus much Scaliger. As for that which Serarius hath writte^ against Scaliger and Drusius in this argument, both in his Trihaeresium and his Mineruall, or elsewhere, I refer the Reader to himselfe, choosing rather to expresse what I thinke probable then entertainmen with long vnnecessarie disputes. DrusiusDrus. de 3. Ser. li. c. 11. proueth, that diuers of the Pharises and Essees also were of these Hasidaei, wherby it appeareth, that it was rather a Brotherhood, as Scal. calleth it, then a Sect. He sheweth their Rites and Discipl^ne, out of Iuchasin.Or Iehasin Ab. Zec. They spent 9. houres of the day in praier. They beleeued that a man might sin in thought, and  therfore they had care thereof; their will was not without the will of Heauen, that is, of God. Ten things were peculiar to them: Not to lift vp their eyes aboue ten cubits: 2. Not to goe bare-headed: 3. To establish three refections: 4. To dispose their hearts to Prayer: 5.
 Not to looke on eyther side: sixtly, To goe about, that they might not bee troublesome to any companie: Seuenthly, Not to eate at the Tables of great men: eightly, If they had angred any man, quickly to appease him: ninthly, To haue a pleasant voyce, and to descend to the interpretation of the Law: tenthly, to accustome themselues to their Threads and Phylacteries.
Rab (one of his Fraternitie) did not lift vp his eyes aboue foure cubits, Tenne or twentie daies before their death, they were diseased with the Collicke, and so all cleare and cleane they departed into the other life.
To returne vnto Scaliger touching the originall of Sects, and to leaue those Hosidaean obseruants. As long (saith he) as Supererogation onely was vsed, there was no Sect in the people  of GOD: But when the precepts thereof were brought into Canons, and committed to wrighting, then arose many doubts, disputations, altercations, growing and succeeding daily, from whence sprang two Sects, differing in opinion; the one admitting onely the Law, the other embracing the interpretations and expositions of their Rabbines. The former in processe of time, was diuided into two. For at first, the Karraim were only such as obserued the Law and the Prophets, till the times of Sadok and Boethi, or Baithi, who first doubted of the punishment of sinnes, and rewards of good works, from whom sprang the heresie of the Sadduces. The Karraim were not before this diuided in Sect from the Hasidim, but onely in those voluntarie Functions and Supererogations, wherein the Law, by Iniunction, ruled the former, and these, as is said, supererogated. But when Canons and Iniunctions began to bee  written, then of these Hasidim arose Dogmatists, which called themselues Perushim, Holy, and Separated both from the other Hasidim, and from the Vulgar; making a necessitie of that obseruation, which before was voluntarie. This sort was againe diuided into those which retained the name Perushim, or Pharises; and the Essens; both receiuing from their Authors the Rules and Precepts of their Sect. After this, the Pharises were diuided into many kindes: The Iewes reckon seuen. The Essens also were diuided first into Cloysterers, or Collegians, which liued in a common societie; and Eremites, or solitarie persons; and those former into such as married; and others which remained continent.


@ III.  Of the Pharises.
NOW let vs consider of these more particularly; and first of the Pharises, DrusiusDrusius de 3. Sect l. 2. deriueth the name from the Syrian, as most of the names of the new Testament are, and not from the Hebrew; for then it should not bee Pharises, but Pharuses: as after the Hebrew; it should rather be Masias, then Messias. The Etymologie some fetch from Phares, which signifieth Diuision, as Epiphanius, and Origen, with othersAmbros. in Luc. li. 3. Damascen. de haeres. Suidas.: against which Drusius excepteth, because in Phares the last Letter  is Tsaddi; here it is Schin. OthersF. Forerius, Es. 1. Io. Forsterus lexit. deriue it from Parash, signifying to explaine, because they did all things openly, to be seene of men: it is not likely: for Hypocrisie loues her works should be seene, but not her Humor (then should it be hypocrisie:) she would not be seene in her affection to be seene: And this name, in this sense would haue beene to their infamie, and not to their reputation, which they most aymed at. A third deriuation of this name, is from another signification of the same Verbe,Sic Iansen. in Conc. Euan. c. 13. Serar. l. 2. c. 1. to expound. But to expound the Law, was more ptoper to the Scribes; and some of the Pharises were not expositors. Howbeit, the most probable opinion is, that they were so called of Separation; because they were, or would seeme to be, separated from othersQuasi egregij Iudaeorum Aug. s. 30 de verb. Dom.: first, in cleannesse of life; secondly, in dignitie thirdly, in regard of the exquisitenesse of those obseruations, whereto they were separated; fourthly,  in their habit, wherein they were (as our Monkes) distinguished from the people; yea, they did abhorre the garments of the people.
Their opinions are gathered byIoseph de Antiq. l. 18. de bell. Iud li. 2. Iosephus, and others, out of whom Drusius, Serarius, Scaliger and others. They attributed (saith Iosephus) all things to Fate. Abraham Zacuth interpreteth their opinion thus, They beleeue that God knoweth and disposeth all things, and the Stars helpe; yet so, as free-will is left in the hand of man. And if a man by his free-will chuseth the good, God will helpe himSerarius in clineth to a more Stoicall interpretation. in his good way. They say; That there is no Hearb in Earth which hath not his proper Planet in Heauen.
The ascribe immortalitie to the Soule, holding, that iudgement passed on it vnder the Earth; and that if it had done euill, it was adiudged to perpetuall prisons; if well, it had  easie returne vnto life by a(...). Thus Christ was, after this opinion called Elias, or one of the Prophets. transmigration, or going into another body. So Zacuth: The good Soules take delight of their good workes; the bad descend, and ascend not. They beleeued
 that there were both Deuils and good Angels. They conceiued, that he which kept the most of the commandements, although he transgresse in some, is iust before GOD: against which opinionBurgens. Addit. 1. in Epist. Iac. 2.10. Burgensis thinketh, that Iames alledged that saying in his Epistle, He that fayleth in one, is guiltie of all. He citeth Rab. Moses for his Pharisaicall opinion; That GOD iudgeth according to the pluralitie or paucitie (to vse his owne words) of merits or demerits. Like stuffe haue I read in S. Francis Legend, of the ballance wherein mens deeds are weighed, and the Deuil lost his prey by the weight of a Chalice, which one had giuen to the Saint; which heauie metall caused the Scale wherein his good deedes were put (before too light) to weigh heauiest. They (the ancienter Pharises) confesse the Resurrection of the  flesh. Here of are three opinionsDrus. l. 2. c. 14.: one; That all, good and bad, shall rise againe; another, That the iust onely shall rise: a third, That the iust, and part of the wicked shall rise.
They call their Traditions the Law giuen by Word, and the vnwritten Law, which they equall to the written, deriuing both from Moses, as more fully else-where shall bee said. These Traditions they called (...), as both Epiphanius and Hieronymus witnesse: the Teachers thereof (...) or Wise-men, and when they lectured, they were wont to say, (...). The wise-men teach Traditions. Of these Traditions were,Hier. ad. Algas. concerning the Sabbath, That they might iourney from their place two thousand cubites; (HieromeHierom ep. ad. Alg. accounteth feete, OrigenOrig. (...). l. 4. c. 2. Elnes) That none might carry any burthen that day, but they interpreted, if one carried on one shoulder, it was a burthen; if on both, it was none; if his  shooes had nailes, they were a burthen, otherwise not. Concerning fasting, the Pharise boasteth, Luke 18.12. I fast twice in the weeke: which they obserued (sayth TheophilactTheoph. in Luc. 18.) on the second and fifth day, Mundaies and Thursdaies. Happily our Wednesdaies and Fridaies succeeded in this Penance, that we might not seeme to be behinde them in dutie, howsoeuer we disagree with them in their time. And yet Mercerus saith, The Iewes fasted the fourth day, Wednesday, because they held that vnluckie, in which children are taken with the Squinancie. Further, the Pharises eate not vnwashed (...), Marke 7.3. Except they wash with the fist; as Beza translateth. ScaligerScal. Elench. Ser. cap. 7. Serar. Triber. lib. 2. c. 2. expoundeth it, not by washing one fist in the other, but composing the fingers into such a frame, that all their ends meete on the top of the thumbe, which for want of another name is called (...), a Fist, although it  be not properly so. In this forme they hold vp their hands in washing, that the water may slide downe to the elbow, and thence fall to the ground, as the Iewes vse to this day. They washedMar. 7.4. when they came from Market, because sinners and vncleane persons were there, whose touch might pollute them. They washed also Cups and Brasen vessels and Beds, not Chamber-beds to lie on (DrusiusDrus. lib. 2. vbi supra. expoundeth) but dining-beds, which they vsed in stead of Tables.
They would notLuk. 7.39. Esd. 65.5. eate with Publicans or sinners, yea, they accounted themselues polluted with their touch.
Their hypocrisie in prayer Christ mentioneth, that it was long, and open in the streetes, etc. It was thrice in the day, at the third, sixt, and ninth houre: Their words submisse and softly, as of Hannah, 1. Sam. 1. and toward the Temple.
 They Tythed all, Luke 18. Math. 23. euen the smallest matters. For Tythes (saith Akiba) are the Hedges of thy Riches. And another Prouerbe (learne it) Tythe, that thou maist be rich. EpiphaniusEpiph. haer. 16. addeth, they paid first fruits, thirtieths, and fiftieths, Sacrifices and Vowes,
Their Phylacteries or Seruatories, Defensiues (so the word signifieth) in HebrewOf these r^^de the 25. chapter following. Totaphoth, they vsed as Preseruatiues, or Remembrancers of the Law, and ware them larger then other men. Hierome calls them Pittaciola, resembling to them herein some simple superstitious women, wearing little Gospels, and the wood of the Crosse, and such like, of zeale, not according to knowledge, strayning a Gnat, and swallowing a Cammell. This superstition, then complayned of by Hierome, yet remaineth (saithScal. Elench. cap. 8. Scaliger) among Christians and Mahumetans, which weare about them the Gospell of S. Iohn. Christ condemneth not the Rite,  but their ambition, for dilating, not for wearing them, to which all the Iewes were bound, and all the Iewes and Samaritans obserued. They vsed the like ambition in their Fringes or twisted Tassels, which the Iewes call Zizis, and vse them still, as after shall appeare. Their Oathes were, By Ierusalem, the Temple, the Heauen, Earth, their Head, by the Law.Fag. annotat. ad Onk. ap D^. Fagius obserueth, that the Iewes in swearing, lay their hand on the booke of the Lawe at this day. Other Oathes are little esteemd. Hence it seemeth came our corporall oathes on a book. The Iewes (saithCapit in Hos. Capito) thinke it no Oath, if one forsweare by Heauen, or Earth, vnlesse he say by him which dwelleth there, etc. And none is subiect to that Curse, in which the name of God is not added.
That of Corban pertayneth to this place, mentioned Math. 15.5. and Marke 7.11. which  some interprete, as if a Iew should say to hisThey otherwise acknowledge much pietie to their p^rents: so Hiscuni, God is to be honored with thy goods if thou hast any, but for thy parents, if thou hast not, thou must beg from doore to doore: but their traditionall pietie disanulled this textuall. Vid. Drus. praet. in Mat. 15. Parents, That he had alreadie dedicated all that to God (to whom vowes are to be performed) wherewith he might haue helped them. Doctor RainoldsRain. and Hart. c. 7 d. 4. saith, That the Iewes, as they were prone to vngodly vowes, so this was
 an vsuall vow amongst them, and they would binde it with an Oath, That such or such a man should haue no profit by them. The Oath which they herein vsed as most solemne, was, By the Gift: for so they were instructed,Matth. 23. That if any sware by the Altar it was nothing, but if by the Gift, he was a debtor. The Pharises therefore taught, if any had said to his father, By the Gift thou shalt haue no profit by me, then he might in no case doe them any good, against the Commandement, Honour thy Father, etc. The Iewes vsed to binde their vowes with a curse, as they which vowedAct. 23.14. Paules death, vsing yet to suppresse the curse it selfe, as,Heb. 3.11. If they shall enter into my rest: So these, By the gift, if they haue any profit by me, meant, they should haue none. Thus the Talmud (saith he) the Booke of their Canon Law, and Schoole-Diuinitie, saith; That a man is bound to honor his Father, vnlesse he vow the contrary. MasiusMas. in Ios. ap. Dr.  explaineth it thus; That they did consecrate (by saying Corban) all, where-with they should haue benefited their parents: as if they had said; Let it be Anathema, or deuoted, whatsoeuer it be, with which I may profit thee. And therefore those Rabbines, vnder pretext of Religion, allowed not to spend on his parents, that which he had thus vowed to God. ScaligerScal. Elench. cap. 9. thus interpreteth the place, as if a sonne being by his parents admonished of his dutie, should put them off, with this exception, vnlesse that which I haue offered for thee, free me of this burthen. But let the more curious reade it in himselfe, and what Masius, Serarius, and others haue written hereof.
The Pharises were esteemed pitifull: The Sadduces moreThe one after the Letter of the Law exacted eye for eye, etc. the other accepted a price in lieu thereof, D^us. Praet. in Mat. 5. and Hircanus of a Pharise became a Sadduce, and his son Alexander slue six thousand Pharises, and persecuted the rest, that they fl^d into other countries, P. Ric. de Coelesti Agricultura. l. 1. cruell.N. Lyra. in Mat. 16. They were much addicted to Astrologie, and the Mathematikes; whose names of the Planets, EpiphaniusEpipha. haer. 6. rehearseth,  as also the twelue Signes.
There wereDrus. de 3. sec. l. 2. c. 22. seuen sorts of the Pharises, which the Talmud reckoneth: first, Sichemita, which measure pietie by honour and profit, as the Sichemites, which for the marriage of Dina endured circumcision: Secondly, Nacphi, which lifted not his feete from the ground: the third, Kisai, Draw-blood, which smiteth his head to the wall, to cause the bloud to come, and also shutteth his eyes, that he behold not a woman: The fourth, that standeth on his perfection, called Mahchobathi: What is my sinne? as if there wanted nothing to his Righteousnesse: The fift, Meduchia, which goe lowly and stooping: The sixt, The Pharisee of Loue, which obeyeth the Law for loue of vertue or reward: The seuenth, the Pharisee of Feare, which is holden in obedience by feare of punishment. This they call, Iobs Pharisee,  the former Abrahams.
EpiphaniusEpiph haer. 16. describeth their strict obseruations. Some (saith he) prescribed to themselues ten yeeres, or eight or foure yeeres continence. Some lay on plankes, which were onely nine inches broad, that when they slept, they might fall to the pauement, so to be awakened againe to prayer, and keepe themselues waking. Others put stones vnder them for the same end, by pricking to awake them: Others lay on Thornes for that purpose. ScaligerScal. El. c. 13. reproueth Epiphanius for affirming, that the Pharises ware womans attire, as not agreeing to their austeritie, which despised all beds, beate themselues against walles, and put thornes in the fringes of their garments, to prick them: he thinketh him deceiued by some Iewes report; and addeth, that the moderne Iewes haue little or no knowledge of those ancient Pharises,  but as they learne it of the Christians, or of Pseudo-Gorionides. (so hee calleth the Hebrew booke, ascribed to Ioseph Ben Gorion, whom Drusius esteemeth, and Scaliger proueth to be a counterfeit, wherein Serarius and Ribera concurre with them.)
The Pharises in a selfe-conceit and singularitie, called, all but themselues, in a disgracefull scorne,Ar. Mont. in Euang. Mat. 23. Other men: so said he, Luke 18. I am not as other men: whereas they accounted themselues Masters of others, on whom also they bound heauie burthens, in their Rules and Cases, the breach whereof they iudged Sinne in the people, but yet held not themselues bound thereto. For example, Euery Israelite ought euery day, by their Rule, to say ouer the ten Commandements, and that in the first Watch, which might not be deferred, for danger of sinne; and yet amongst themselues they esteemed it lawfull at any houre of the night.  But vpon the Proselytes they imposed more then on the other Israelites, all which they were bound to (in their censure) vnder paine of Hell fire; and therefore Christ said, They made them two-fold more the children of Hell then themselues; for they freed themselues from many of those impositions they laid on the Consciences of others: And these Proselytes the lesse trusted, and therefore burthened them with more obseruations.




@. IIII. Of the Sadducees.
AFter we haue spoken of the Pharisees, which loued the first roomes (which they haue heere obtained) it followeth to speake next of the Sadducees,Sadducees. who in the New Testament are often mentioned.Beda in Act. 5. Beda giueth an vniust interpretation of their name, saying, the Sadducees are interpreted Iust. EpiphaniusEpiph. haer. 14. also fetcheth  their name from Sedec, which signifieth Iustice. LyraLyra in Act. 5. alleageth a reason, because they were seuere and rigorous in iudgement, they gaue this name of Iust (not iustly) to themselues. BurgensisBurgens. ibid. otherwise; as of Arrius were the Arrians, so of one Sadoch (saith hee) are the Sadducees called, who was the first inuentor of their Heresie. Serarius deriueth the name from both. The Pharisees were esteemed more iust then they, as appeareth Luke 18.9. They counted themselues iust, and despised others; Summumius, summa iniuria. Their rigorous Iustice, was vniust rigour.Drus. de 3. Sec. l. 3. c. 3. Elias Thi^b. rad. Sadoc. Pirke Aboth. c. 3. vid. Ser. Tr. l. 2. c. 19. This Sadoc, or rather Saduc, liued vnder Antigonus Sochaeus, who succeeded to Simeon the iust: His fellow Scholler was Baithos, of whom came the Baithosaeans. So saith Abraham ben Dauid in his historicall Cabball: Antigonus said, Bee ye not as seruants, which Minister to their Prince, on condition to receiue reward. Sadoc and Baithos  asked him of this thing: And he answered, that they should not put confidence in the reward of this life, but in the world to come. But they denied his words, and said; We neuer heard any thing of the world to come; for they had beene his Disciples: and they dissented from him, and went to the Sanctuarie of Mount Garizim, where the Princes were. They vpbraided the Pharisees with their Traditions, saying; The Tradition is in the hand of the Pharisees, to vexe themselues in this World, whereas in the World to come, they haue no reward. Antigonus his words are in the Treatise Pirke Aboth. Be yee not seruants which minister to a Prince, to receiue of him reward: But be yee as seruants which minister to their Prince, with this condition, that they receiue no reward, and let the feare of God be vpon you.El. in rad^ Zadok. Elias Leuita thus reporteth it: Antigonus Sochaeus had two Disciples, Zadok and Baiethos, which leauing their Master  to follow wicked men, first beganne to deny the Lawe, which was giuen by word of mouth, and beleeued nothing but that which was written in the Law: Wherefore they were called, Karraim, that is, Bible-men, or Textuals, and in the Romane Tongue they call them Sadducees. These two are reported also to haue forsaken their Master Antigonus, and as Apostaticall Heretikes, to haue embraced Sanballats new Samaritane Religion at Carizim.
Baithos had a certaine family from Sadoc, otherwise held the same opinions, as Hillel and Sammai among the Pharisees: so these were two chiefe Masters of the Sadducaean Schooles. The Baithucaeans ministred to Baithos in vessels of siluer and gold. These Sadduces were called Minim, or Minei, that is, Heretikes. They are called Karraim, because they would  seeme Textuall, and Scripture-men, disallowing Traditions,Scalig. Elenc. Trihaer. cap. 2. of Kara, which signifieth the Scripture: which was called Kara, or Cara, of Cara to reade, saith Drusius,Drus. quaest. lib. 1. quaest. 44. because of the diligence which ought to be vsed in reading the Scriptures, whereunto men should designe (after the Iewish precepts) the third part of their life. Abraham Zachuth calls them Epicures. The Scriptures they interpreted after their owne sense, nor regarded they the words of the Wise-men; that is, the Pharisees. They were of the ancient Caraeans, or Karraim, but not of those which now are so tearmed; Which as Zachuth confesseth, confesse the Resurrection, and Reward. ScaligerScal. quo sup. It seemeth that Philip Ferdinandus, by his Pharisees Sadducees and intendeth the Rabbanim, and Karraim. affirmeth, by the testimonie of Philip Frederike a Christian Iew, who had great familiaritie with these Karraim at Constantinople, and had beene often present at their Synagogue, that they differ nothing from the other Iewes, but in reiecting  Traditions, and are farre more honest and faithfull then the Rabbanim, of whome they are no lesse hated for their integritie, then for reiecting Tradition. But in comparison of theScal. E. T. l. 2. Rabbanim, there are but fewe of the Karraim: And these are of the Reliques of the olde Sadducees. These two Sects haue nothing common betweene them, but the Text of the Scripture: They haue a differing account of their New-Moones: the other Iewes reckoning from the Coniunction, these Karraim from the time of apparition, as doe the Arabians.
Concerning the Karraim now remayning, it is reported that the other Iewes, and they will not speake one to another: so inexpiable hatred doe the other Iewes conceiue against them. And Postellus saith,G. Postel. Alpbab. 12. ling. ap. Dr. There are three principall Sects of the Iewes in the Easterne  parts; Thalmudists; Carraim, which reiect those Glosses. They are rich, but so hated of the rest, that a great part of their Virgins remaine vnmarried: And if (saith the common Iew) it should so happen, that a Caraim and a Christian should fall together into the water, with like
 possibilitie of sauing either, he would make a bridge of the Carraim to saue the Christian. The third sort is the Samaritan, of which afterward. Buxdorf.Buxdorf. Synagog. Iud. c. 2. saith, that there are of these Caraim also in Poland; and LeoLeo Africa, Beniamin Tudel. founded in his time fortie of them at Beniabera: at Damascus two hundred. mentioneth some places in Barbarie, where this sort of Iewes doth inhabite; as you may hereafter reade in our sixt booke, and the eleuenth Chapter. Some also are in Palestina.
First, their difference from the Pharisees was about the future reward, which being denied, they by consequence of that error fell into the rest, to denie the Resurrection: the subsistence spirituall, etc. They cooped vp God in Heauen, without all beholding of euill. They denied Fate, which the Pharisees held. They denied Spirit altogether, saith Lira,Lyra in Act. 23. for they held God to be corporeall; the soule to die with the bodie: Angels and diuels they denied:  Good and Euill they ascribed to a mans free-willIoseph. de Bel. Iud. lib. 2. c. 7.. They were inhospitall and cruell; and as cruelly hated of the people. They are charged (the Diuell may be slandered) to denie all Scripture but MosesReade this Argument handled by Scaliger Elench. ca. 16. and Serar. in Trihaer. and M.: But first in Scripture, this opinion of theirs is not mentioned: and Iosephus affirmeth, that they receiued the Scriptures, and reiected Tradition. Neither would the zealous people of the Iewes haue endured them in the Temple, if they had denied their Prophets, for feare of whom they durst not professe otherwise of Iohn Baptist, although hee had left no monument of miracle, or Scripture. DrusiusDrus. de 3. Sect. l. 3. cap. 10. would reconcile this opinion of the Fathers, which, say they, denied all but Moses; and the other, saying, that some of the Sadduces liued in Iudaea, others in Samaria. These later happily, with the Samaritans, denied all saue Moses. Amongst these were the Apostata's, which liued in Sichem, mentioned by Iosephus,  Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8. and Eccles. 50.27. Iunius thinketh that they fell from the Iewish Religion with Manasses, in the time of Nehemias.
The Sect of the Sadduces was diminished, if not worne out, after the destruction of the Temple, till in the yeere 4523. or after Scaliger, 4515. and Anno Dom. 755. one Anan and Saul his son renued that Doctrine, because he had not receiued his expected promotion to the degree of GaonGaon was a degree, as a Doctor with vs, created by imposition of hands, etc.. He wrote bookes against the other Iewes. The like did one Carcas^ai. But of these Sadduces too much.


@. V.  Of the Hessees.
OF theEsseni. Essees, Essens. or Hessees, followeth in the next place. Their name ScaligerScalig. Elenc. cap. 26. deriueth of a(...) to be written Hessees, not Essees cont. Serar. l. 3. cap. 3. word which signifieth Rest, or quietnesse and silence: both which well agreed to their institution. He disproueth that opinion of Eusebius, and others, that therein followed him, which thought these Iewish Heretikes were Christian Monkes and Catholikes. Such Catholikes let Baronius,Baron. Annal. tom. 1. and BellarmineCent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. boast of, as the Authors of their Monkes, for so they would haue them; which you may beleeue as well as before the Floud, Enosh, and after, Elias, Iohn Baptist, the Nazarites, and  Rechabites, were Monkish Votaries, as the Cardinall would haue you. As for these Essees, hee makes no small adoe against the Centuries, g for vnderstanding Philo of Iewish, and not of Christian Monkes.Bellar. de Men. lib. 2. cap. 5. But the loue to Monkery hath dazeled the eyes of men too much: and euen their Historie (which followeth) will conuince that opinion of falsehood. Besides, Christianity should haue small credit of such associates. Indeed the later Monkes are much like them in superstition and idolatrie, though farre behind in other things. But he that will see this Argument disputed, let him reade Scaliger his Confutation of Serarius the Iesuite. He sheweth also that the Ossens, Sampsaeans, Messalians, and diuers heresies amongst the Christians, sprang from these Essees: That the Egyptian Essees, of which Philo speaketh, out of whom Eusebius first collected that conceit, and that Philo himselfe, had no skill in the  Hebrew, but knew onely the Greeke tongue: that Paulus the Eremite in Thebais, was the first Author of Monasticall liuing. But now to come to our Historie of these men.
These Essees, Hessees, or Essens, are placed by Plinie on the West of dead SeaPlin. l. 5. c. 17., a people solitarie, and in the whole world most admirable, without women, without money; a Nation eternall, in which none is borne, the wearinesse of others fortunes being the cause of their fruitfull multiplyings, Philo in that booke which he intituled, that all good men are free, saith, that there were of them aboue foure thousand, called Essaei, quasi (...), that is, Holy, not sacrificing other creatures, but their mindes vnto God. Some of them are Husband-men, some Artificers, for necessitie, not for abundance: they make no weapons of war, nor meddle with Merchandize. They haue no seruants, but are all both free and mutually seruants to  each other. They liue perpetually chaste, sweare not at all, nor lye: esteeming God the giuer of all good, and Author of no euill: Their societie is such; that one garment, one house, one
 foode, one treasurie, one getting one spending, one life, is in common to them all; carefully prouiding for their sick, and holding the elder men in place of parents.
Iosephus, who himselfe liued among them, doth more largely describe them.Ioseph de Bel. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 7. He reporteth that they were by Nation Iewes, auoiding pleasures and riches as sinnes; accounting continence and contentednesse great vertues. They marrie not, but instruct the children of others, respecting them as their kindred, in their manners: not denying the lawfulnesse of marriage, but the honestie of women. He which becommeth one of their fraternitie, must make his goods common. Oyle and neatnesse they shunne, yet weare alwaies a white garment. They haue officers for their common prouision. They haue no one certaine Citie, but  in each, many of them haue their houses: to strangers of their owne Sect, they communicate their goods and acquaintance; and therefore carry nothing with them in their iourneyes, but weapons for feare of theeues: and in euery Citie haue of the same Colledge an especiall Officer which prouideth for strangers. The children vnder tuition of Masters are alike prouided for; nor doe they change their rayment till the old be worne; They neither buy nor sell, but mutually communicate. Deuout they are in the seruice of God. For, before the Sunne riseth, they speake of no prophane or worldly matter, but celebrate certaine Prayers, asThe Essees were worshippers of the Sunne, hence came the (...). and Sampsaei. praying him to rise. Then by their Officers are each appointed to their workes, till the fifth houre, at which time they assemble together, and, being girded with linnen garments, wash themselues with cold water. Then doe they goe into their dining-roome, as into  a Temple, where no man of another Sect may be admitted; and there staying with silence, the Pantler sets them bread in order, and the Cooke one vessell of broth. The Priest giueth thankes, a^ after dinner also. Then laying aside those their holy garments, they plie their worke till the Euening; and then suppe in like manner. There is neuer crying or tumult, they speake in order, and obserue euen without the house a venerable silence. In other things they are subiect to their ouerseer, but at their owne choice may helpe and shew mercy to others. To their kindred they cannot giue without licence. What they say, is certaine: but an Oath they hate no lesse then periurie. They studie the writings of the Ancient, thence collecting such things as may benefite the manners of the minde, or health of the bodie. They which are studious of their Sect, must a yeeres space endure tryall, and then after that  probation of their continencie, must bee probationers yet two yeeres longer, and then vpon allowance of their manners, are assumed into their fellowship; making first deepe protestation of Religion towards God, and iustice towards men, to keepe faith to all, but especially to Princes, and if they shall come to rule ouer others, not to abuse their power, not to exceede others in habit, not to steale, not to keepe any thing secret from them of their owne Sect, or cummunicate it to another, although vpon perill of life: not to deuise new doctrines: to keepe the bookes of their owne opinions, and the names of the Angels. Offenders they put from their fellowship; and hee which is thus excommunicate, may not receiue foode offered of any other, but, eating grasse and hearbs, is consumed with famine, except they in compassion receiue him againe, in extremitie. They giue no sentence of iudgement,  being fewer then an hundred. If ten sit together, one speakes not without consent of the rest. They may not spit in the midst or on the right hand. They will not so much as purge Nature on the SabbathThey go not to stoole on the Sabbath, because of that instrument which they could not vse to dig and couer their excrement, without Sabbath breaking. Scaliger., and on other daies do it very closely, for offending the Diuine light, and couer it with an instrument in the Earth, and that in the most secret places; and are washed after.
They are of foure rankes, according to the time of their profession, and the yonger sort of these are so farre inferiour to the rest, that if one of these do touch them, hee washeth himselfe, as if he had touched a stranger. They liue long: feare not death: not by any tortures of the Romans, could be compelled to transgresse their lawes; but derided their tormentors rather: beleeuing to receiue their soules againe presently, holding the bodies to be corruptible,  and the prisons of the immortall soules: which if they haue been good, haue a pleasant place assigned them beyond the Ocean, but the euill to be in tempestuous stormie places of punishments. Some of these Essens also foretell things to come. And another sort is of them which allow of marriage, but make a three yeeres tryall first of the woman; and if by a constant purgation they appeare fit for child-bearing, they wed them, not for pleasure but procreation: and therefore after conception, do not accompanie with them. These women when they wash, haue their sacred linnen garments also, as the men. Thus far Iosephus: who in hisIos. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2. Antiq. addeth to these, their opinions of Gods prouidence ruling all things; and that they thinke their Ceremonies more holy then those of the Temple, and therefore send thither their gifts, but do not there sacrifice, but by themselues, following the same course of  life, which the PlistiScaliger readeth not ^l^sti, but Polistae, called also Ctistae, Scythian Nomades. do amongst the Dacians.
Some of these Essees liued solitarie, like to Hermites, as is said before. Happily that Baenus was of this sort, to whom IosephusIn vita Iosep. resorted for imitation. He liued in the wildernesse, cloathing
 and feeding himselfe with such things, as the trees and plants of their owne accord yeelded him, and with often cold washings in the night and day, cooling the heate of lust; with him Iosephus abode three yeeres.


@. VI. Of the Scribes.
THE Gaulonites or Galilaans,Galilaeans had theirIoseph. de Antiq lib. 18. cap. 2. de Bello Iud. lib. 2. cap 7. beginning of Iudas (elsewhere hee  calleth him Simon) a Galilaean, whose doctrine was, That, Only GOD was to be accounted their Lord and Prince: In other things they agreed with the Pharises: but for their libertie they would rather endure any the most exquisite tortures, together with their kindred and friends, then call any mortall man their Lord. Theudas happily, mentioned, Act. 5. and that Egyptian, Act. 21. were of this rebellious and trayterous Sect, and those Sicarij which wore short weapons vnder their garments, therewith murthering men in assemblies. That Egyptian,Joseph. de Bell. lib. 2. ca. 2^. Iosephus cals a false Prophet, who vnder pretence of Religion, and name of a Prophet, assembled almost thirtie thousand men to Mount Oliuet, hee was defeated by Foelix the Gouernour. Such were their Zelotae in the siege of Ierusalem, vnder the mantle of Religion, all of them harbouring and cloaking Treason and  villanie.
The ScribesScribes. are not a Sect, but a function: of which were two sorts, (...), and (...), the one expounders of the Law, the other publike Notaries, or Actuaries, Recorders, Secretarie. Epiphanius maketh difference betwixt the Scribes that were (...), Teachers of the Law, and the (...), or Lawyers, which prescribed formes of Law, Law-cases, and taught Ciuill actions. But these are often taken one for the other. Ezra is called a Scribe, whose Pulpit is mentioned, Nehem. 8. andRainolds and Hart. Moses Chaire was the Seate of the Scribes, that is, they taught the Law of Moses, which they vsed to do sitting: as Christ also did, Math. 5.2. Their expositions, EpiphaniusEpiph. haer. 15. saith, were of foure sorts, one in the name of Moses; the second in the name of their Rabbine Akiba (he is  said to haue liued a hundred and twentie yeeres, and to be standard-bearer to Barchozba) the third in Andan or Annan; the fourth after the Assamonai. But little is to bee said of these Scribes, more then what is before said of the Pharises, this being not a differing Sect, but an Office or Ministerie, wherof the Pharises also were capable, and are for false teaching blamed by our Sauiour, together with the Scribes.
The Scribes are said in their expositionsD. Hall Pharis. and Christian. to haue beene more textuall, the Pharises more in their Glosses and Traditions: The Scribes had chiefe reputation for learning, the Pharises for holinesse, taking more paines (saith our English Iosephus) to goe to hell. The Scribes professed both disputation and obseruation of many things, saith Arias Montanus,Ar. Mont. in Euang. Mat. 15. but not so exact as the Pharises. For the Pharises, though not so learned as the other,  thought themselues more holy then them, because they obserued not onely those things, which in the common opinion were thought meete, but those things which were least, which the people obserued not, which others had added. This they were ambitious of, as of some great perfection, for there was a threefold state of men. The Doctors, Pharises, and people of the Land. The Prouerbe was, The people of the Land, are the foote-stoole of the Pharises. And this,Vid. Drus. praet. in Io. 7.49. The people of the Land is not holy: and they discerne not the Law nor wisedome: yea, saith the booke Musar, hee shall not take the daughter of the people of the Land, because they are abomination, and their wiues are abomination; and of their daughters it is said, Cursed be hee that lyeth with a beast. Thus did these proud Doctors and Pharises treade the way to the Popish Clergie, in contemning the Laytie, as vnworthie of the Law and  Scripture, which in an vnknowne tongue was sealed from them, and feasted them at high Feasts with an halfe Sacrament, and in their ordinarie priuate Masse, with none at all. Were not these faire reasons?Gerson. l. 2. de connisun. sub vtraque spec. The Laytie might (if they had a whole Communion) touch the Cup, and some of them haue beards, and some haue the palsie, and their dignitie is inferior to the Priestly, etc. The Booke Aboth sheweth how the people of the Lord required this supercilious generation, talking of them, and scoffing at them for their obseruations. When I was of the people of the Land, R. Aquiba there saith, I said, Who will giue me a Disciple of the wise? I would bite him as an Asse; for that insolence, and because they would not suffer themselues to be touched of them. The people were tyed to obserue the precepts mentioned, or by necessitie of consequence drawne out of the Bible. The Pharises (as is said) added their Traditions.  The Scribes mannerAr. Mont. in Marc. 1.22. of teaching was colde and weake, consisting in certaine arguments, which rather afflicted then affected the mindes of the hearers; in certaine niceties,
 and scrupulous questions, and sometimes inextricable. And therefore the people heard Christ, as speaking with authoritie, and not as the Scribes. But to let passe these Schoole-men, and those Canonists, let vs come to their other Sects and sorts of professions.


@. VII. Of many other Iewish Sects and Heresies.
 THe HemerobaptistsHemerobaptists. are numbred by EpiphaniusEpiph. haer. 17. among the Iewish heresies, which, saith hee, in other things differ not from the Scribes and Pharisies; but in their doctrine of the resurrection, and in infidelitie, are like to the Sadduces: And euerie day in all times of the yeere, they are baptized or washed, whence they haue their name. But this custome of daily washing, saith ScaligerScal. Elench. cap. 31. was common to all the antient Iewes, which would seeme better then their fellowes, and not only obserued of the Pharises Essees, and Hemerobaptists (if such a Sect may be added.) At this time in Palestina, many doe it, not once, but often in the day. The Mahumetans obserue it. The Iewes (as aManahem. ap. Drus. praet. l. ^. Iew hath written) were so zealous herein, that they would not eate with him that did eate with vnwashed hands: and one of their holy men being inuited by such an  host, rose vp and went his way, alleaging to him, when he would haue recalled him, that he must not eate the bread of him which had an euill eye: and besides his meate was vncleane. The Priests, when they kept their courses in the Temple, abstained from Wine, and ate not of the Tithes before they had washed their whole body. The Pharises and Essees composed themselues to this sanctitie: the greater part of the Pharises, and all the Essees abstained from Wine, and both vsed daily washings, especially before they ate. And as many Heretikes professing themselues Christians, retained many things of Iudaisme; so these Hemerobaptists learned them this daily washing. It seemeth by him, that these were Christian rather then Iewish Heretikes.
And so were the NazaraeansNazaraeans. also, which some reckon among the Iewish Sects, who  embraced the Gospell of Christ, but would not relinquish their Iudaisme; vnlesse wee say with Hierome, that whiles they would be both Iewes and Christians, they were neither Iewes nor Christians. These Nazaraeans, or Nazoraeans, Scaliger affirmeth, were meere Karraim Scripture Iewes, but because of their obstinacie in the Law, the first Councell of the Apostles determined against them. As for the Nazarites of the old Testament, Moses describeth them and their obseruations, not to cut their haire, not to drinke wine, strong drinke, etc. Such was Sampson: But these could be no Sect, holding in euery thing the same doctrine with the Iewes, and onely, for a time, were bound by vow to these Rites. But for those Nazaraeans, EpiphaniusEpiph. haer. 18. maketh them a Iewish Sect, not without cause, if such were their opinions, as he describeth them. Their dwelling was beyond Iordan, in  Gilead and Bashan, as the fame goeth (saith he) by Nation Iewes: and by obseruing many things like to the Iewes. Herein they differed: They did not eate any thing which had life, they offered not sacrifice: for they counted it vnlawful to Sacrifice, or to eate flesh. They disallowed the fiue books of Moses: they indeed confessed Moses, and the Fathers by him mentioned, and that he had receiued the Law, not this yet, which is written, but another.Phil. Brix. de Haeres. Philastrius saith, they accepted the Law and Prophets, but placed all righteousnesse in carnall obseruation: and nourishing the haire of their heads, placed therein all their vertue, professing to imitate Sampson, who was called a Nazarite: from whom the Pagans afterwards named their valiant men Hercules.
Next to these dothHaeres. 19. Epiphanius place the OssensOssens., dwelling in Ituraea, Moab, and  beyond the Salt or Dead Sea: to these one Elixai in the time of Traian ioyned himselfe: hee had a brother named Iexai. Scaliger (here and euery where acute) saith,Scal. Elenc. cap. 27. that the Essens and Ossens are the same name, as being written with the selfe-same Hebrew Letters, differing onely in pronunciation, as the Abyssynes pronounce Osrael, Chrostos, for Israel, Christus. And the Arabian Elxai, and his brother Iexai, were not proper names, but the appellation of the Sect it selfe, as hee proueth. But they agreed not so well in profession, as in name, with the Essens, for they were but an issue of those ancient Essens, holding some things of theirs, others of their owne: as concerning the Worship of Angels, reproued by the Apostles, Coloss. 2.21. In which the Essens and Ossens agreed, and other things there mentioned, Touch not, taste not, handle not: and in worshipping of the Sunne, whereof  they were called Sampsaeans, or Sunners, Sun-men, as Epiphanius interpreteth that name. Those things wherein they differed, were brought in by that Innouator, who (of this his Sect) was called Elxai.

He was, saith Epiphanius, a Iew, he ordained Salt, and Water, and Earth, and Bread, and Heauen, and the Skie, and the Winde, to be sworne by in Diuine worship. And sometimes he prescribed other seuen witnesses; Heauen, and Water, and Spirits, and the holy Angels of Prayer and Oyle, and Salt, and Earth. He hated continencie, and enioyned marriage of necessitie. Many imaginations he hath, as receiued by reuelation. He teacheth Hypocrisie, as in time of persecution to worship Idols; so as they keepe their Conscience free: And if they confesse any thing with their mouth, but not in their heart. Thus ancient is that Changeling Aequiuocation. He bringeth his Author, one Phineas of the stock of the ancienter Phineas, the sonne of Eleazar, who had worshipped Diana in Babylon, to saue his life. His followers esteeme him a secret vertue or power. Vntill the time of Constantine, Marthus and  Marthana (two women of his stocke) remained in succession of his honour, and were worshipped in that Countrey for gods, because they were of his seede. Marthus died a while since, but Marthana still liueth: Their spittle, and other excrements of their body, those Heretikes esteemed, and reserued for Reliques, to the cure of diseases, which yet preuayled nothing. He mentioneth Christ, but it is vncertaine whether he meaneth the Lord Iesus. Hee forbids praying to the East-ward, and bids turne towards Ierusalem from all parts. He detesteth Sacrifices, as neuer offered by the Fathers: He denieth the eating of flesh among the Iewes, and the Altar, and Fire, as contrarie to God, but water is fitting. He describeth Christ after his measure, foure and twentie Schaem in length, that is, foure-score and sixteene miles; and the fourth part thereof in breadth, to wit, six Schaeni, or foure and twentie  miles; besides the thicknesse, and other fables. He acknowledgeth a holy Ghost, but of the female sexe, like to Christ, standing like a statue aboue the Clouds, and in the midst of two mountains. He bids none should seeke the interpretation, but only say these things in prayer: (words which he had taken out of the Hebrew tongue, as in part we haue found.) His prayer is this,Scaliger thinketh they are three sentences, and not a Prayer. Abar anid moib nochiel daasim ani daasim nochile moib anid abar selam. Thus Epiphanius relates it, and thus construes, I cannot say expoundeth (although they like our deuout Catholiques, needed no exposition.) Let the humilitie passe from my Fathers, of their condemnation, and conculcation, and labour; the conculcation in condemnation by my Fathers, from the humility passed in the Apostleship of perfection. Thus was Elxai with his followers opinionate: otherwise Iewish. Epiphanius speakes of his Sect else where often, as when he mentioneth the Ebonites,Epiph. haer. 53.  and the Sampsaeans: This booke both the Ossees and Nazoraeans, and Ebionites vsed.
The SampsaeansSamsaeans. had another booke (they said) of his brothers. They acknowledge one God, and worship him. vsing certaine washings. Some of them abstaine from liuing creatures, and they will die for Elxai his posteritie; which they had in such honour, that if they went abroad, the people would gather vp the dust of their feete for cures, and their spittle, and vsed them for amulets and preseruatiues. They admit neither the Apostles nor Prophets: they worship water, esteeming it as a god, beleeuing that life is from thence.
Scaliger also affirmeth, that theMassalians. Massalians (which word Epiphanius interpreth (...), Such as pray, according to the opinion and practice of those Heretiks) wereScal. ele. c. 28. first a Iewish Sect, and a slip of the Essees, and after by marriage with some false Christians, made  such a gally-maufry, as after when we come to speake of the Pseudochristian sects shall (God willing) be related: for of Iewish they became Christian Heretiks.
TheHerodians. HerodiansEpiph. haer. 20 otherwise agreeing with the rest, thought Herod to be the Messias, moued by Iacobs Prophecy falsely interpreted, that the Scepter should not depart from Iuda til Shilo came. When as therfore they saw Herod a stranger to possesse the Kingdom, they in-terpreted as aforesaid. Some make question whether this was the name of a sect, or of Herods souldiers. Drus.Drus. de 3. sec. 1. lib. cap. 3. obserueth out of a Co^menter vpon Persius, Sat. 5. Herodis venere, etc. These words; Herod raigned among the Iews in the parts of Syria, in the daies of Augustus. The Herodians therfore obserue the birth-day of Herod, as also the Sabbaths: in the which day they set Lamps burning, and crowned with Violets in the windows. Elsewhere he citeth out of a Lexicon of the Hebrew Law,  that they were called Herodians of Herods name, and Dorsians of the place whence they were brought; for by Nation they were Greekes: so saith the Author of Baal, Aruch, Herod the King brought Greekes out of the desart,Scal. ad Euseb. pag. 150. and brought them vp in the habitable land. Scaliger saith that they were a corporation or guilde, instar earum societatum, quae vulgo confrairia vocantur, and besides their Hereticall opinion that he was the Messias, entred into societie for costs and charges in common, to be bestowed on sacrifices and other solemnities, wherewith they honoured Herod aliue and dead. Arias MontanusAr. Mont. in Euang. Matth. 22.6. thinketh that the Herodians were politicians, that little respected Religion. They thought the Common-wealth should be established, and that could not stand without Princes, nor could Princes nourish themselues or theirs without money, and therefore propounded that question to our Sauior touching  Caesars tribute. Others thinke they made hotchpotch of Iudaisme and Gentilisme, as Herod had done: in which it is like his successors succeeded him. This coniecture is mentioned
 byB^za Annot. in Matth. 22. Beza, who yet rather thinketh that the Herodians were Herods courtiers, moued thereto by the Syrian translation, which hath debeth Hiraudis, Herods domesticals. Thus thinkethJun. in Annot. Syr. Tran. Iunius of them also, who saith that when the Pharises could not intrap him in the Law, they sent their disciples to question him of Tribute, hauing before agreed (which vsually they did not) with the Herodians to stand by (vnknowne) as witnesses, if he had answered any thing whereat Caesar might haue beene offended. And this seemeth most likely: for after Herods death, how could they hold him for Messias?
Another Sect among these of the Circumcision,Euseb. hist. Eccles. 4. c. 21. Eusebius out of Hegesippus nameth theMasbothaei. Masbothaei or Masbotheani; for Thebulis (saith Hegesippus) was of their number, which arose  out of seuen sects in the Iewish people; which Sects had their beginning Symon, of whom the Symonians; and Cleobius, of whom the Cleobians, Dositheus, of whom the Dositheans; and Gortheus, of whom the Gortheans; and Mashotheus, of whom the Masbotheans. And from the same fountaines issued the Menandrians, Marcionists, Carpocratians, Valentinians, Basilidians, and Saturnilians. And a little after, There were diuers Sects amongst the Israelites, Essees, Galilaeans, Hemerobaptists, Masbotheans, Samaritans, Sadduces, Pharises.
The word Masbothaei,Scalig. Elene. cap. 9. Scaliger saith, signifieth Sabbatists or Sabbatarians, because they professed to haue learned the obseruation of the Sabbath from Christ, and therein differed from the other Iewes.
 He there nameth (and little else haue we but their names, euen the name also of the wicked shall rot) diuers other Sects, if they may beare that name: as the GenitesGenites. or Genists, which stood vpon their stock and kindred: the reason Breidenbachius alledgeth, because in the Babylonish captiuitie or after, they married not strange wiues, and therefore boast themselues of the puritie of Abrahams seede. TheMerissaeans. Merissaeans or Merists, which were (as the name importeth) sprinklers of their holy-water, Breidenbach saith, they made a diuision of the Scriptures, and receiued only some part of them: The Morbonei, he addeth, Sabbatise in euery thing. TheHellenians. Helienians, of Hellenius,Cleobians. The Cleobians andTheobulians. Theobulians we can but mention. Of theTubiens. Tubiens as little, saue that they are said to be a Colledge or fellowship: and lesse ofGanaei. Ganaei, and such like, if there be any other names that remayne as the rotten  bones of the consumed carkasses of heresies and Heretikes; and either are vnknowne, or degenerated into some or other sect of Pseudo-christians, which require another taske.
TheCoelicolae. Coelicolae were Iewes,Scal. Elench. tribar. Serar. cap. 31. but corruptly embracing Christianity, for they were Massalians, which had their houses or places of Prayer abroad in the open ayre, of whom Iuuenal is vnderstood, Nil praeter nubes and coeli lumen adorant. So Scaliger Readeth, not numen: and Petronius, Iudaeus licet and porcinum nomen adoret, Et coeli summas aduocet auriculas. These also were an off-spring of the Essees: and from these proceeded the Massalians: they being baptized, reuolted to their former Iudaisme, and bearing the name of Christians, retayned the rites of those Coelicolae or Heauen-worshippers.
TheCannaei. Cannaei were a deuout society and order, giuen to holinesse of life, and obseruation  of the Law; of whom was Simon Kannaeus, Mat. 10. called Zelotes, the interpretation of the former, asBeza Annot. in Matth. 10. Beza andScal. El. c. 1. Scaliger shew. Suidas calleth them obseruants of the Law, whom Ananus shut in the Temple. Their (...), orMourners. Mourners were such as lamented with continuall fasting, praying, and weeping, the destruction of their Citie,See cap. 10. Philast. Episc. Briziens. lib. de haeresib. Ophila. Temple and Nation; as else-where is said, I might adde out of that ancient father Philastrius (whom S. Augustine saith he had seene at Millan with S. Ambrose) diuers other heresies amongst the people of the Iewes before the incarnation of Christ, no fewer then eight and twentie; of which we haue already mentioned the most and principall. Hee addeth the Ophitae or Serpentines, which worship a Serpent, saying, that he first procured vs the knowledge of good and euill; for which GOD enuied him, and cast him from the first heauen into the second, whence  they expect his comming, esteeming him some vertue of GOD, and to be worshipped. Another sort are the Caiani, which commend Cain for fratricide, saying,Caiaeni. that Cain was made of the power of the Deuill, Abel of another power, but the greatest power preuailed in Caine to slay Abel. A third sort reckoned by Philastrius are the Sethiani,Sethiani. worshippers of Seth the sonne of Adam, who affirme, that two men being created in the beginning, and the Angells dissenting, the faeminine power preuailed inHere our Author is obscured. heauen (for with them are males and females gods and goddesses) Eue perceiuing that, brought forth Seth, and placed in him a Spirit of great power, that the aduersaries powers might be destroyed. Of Seth they say, that Christ should come of his stock, yea some of them conceiue him to be the very Christ.Heliognostice. The Heliognosti, called also Deuictaci,Deuictaci. worshipped the Sunne, which (said they) knew all  the things of GOD, and yeelded all necessaries to men. Others there were which worshipped Frogges, thereby thinking to appease Diuine Wrath,Frog worshippers. which in Pharaohs time brought Frogges vpon the Land of Aegypt. He reckoneth the Accaronites which worshipped
 a Flie; of which else where is spoken: as also the Thamuzites, of Thamuz, which hee saith was the sonne of a Heathen King, whose Image the Iewish woman worshipped with teares and continuall sacrifices;-- and that Pharao which ruled Aegypt in Moses time was of that name. Astar also and Astarot, he saith, were Kings of Syria and Aegypt, worshipped after their deaths. But (perhaps more truely) we haue expressed these things in our former booke. Beniamin Teudelensis speaketh of a sect in his time, which he calleth Cyprians and Epicures, who prophaned the euening before the Sabbath, and obserued the euening of the first day. I might adde to their sects the diuers Christs or Messiases, which in diuers ages they had; but that I haue referred to the tenth Chapter.




CHAP. IX. Of the Samaritans.
IT remaineth to speake of the Samaritan Sects. Samaria was the Citie royall of the ten Tribes, after that Omri (who, as other his predecessors, had raigned before at Ticzah) had bought the Mountaine Shomron1. Reg. 16.24. of one Shemer, for two talents of siluer, and built thereon this Citie, which he called after the name Shemer, Lord of the Mountaine. In vaine therefore is it to seeke  the name of the Samaritans from the signification of theEpiph. har. 9. Chytr. Ono^ast. word (which is keeping) seeing they are so called of the place, and the place of this their ancient Lord. It remayned the chiefe seate of the kingdome, as long as the same endured, and namely, till the dayes of Hoshea their last King, in whose time2. Reg. 17. Salmanasar the Assyrian carried the Israelites thence Esarhaddon, the son of Senacherib, otherwise called Osnappar (thus saithEzr. 4.2.10. Hezra: and therefore Epiphanius was deceiued in ascribing this act to Nabuchodonosor in the time of the captiuitie, fortie yeeres before the returne) sent to inhabite that Region, Colonies from Babel, and from Cuthan, and from Aua, and from Hannah, and from Sepharuaim. Babel is knowne: Cutha and AuaTremel annot. in Reg. 22. 7. Iosephus thinketh Cutha to be Persian. are esteemed parts of the desart of Arabia, the other of Syria and Mesopotamia. It seemeth that most of them were of Cutha, because all of them  after passed into that name, and were of the Iewes called Cuthaei, as witnessethIoseph. Antiq. l. 9. 14. and l. 11. 4. Iosephus.Elias Thisrad. Cuth. Elias Leuita giueth the same reason; and addeth, that a Iew might not say Amen to a Samaritans or Cuthans blessing. The Cuthi, saith he, were the subtlest beggers of all men in the world, and from them, as he thinketh, came those cosining Roging Gipsies or Egyptians, which so many ages haue troubled so many countries of Europe.
These Heathens serued not the Lord, and therefore the Lord sent Lyons among them, which slew them; wherefore they sent to the King of Assyria, who sent thither one of the captiued Priests of Israel, to teach them how to worship GOD (Epiphanius calleth his nameThe Hebrewes call him Dosthai as Drusius citeth Senacherib sent to Samaria R. Dosthai, the son of Iannai, to teach them the Law, Drus. l. 3. de sec. c. 4. Tertullian cals him Dositheus, and so doth Ierome, fathering the Samaritan Sect on him. Esdras.) He dwelt at Bethel; and as some conceiue, taught rather that Idolatrous worship, whereof Bethel had beene before the Beth-auen, where Ieroboam had placed his  golden Calfe, then the true worship of the True Iehouah. Howsoeuer, euery Nation (saith the Text) made them gods, and put them in the houses of the high places, which the Samaritans had made. The men of Babel made Succoth Benoth; and the men of Cutha made Nergal; and the men of Hamath, Ashima; and the Auims, Nibhaz and Tartak; and the Sepharuams burnt their children in the fire to Adrammelech, and Anammelech their gods. Thus they feared the Lord, and serued their gods after the manner of the Nations, and so continued: A mungrell Religion, begotten of a bastard or haereticall Iudaisme, and wilde Paganisme. What those gods were it is vncertaine, and interpreters agree not. Of Succoth Benoth, isL. 1. c. 13. already spoken. Wolphius interpretethWolph. in 2. Reg 17. Nergal a wilde Hen, Ashima a Goate, Nibhaz a Dogge, Tarkak an Asse, Adramelech a Mule, Anamelech a Horse: Thus (saith he) the Hebrewes expound them; and hee  supposeth these creatures were among them canonized and sacred: as the Persians are said to worship a Cock, the Proembari of Africa a Dog: other people other creatures. Some are of opinion that Nergal was that continuall fire which these Cuthaeans after the Persian manner kept in their Pyraeths (places inclosed for that purpose) as in our Persian relations shal follow; and Kimchi saith that Adramelech had the forme of a Peacock. Anamelech of a Pheasant.Seld. de d. Syris. But neither are the trifling RR. too far to be trusted, nor haue we any other good testimonie. Thus their Religion continued till after the returne of the Iewes from captiuitie, to whom they would haue beene officious helpers in building of the Temple: which being refused they be came their enemies,Ezra. 4. and hindred a building the long time. But the Temple being built, and Religion established among the Iewes, and their state flourishing,Ios. Antiq. 11.7. Sanballat  gaue his Daughter Nicaso to Manasses, the brother of Iaddus the high Priest, in the time of Darius the last Persian Monarch. This Nehemiah mentioneth, but deigneth not to name
 him, affirmi^g that he chased him from him, of which someWolph. in Neheus. descant whether it were by exile or excommunication, or some other punishment. R. Salomo interpreteth it of exile, Pelican of excommunication.
DrusiusDrus. de 3. sec. l. 3. c. 2. hath a discourse out of a Iewish Author, which relateth the forme of that first Anathema and iudiciall curse (not vnmeete here to be mentioned) denounced against the Samaritans for hindring the worke of the Temple. Zorobabel and Ioshua (saith hee) gathered all the Congregation into the Temple of the Lord, and brought three hundred Priests, and three hundred Trumpets, and three hundred Bookes of the Law, and as many children, and sounded. And the Leuites singing and playing on instruments, cursed with all  kindes of Anathema's the Chutheans, in the secret of the name Tetragrammaton, and in writing written vpon Tables; and with the Anathema of the house of the higher iudgement, and the Anathema of the house of the lower iudgement, that none of Israel should eate the bread of the Cuthean (whereupon it is said, He which eateth a Samaritans bread, be as he that eateth Swines flesh) and that a Cuthean should not bee a Proselyte in Israel, nor should haue part in the Resurrection of the dead. Thus they writ, and sealed, and sent vnto all Israel which were in Babylonia, which heaped vpon them Anathema vpon Anathema. That, concerning their becomming Proselytes, Drusius doubteth whether it may not bee translated, that a stranger Cuthaean should not abide in Israel: which is more likely. The other had beene more impious: their zeale to make Proselytes of all Nations is knowne.
 To returne to Manasses, Iosephus saith, that the high Priests and the Elders put him from the Altar, who therefore went to Sanballat his Father in law, and told him that he loued his daughter well, but would not for her lose his Priest-hood. Sanballat replied, that if he would retaine his daughter, he would not onely maintayne him in his Priest-hood, but procure him a high-Priests place, and make him Prince of all his Prouince; and would build a Temple like to that of Ierusalem in mount Garizim, which looketh ouer Samaria, higher then the other Hills, and that with the consent of K. Darius. Hereupon Manasses abode with him, and many Priests and Israelites being intangled with like marriages, reuolted to him, and were maintayned by Sanballat. But now Alexander preuailing against Darius, Sanballat (whose Religion was Policie) rebelled, and tooke part with Alexander, and in reward  thereof obtayned leaue to build his Temple, whereof Manasses enioyed to him and his successors the Pontificall dignitie. Then was the Circumcision diuided some (as said the Samaritan woman)Ioh. 4.20. worshipping in this Mountaine, others at Ierusalem. The zeale which the Samatitans had to their Temple, appearedJos. Antiq. li. 13. c. 6. in the time of Ptolomaeus Philometor, when at Alexandria, Sabbaeus and Theodosius, with their Samaritans, contended with Andronicus and the Iewes, these challenging to Ierusalem, those to Garizim, the lawful honor of a Temple, both parties swearing by God and the King, to bring proofe of their assertion out of the law; and beseeching the King to do him to death that should not make his part good; and thereupon the Samaritans failing in proofe, were adiudged to punishment.
The Samaritans in the prosperitie of the Iewes professed themselues their kinsmen and allies:  in aduersitie disclaymed them, and their God also, as appearethAntiq. l. 12. c. 7. in their Epistle to Antiochus, that figure of Antichrist, and persecuter of the Iewish Religion, in which they call themselues Sidonians dwelling in Sichem, and say, that moued by ancient superstition, they had embraced the Feast of the Sabbath, and building a Temple of a namelesse Deity, had offered therein solemne Sacrifices: whereas therefore their originall was Sidonian, and not Iewish; pleased him to enact that their Temple might beare name of Iupiter Graecanicus, and they might liue after the Greekish Rites. These things Antiochus easily granted. This Sichem is called Sichar, Io. 4.5. It was after that called Neapolis, and lastly (of the Colonie which Vespasian or Domitian placed there) Flauia Caesarea. Of that Colonie was (it is Scaligers testimony, Animal. Euseb. pag. 201.) Iustin Martyr, omnium Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum qui hodie  extant, vetustissimus; which occasioned Epiphanius his error, that of a Samaritan he became a Christian; whereas he was neuer a Samaritan in Religion, but only of this Samaritan Colonie. In this were in the age of BeniaminItin. Beniam. one hundred Samaritans: the words of Beniamin are worthy the inserting. I came, saith he, to Samaria, in which the Palace of Ahab is yet to be knowne: a place very delectable, with Springs, Riuers, Gardens, etc. and hath not one Iew inhabiting. Two leagues from hence is Nables, somtime called Sichem, in mount Ephraim, where are no Iews. The Citie is situate betweene the hils of Garizim and Heball; there are about a hundred Cuthaeans, which obserue only the law of Moses. They are called Samaritans: they haue Priests of the posterity of Aaron which resteth in peace, who marry not with any other but the men or women of their owne stock, and are there commonly called Aaronites;  they sacr^fice and burne their offerings in a Synagogue which they haue on Mount Garizim, citing out of the law, Thou shalt giue a blessing vpon the Mount Gerizim: this, say they, is the house of the Sanctuarie, and on the Paschall and other solemnities, they Sacrifice on an
 Altar in Mount Garizim made of stones, taken by the Israelites out of Iordan. They boast themselues to be of the Tribe of Ephraim. With them is the Sepulchre of Ioseph. He addeth (which Scaliger saith, is a slender) that they want three Letters, He, Cheth, Ain: whereas they reade the Pentateuch in so many and the same Letters; in which Moses wrote them, as Postel and Scaliger affirme, and those which the Iewes vse, are later counterfeits: the example whereof Scaliger hath giuen vs in their Computation, in the last Edition of his Emendation: yea, they are now also further from Idolatrie then the Iewes themselues, howsoeuer in their Talmud and else where, they brand them with false and odious imputations. Beniamin also testifieth, that they abstaine from pollution by the dead, or bones, the slaine and the Sepulchres. And euery day when they goe into the Synagogue, they put off their vsuall clothes,  and hauing washed their bodies with water, put on other clothes, sacred only to this purpose. Beniamin found of these Cuthaeans two hundred in Caesarea: at Benibera or new Ascalon three hundred, and at Damascus foure hundred.
Hircanus by force tooke both Sichem and Garizim. Two hundred yeeres after the foundation of this Temple, as testifieth Iosephus,Antiq. l. 13. cap. 17. hapned this desolation thereof. The zeale yet continued as appeareth by many testimonies of Scripture. The Iewes medled not with the Samaritanes, which madeIo. 4.9. the woman wonder that Christ asked drinke of a Samaritan. Another time the Samaritans would not receiue him, because hisLuke 9.52. behauiour was as though he would goe to Ierusalem, for which fact of theirs the sonnes of thunder would haue brought lightning from heauen vpon them. And the Iewish despite could not obiect worse in their  most venemous slander, then,Ioh. 8.42. Thou art a Samaritan. This Ierusalem-iourney through the Samaritans countrey caused bloudie warres and slaughter betwixt the GalilaeansIos. Antiq. l. 20. c. 5. and them, in the time of Cumanus, to the destruction of many. And before that in the daies of Pilate, a cosining Prophet abused their zeale, bidding them to assemble in mount Garizim,Antiq. l. 18. c. 5. with promise there to shew them the sacred vessels, which, said he, Moses had there hidden. Whereupon they seditiously assembling, and besieging Tirabatha, Pilate came vpon them with his forces, and cut them in peeces.
Their opinions (besides those aforesaid) were,Epiphan. haeres. 9. that onely the fiue bookes of Moses were Canonicall Scripture, the rest they receiued not. They acknowledge not the Resurrection, nor the Trinitie: and in zeale of one GOD, abandon all Idolatries, which it seemeth  was receiued of them after the building of the Temple, and mixture with the Apostate Iewes: the Scripture testifying otherwise of their former deuotions. They wash themselues with Vrine, when they come from any stranger, being (forsooth) polluted. And if they haue touched one of another Nation, they diue themselues garments and all, in water. Such a prophanation is the touch of one of another faith. They haue a dead corps in abomination presently.
The Samaritan,Drus. de 3. sect. l. 2. if he meeteth a Iew, Christian, or Mahumetan, he saith vnto them, Touch me not. Scaliger out of the Arabian Geographer,Scal. de Em. Tem. l. 7. telleth of an Iland still inhabited with these Samaritans, in the red Sea, which appeareth by their custome, when any comes on shore, forbidding to touch them. This arrogant superstition remaineth with them.  
The Samaritan Chronicle is cited by Eusebius, Chron. graec. l. 1.Scal. Annot. in Eus. Chron. and in Isag. Can. See Em. T. vlt. edit. pag 616. Scaliger saith, hee had a copie of their great Chronicle, translated out of Hebrew into Arabian, but in Samaritan Letters: It differeth somewhat from the Hebrew account. The Iewes confoundIos. Albo. saith, they denied the Resurrection and immortalitie of the soule. the Samaritans and Sadducees, as if they were but one Sect. The difference hath appeared, for the Sadducees accept all the Bible; the Samaritans, Moses only. The Sadducees denyed the soules immortalitie and reward. The Samaritans in their Chronicle acknowledge both a place of reward and punishment after this life. But whether they beleeue the Resurrection or no, he doubteth. The Sadducees denie Spirits, Angels, Diuels; the Samaritans confesse them. The Samaritans also vse still those ancient Letters called Phoenician, which the Hebrewes vsed before the captiuitie, which whoso listeth to view, let him see their  Characters, and Scaligers large notes thereon in his Annotations vpon Eusebius Chronicle, and a briefe of their Chronicle and Kalender therein written in his Emendation, as before is said; Which they beginne very Religiously after their manner. In the name of Iah the GOD of Israel. There is none like to Iah our GOD. One Iehoua, GOD of GODS, LORD of LORDS, a great GOD, strong and terrible. There is none like to the GOD Ieschurun, the GOD of ABRAHAM, ISAAC, IACOB, IOSEPH, and our Lord MOSES, ELEAZAR, and PHINEAS. He confirme vnto you the blessing of our Lord MOSES. IEHOVA, GOD of our Fathers, adde vnto you, as many as yee are, a thousand times and blesse you. This inscription the great Synagogue of Garizim alwaies vse, when they write to other Samaritan-Synagogues, the Kalender of the yeere following. They are very ignorant of Antiquities,  and know none other but that they came thither with Moses out of Aegypt: neither can they tell any thing of the old Kings, or defection of the ten Tribes vnder Ieroboam. They
 lightly touch the names of Samson, Samuel, Dauid, and others, in their Chronicle, which they call the booke of Iosue. Ptolemaus Lagi conueyed Colonies of them into the Cities of Aegypt, the Reliques whereof are those Samaritans which haue a Synagogue in the great Citie Cairo: And those also in the Iland before mentioned. In respect of the Mount Garizim, the seate and Sanctuarie of their holies, the Samaritans call themselues men which belong to the blessed Hill: and still, euery yeere they in Aegypt receiue from the great Synode of Garizim, the type of the yeere following two of which Scaliger had seene, and hath expressed one of them.
The Samaritans were diuided also into diuers sects, as EpiphaniusEpiph. haeres. 13. rehearseth: One  whereof were calledDosithaeans. Dositheans; if it be lawfull to reckon them Samaritans, which acknowledged (as Epiphanius acknowledgeth of them) the Resurrection of the dead. They abstaine from such things as haue life: some of them from marriage, after they haue beene before married, and some continue in Virginitie. They obserue circumcision and the Sabbath; and they touch no man, but hold euery man in abomination. Report goeth also of their fasting and exercises.
They had name of Dositheus: who being a Iew, and hauing well profited in their Law, but not receiuing promotion sutable to his ambition, reuolted to the Samaritans, and hatched this sect amongst them. And when afterwards in a singularitie he had gone aside into a Caue, and there mewed vp himselfe, and persisted in hypocrisie and fasting, he there died  (as the fame goeth) through his wilfull want of bread and water. After a few daies, some resorting to him, found his dead body crawling with wormes, and compassed with flies. Of this name Dositheus there were diuers.Drus. de 3. sect. l. 3. 6. Two of them liued after the comming of Christ. One a Iew, sonne of R. Iannai, the other a Samaritan, which endeuoured to perswade his Countrimen, that he was the Christ which Moses had prophecied of, asOrig. Cont. Cels. l. 2. Origen reporteth, and saith: of him are the Dositheans named. Another is mentioned inIohasin. Ab. Zach. Iohasin, who liued in the time of Christ, the Disciple of Sammai. And before these was another Dosthai, the sonne also of Iannas, of whom it is said inLib. Ilmedenu. Ilmednu, that Senacherib sent R. Dostha. to Samaria, to teach the Samaritans the Law. This seemeth to be he, whom before out of Epiphanius wee haue called Esdras, the first founder of the Samaritan heresie. And so TertullianTert. proscrip. aduers. haer. l. 1.  saith of him; Dositheus the Samaritan, was the first that reiected the Prophets, as not hauing spoken by the holy Ghost. The like testimonie Hierome giueth of him. His colleague and companion is said to be one Sebua, the supposed author of the Sebuaeans. In IlmedenuAp. Drus. pag. 260. he is called Sebaia, or Sebuia.Orig. de princip. 4. c. 2. Dositheus also taught, that how and in what position of body he was in the Sabbath morning, in the same he ought to continue all that day, without change of gesture or place: that if he did sit, he should sit in the same place all day long; and so of lying or other habit of body. The Author of this Dosithean Sect (properly so called) liued as ScaligerScal. Elench. Serarij trihar. cap. 15. thinketh, about or at the destruction of the Temple, and could not be that first Dustai or Dosthai.
The Sebuaeans,Sebuaeans. you haue heard, in Drusius opinion, haue their name of Sebuia, the companion  of Dosthai, sent by Senacherib, or rather by Esarhaddon; which if it be so, it seemeth this Sect is ancient, haply nothing differing from the other Samaritans. Epiphanius maketh a difference,Epiph. haer. 11 but the cause he alledgeth, was the Iewes refusall of their helpe at Ierusalem, which was common to all the Samaritans. The difference he alledgeth, is the transposing of their solemnities (for that quarrell betwixt them and the Iewes) from the Iewish times, so that they kept their Passe-ouer in August (which they made the beginning of their yeere) Pentecost in Autumne, and that of Tabernacles, when the Iewes kept their Passe-ouer: neither might they sacrifice in Garizim, obseruing such differing solemnities.Scal. Canon. Isagog. l. 3. pag. 218. 219. Scaliger (whom I shame not thus often to name, in relation of these things too intricate for mine owne, or for common wits to finde) both in his Treatise against Serarius cap. 1. and 21. and  in his Canons Isagog. lib. 3. dissenteth from Epiphanius, saying, that they dissented not from the other Samaritans, but that the name was a common name, which the Iewes ascribed to the Samaritans: It signifieth (...), Weekers: Which name they gaue them, because that euerie weeke betweene the Passe-ouer and Pentecost, they obserued that day of the weeke, in which the computation of the fiftie daies beganne, with as great solemnitie as the feast of Pentecost it selfe. This day, from which the reckoning beganne, was called (...) the second, because it was the next day after the Azyma or Feast day. But the Samaritans reckoned the second after the Sabbath, and so in all that space of fiftie dayes, kept the first day of the weeke, that is, Sunday, holy. Thus they kept seuen Pentecosts in a yeere. And perhaps (he but coniectureth) as they had these imaginarie Pentecosts, so they might at other  times of the yeere haue such imaginarie solemnities of other Feasts. From that word (...), the second day, and next to the Feast of vnleauened bread, the Sabbaths, saith Scaliger in the same place, were called in order, the first (...), the second
 Sabbath after that day, (...), and so the rest: and thus hee expoundeth those words of Luke cap. 6. v. 1. Secundo primum Sabbatum, that is, the first Sabbath after that (...), or first day of the fiftie, which beganne to be reckoned the next day after Easter till Pentecost. A place hitherto very obscure. Epiphanius doth number for Samaritan Sects; The Essens,Esseni. of which is before shewed that they were Iewes, and otherwise hereticall and Idolatrous in respect of their morning deuotions to the Sun, for which it seemeth they might not (certaine they did not) communicate with other Iewes in the Temple and Sacrifices. These pertaine not to this place; as not Samaritans. A fourth Samaritan Sect he accounteth the Gortheni,Gortheni, or Gorthaieni. Scal. de E.T. l. 5. which differed from the rest, at least from the Sebuians, in keeping their solemnities, Paschal, Pentecost, and of Tabernacles at the Iewish times, and obserued but one  day holy: as likewise the fasting day. The Iewes still obserue the Sabbaticall yeere, and so do the Samaritans also, but not at the same time; for that which is the fourth of the seuen with the Iewes, is the Sabbaticall of the Samaritans.


CHAP. X. The miserable destruction and dispersion of the Iewes, from the time of the desolation of their Citie and  Temple to this day.

@. I. Of the Destruction of the Iewes vnder TITVS.
THE curse threatned vnto this superstitious and Rebellious Nation,Deut. 28.28. madnesse, blindnesse, astonishment of heart, to grope at noone-daies, as the blinde gropeth  in darkenesse, to be a wonder, a prouerbe, and a common talke among all people, among which they should be scattered from one end of the World to the other, is this day fulfilled in our eyes, both in respect of their Politie and Religion, GODS iust iudgement, sealing that their owne imprecation,Math. 27.25. His blood be on vs, and on our children, and pursuing them in all places of their dispersion through the reuolutions of so many ages. Odious are they, not to the Christians alone, but to the Heathen people that know not GOD:P. Galat. l. 4. c. 28. Bidulph. letter. nor will the Turke receiue a Iew into the fellowship of their Mahumetane superstition, except he hath passed first from his Iudaisme through the purgation of a Christian profession, vnto that their no lesse ridiculous and miserable deuotion.1. Thes. 2.15. God they please not (saith Paul) and are contrarie vnto all men. This their wretchednesse, although  it seemed to beginne, when Herod a stranger seized their state, yet was that infinitely more then recompenced, when their Messiah, so long before prophecied and expected, came among his owne, but his owne receiued him not: yea, they crucified the Lord of Glorie. But euen then also did not the long-suffering GOD reiect them, Christ prayed for them, the Apostles preached to them remission of this and all their sinnes, till that (as Paul chargeth them) theyAct. 13.46. putting these things from them, and iudging themselues vnworthie of eternall life, GOD remoued this golden Candlestick from amongst them to the Gentiles, and let out his Vineyard to other husband-men. Famine, sword, and pestilence at once assayled them (And what shall not assayle, what will not preuaile against the enemies of GOD?) Ierusalem, sometimes the glorie of the Earth, the type of Heauen, The Citie of the great King, and Mother-citie  of the Iewish kingdome, from this incomparable height, receiued as irrecouerable a fall, besieged and sacked by Titus, and yet more violently tortured with inward convulsions, and ciuill gripes, then by outward disease, or forraine hostilitie. Iosephus and IosippusIoseph. de Bel. Iud. and Antiq. Iosippus Hebr. both Englished. haue handled the same at large, both which can acquaint the English Reader with the particulars. Besides many thousands by Vespasian and the Romans slaine in other places of Iudaea, Ierusalem the holy Citie was made a prison, slaughter-house, and graue of her owne people. First had diuine mercieEuseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 5. by Oracle remoued the Christians to Pella out of the danger, that without any impediment the floud-gates of vengeance might be set wide open for Desolations black-guard to enter. Here might you see the strong walls shaking and falling, with the pushes of the yron Ramme; there the Romans bathing their swords in Iewish entrales;  here the seditious Captaines disagreeing in mutuall quarrels, written in blood; there agreeing in robbing and burning the Citie, and in slaughter of the Citizens: here hunger
 painted with pale colours in the gastly countenances of the starued inhabitants; there, dyed in red with the blood of their dearest children, which the tyrannie of famine forceth to re-enter into the tendrest-hearted mothers wombe, sometime the place of Conception, now of buriall. Euery where the Eye is entertained with differing spectacles of diuersified Deaths, the Eare with cries of the insulting Souldier, of the famished children, of men and women, euen now feeling the tormenting or murthering hand of the seditious: the Sent receiueth infectious plague and contagion from those humane bodies, with inhumanitie butchered, whom no humanitie buried: the Taste is left a meere and idle facultie, saue that it alway tasteth the more distastfull poyson of not-tasting and emptinesse: what then did they  feele, or what did they not feele? where all senses seemed to bee reserued that they might haue sense of punishment? Where all outward, inward, publike, priuate, bodily, ghostly, plagues were so ready executioners of the Diuine sentence. The continuall sacrifice first ceased for want of Priests of the last course, to whom in order it had descended; after, for want of a Temple, before polluted with Ethnick sacrifices, and murthers of the Priests and Souldiers, and lastly ruined the sacred vessels thereof being carried to Rome for ornaments of the Temple of Peace, which Vespasian had thereIos. de Bel. Iud. l. 7. c. 24. erected.
Eleuen hundred thousands are numbred of them which perished in this destruction: The remnant that escaped the Roman Sword, for the most part, perished after in Warres, or killed themselues, or were reserued eyther for solemnitie of triumph, or (if they were vnder seuenteene  yeeres of age) sold vnto perpetuall slauerie,Iosep. de Bell. Iud. l. 7. c. 17. ninetie seuen thousand of these Iewish slaues were numbred: GalatinusP. Galat. de Arcan. l. 4. c. 21. accounteth two hundred thousand. And that the hand of GOD might be the more manifest, they which at their Passe-ouer feast had crucified the Sonne of GOD, are at the same time gathered together in Ierusalem, as to a common prison-house of that whole Nation: and they, which had bought Christ of the Traytor Iudas for thirtie peeces of siluer, were sold thirtie of them for one peece. Thus were these men forsaken of GOD, that had forsaken GOD made man, who for man had vouchsafed to crie to GOD, Why hast thou forsaken mee? Their owne Talmud relates how GOD had before forsaken their holies, in these words. Fortie yeeres before the desolation of the Temple, the lot no more ascended on the right hand, nor did the peece of scarlet grow white,  nor the euening Lampe burne, and the doores of the Temple opened of themselues. The time is the passion of Christ, when the vaile of the Temple was rent; which is here called a selfe-opening of the doores. The Lot is that Leuit. 16.8. which was cast for the two Goates, that on the right hand was sacrificed, the other was sent into the Wildernesse, and a peece of scarlet put betweene his Hornes at the doore of the Temple, which if it looked white, they reioyced, as hauing their sinnes pardoned, according to that Es. 1.18. their scarlet sins should be as white as snow. These signes ceasing, argued a ceasing of that Ceremoniall Religion, which then died when Christ died: although for the more honorable funerall they were not quite buried so soone, till the Apostles had preached, and by miracles confirmed the Gospell, and GODS Iustice had made the Temple it selfe (sometimes the throne, now) the  Sepulchre of those ceremonies, buried in the ruines of that holy Citte and Temple, not thence to be ra^ed or reuiued by any without Antichristian Sacriledge. But let vs see what followed amongst the Iewes which reiected Christ the Truth, body and substance of their typicall Ceremonies.


@. II. Of the Destruction of the Iewes vnder ADRIAN.
GAlatinus tels vs of two false Prophets, whom comming in their owne name, they receiued for their Messias, hauing before refused IESVS that came in his Fathers name: both these were called Ben or Barchosba, that is, the sonne of lying.Sanbedrin. lib. 2. Helech. R. Moses Ben. Maimon. The one, not long after the Passion of CHRIST (if the Iewes bee not the sonnes of lying which write it) the other in the time of Adrian. Rabbi Akiba (famous for his wisedome, for his twentie foure thousand Disciples, and for his long life) receiued both in their succeeding ages: and interpreted to the first, that place ofHag. 2.7, 8. Haggai, I will shake the heauens, etc. But afterward the slew him as the Salmud witnesseth, which also affirmethTractat. Megbila. that Titus enioyned the Iewes, which he suffered to remaine, that from thence they should no more obserue Sabbaths, nor abstaine from menstruous women.
 Fortie eight yeeres after the destruction of Ierusalem, the Iewes made the CitieBetharon. Hierom. aduers. Ruffin. l. 3. c. 9. Bitter to be their chiefe Citie, and rebelled by the perswasion of Benecochab (so he called himselfe) that is, the sonne of the Starre. Of him Hierome testifieth, that he had a iuggling tricke to
 kindle straw in his mouth, and breath it forth as if he had spit fire. Of him did R. Akiba (which had beene Armour-bearer to the former) interpretTalmud. Ierosol. l. Taanith. that Prophecie of Balaam, Num. 23. There shall arise a starre of Iacob. Adrian then Emperor besieged them in Bitter (where if you beleeue the IewishTract. Beeressith. rabb. fables) were 80000. which sounded Trumpets, euery one of them captaines of many Bands, which helped Barchosba (so they called him after) that is, the sonne of lying, who had two hundred thousand Souldiers, which to testifie their loue and valour, had cut off euery man a finger from his hand. After three yeeres and six moneths, the Citie was taken, andLib Echa. rabbethi. this their Messias slaine, together with such multitudes, that the blood reached to the horses mouthes, and carried downe great streames with the streame thereof, running to the Sea foure miles from Bitter. And Adrian had a Vine-yard eighteene miles  square, which he hedged with those slaine carkasses, as high as a man can reach (a reacher I thinke.) There were two RiuersLib. Massecheth Ghittin. in the Region of Ierico, and the third part of them by estimation of the Wise-men was the blood of the slaine: and seuen yeeres together did the people of the Gentiles fatten and hearten their Vines, only with the blood of the Iewes. Adrian slue also at Alexandria in Egypt, seuen hundred thousand Iewes.
Dion NiceusDion. Nicaei. Adrianus. (a more credible Author) affirmeth, that Adrian sent Seuerus against the Iewes, who in regard of their multitudes would not trie it with their ioynt forces in set battell, but taking his occasions and best oportunitie, proceeded more slowly and more surely: tooke fiftie of their fortified Castles, rased nine hundred and fourescore of their best Townes, slue at sundry times, fiue hundred and eightie thousand of their men, besides  innumerable multitudes, which perished of famine, sicknesse, and fire, these gleanings being greater then the other Haruest. Salomons Sepulchre, by falling downe had fore-signified this their downe-fall: And Hyaena's and Wolues prodigiously entring their Cities, seemed to howle their Funerall obsequies. All Iudaea was left almost desolate.Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. cap. 6. Niceph. lib. 3.24. Caes. Baron. anal. Eusebius out of Ariston Pellaeus addeth, that Adrian prohibited the Iewes by an Edict to come neere to Ierusalem, or once from any high place to looke towards the same, or the Region adioyning. Neuer did NabuchodonosorDrus. Ex. lib. M. S. and ex Inchasin. or Titus so afflict the Iewes as Adrian did. Salmanticensit saith, there was a Decree made at Rome, that no Iewe should euer enter Cyprus, where the Rebellion beganne, and that Adrian destroyed twice as many Iewes, as had come out of Egypt with Moses. Wee haue alreadie shewed how hee destroyed this Citie, and  built a new (the present Ierusalem) called of his owne name Aelia. Hee made Swine ouer the Gates of this new Citie, which Images were most faithfull Porters to prohibite the Iewes (faithfully superstitious in their faithlesse superstitions) to enter. And as hee had erected a Temple to Iupiter, in, or neere the place where the Temple had stood, so (to afflict the Christians also) hee built another Temple of Iupiter in Golgatha, and of Venus at Bethleem, which continued till the time of Constantine. The Christian Iewes gayned by this losse: For when as they might not come to Ierusalem, they afterwards relinquished their wonted Iewish Ceremonies. This was the end of Barchosba. And such is the end of all which fight against GOD and their Soueraigne; their Arrowes which they shoote against the Cloudes, fall downe vpon themselues: Hee proues a falling Star, which being  but a grosser elementarie exhalation, is eleuated by his owne aspiring course (not to the firmament) but to some higher Region of the ayre, where it shineth with the fire which burnes it, and moueth with some short glance, till with selfe-ruine it returneth (whence it had beginning) to the Earth.
Thus haue we seene the Iewes banished their countrie (about the yeere 135.) agreeing to which their miserable estate was that order of Men, mentioned byIos. Scal. Elench. Trihaer. Ser. cap. 13. Scaliger, called (...) Mourners, Heraclitus his Heires, which spent their time in weeping, and intended nothing but Lamentation for the Desolation of their Sanctuarie. These haue beene among the Iewes (saith he) euer since this destruction, and were once a yeere, on the ninth day of the Moneth Ab, allowed entrance into Ierusalem by Adrians Edict. But then also, saith  Saint Hierome,Hieron. ad Soph. c. 1. they are forced to pay for it, that they which sometime bought the blood of Christ, now must buy their owne teares. There may you see, saith he, on that day whereon Ierusalem was taken by the Romans, decrepit women, and old ragged men (annis pannisque obsitos) and many wretched people (but pittied of none) with blubbered cheekes, blacke armes, disheueled hayre, howling and lamenting for the ruines of their Sanctuarie, in their bodies and habite bearing and wearing the markes of Diuine vengeance: Of whom the Souldier exacteth his fee also, for libertie of further weeping. It is written in an ancient Iournall of Burdeaux,Itinerarium Burdegal. that not farre from the Images there is a stone boared thorow, to which the Iewes come yeerely, and anoint it, lamenting grieuously, and renting their garments, and then depart. BeniaminBeniamin Tudelensis translated by Ar. Mont. (an Hebrew Author) relateth, that one and twentie  dayes iourney from Kupha, through the Wildernesse, he trauelled to the Region of Seba, where dwelled Iewes, called the children of Rechab, or men of Theima, which gaue Tithes
 to the Disciples of the wise, who continually applied themselues to learning, and to Sermons, alway sitting in the Schoole, and to the humbled Israelites, and deuout persons, which lament Sion, and bewayle Ierusalem. These dwell in Caues, or in ruined houses, fasting all the daies of their life, except on the Sabbaths and Festiuals, beseeching mercy continually at the hands of God, touching the banishment and deportation of Israel: they neuer eate flesh nor drinke wine. The same also do all the Iewes of the Countrey Theima and of Talmaas pray: All which go with rent clothes, and fast fortie dayes for the Iewish captiuitie. And so let them mourne which refuseLuc. 2.11. the glad tidings of great ioy to all people, that vnto vs is borne IESVS a Sauiour, which is Christ the Lord.
 But yet what rockie heart can but mourne with them, and for them, thus made spectacles to the World of bodily and spirituall misery, which both in these times mentioned, and (before) in the time of Traian, and in all ages since, hath pursued them in all places of their habitation, if that name may be giuen to this World-wandring and Vagabond-people? In the time of Traian,Euseb. l. 4. c. 2. Adrians predecessor, the Iewes had rebelled in Egypt, and Cyrene, where they committed much outrage and mischiefe, vnder one Luke their Captaine, against whom the Emperour sent Martius Turbo, who destroyed many thousands of them; and fearing that the Iewes in Mesopotamia would do the like, commanded Lucius Quietus to destroy them vtterly; in recompence of which seruice, executed to his minde, he made him president of Iudaea. DionDion. N. Traianus. saith, That the Captaine of the Iewes was named Andrew, and that  they slue many Greekes and Romans, did eate their flesh, gyrt themselues with their guts, were imbrued with their blood, and clothed with their skinnes; many they sawed asunder, from the crowne downewards, many they cast to the Beasts, and many were found to kill one another with mutuall combats, so that two hundred and twentie thousand persons perished by this vnspeakeable crueltie. In Egypt and Cyprus, vnder their Captaine Artemion, they destroyed two hundred and fortie thousand. They were subdued by Traians captaynes, specially by Lucius: And it was made a capitall crime for a Iewe (although forced by tempest) to set foote in Cyprus. Africa was re-peopled (where they had destroyed) with new Colonies. No maruell if the Romans, thus prouoked, both in the time of Traian and Hadrian, destroyed so many thousands of them. Iulian afterward gaue them leaue to return  into their Countrie, and re-build their Temple, more for hatred of the Christians, then for loue to their Nation: Whose wickednesse and answerable successe herein, is plainely detected and detested by Gregorie Nazianzene,Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. cont. Iulian. and other Fathers, asCap. 3. we haue before related.


@. III. Of other their False Christs and Seducing Prophets.
TO adde further of their bodily confusions, and the illusions of their bewitched  minds: Nicephorus mentioneth a Pseudo-Moses of the Iewes in the parts of Arabia destroyed by the forces of the Empire, together with his Complices in a like Rebellion. SocratesSocr. l. 7. c. 37. describeth a further madnesse of theirs (for true is that saying of Saint Paul. That they which will not beleeue the Truth, are giuen ouer to strong delusions to beleeue lies.) In the Ile of Creete wasAnno 434. a false Prophet, that affirmed himselfe to be Moses, which led the Israelites thorow the Red-Sea, and to be sent from Heauen to those Iewes to conduct them thorow the Red-Sea, into the continent of the holy Land. This he perswaded them for the space of a whole yeere, going from Citie to Citie: And at last induced them to leaue their riches to them that would take them, and to follow him; at a day appointed he went afore them vnto a Promontorie of the Sea, and there bid them leape in;  which many obaying, perished in the waues, and many more had perished, had not some Christian Merchants and Fishers beene at Land, which saued some, and forbad the rest to follow. The Iewes seeking to be reuenged of this counterfeit Moses, could no where finde him: and therefore thought him to be some Deuill in humane shape, which sought their destruction, and thereupon many of them became Christians. Beniamin Teudelensis reporteth of one in Persia called Dauid Elroi, sometime the Disciple of Hasdai, which wasSee append. to this Chap. Head of the captiuitie, one learned in the Law and Talmud, in forraine learning, in the Ismaelites tongue and in Magike, who gathered together the Iewes in Hhapthon, and would needes warre on all Nations, and winne Ierusalem, affirming that GOD had sent him therefore, and to free them from the Gentiles. Many beleeued him to bee the Messias. The King of  Persia sent for him, imprisoned him in the citie Dabasthan, whence they are not freed during life. But he three dayes after, when the King and his Councel sate to examine and take order for this businesse, came amongst them: And when the King asked who brought him
 thither, he said, his owne wisedome and industrie. The King bid lay hold on him, but his seruants answered, they could heare him, but not see him: and away he went, the King following him to a Riuer, ouer which Dauid stretching his hand-kerchiefe, passed ouer, and was then seene of them all, who in vaine pursued him with their boates. This Dauid the same day went ten dayes iourney from thence to Elghamaria, and declared to the Iewes there all which had passed. The Persian sent to the Calipha of Bagded, that he should cause the head of the Captiuitie, to perswade him to other courses, otherwise threatning destruction to all the Iewes in Persia; which Iewes likewise for feare thereof writ to the head of the Captiuitie. He therefore writ to Dauid. We would haue thee to knowe that the time of our deliuerance is not yet come, nor haue we yet seene our signes, and therefore enioyne thee to desist from these attempts: otherwise,  be thou cast out from all Israel. But he proceeded neuertheles, till Zinaldin, a Turkish King, subiect to the Persian, corrupted his Father in Law with ten thousand peeces of Gold, who accordingly with a Sword slew him in his bed. And thus ended Dauid, but not his designes: for the Iewes in Persia were forced by many talents af gold to buy their peace with the King.In Epist. ad Ma^sil. About the same time Rambam tells of another, which tooke him to bee the Messenger of the Messias, which should direct his way before him, preaching, that the Messias would appeare in the South. To him resorted many Iewes and Arabians, whom hee led alongst the Mountaines, professing to go meete the Messias, who had sent him. Our Brethren in the South countrey, wrote to me a long Letter hereof, declaring the innouations he made in their Prayers, and his preachings amongst them, asking my aduice. And I writ a booke,  saith Rambam, for their sakes, touching the signes of the comming of the Messias. This Seducer was taken after a yeeres space, and brought before one of the Kings of the Arabians, which examined him of his courses, who answered that he had so done at the commandement of GOD, in witnesse whereof he bad him cut off his head, and he would rise againe and reuiue: which the King caused to be done, without any such miraculous effect ensuing. The like telleth Isaac Leuita,Isaac Leuita ad Epist. sup. of one Lemlen, a Iew, in the yeere 1500. as also of R. Dauid, which about the same time was burned for like cause. The Iewes haue Legends (as that of Eldad,Eldad Danius hist. de Iudaeis Clausis. translated by Genebrard) of multitudes of Iewes in Aethiopia: whom when wee come thither, we will visit. But alas, it is small comfort, being burned in the fire, to make themselues merry with smoke.  
Of their miseries sustained in all places of their abode, all histories make mention. And yet their superstition is more lamentable then their dispersion, as also their pertinacie and stubbornenesse in their superstition. And certainely me thinks, that euen to him that will walke by sight, and not by faith, not oblieging his credit to meete authoritie, as the case standeth betwixt vs and the Scriptures, but will be drawne by the cords of Reason onely and Sense, euen to such a one, me thinks, this Historie of the Iewes may be a visible demonstration of the Truth of Christian Religion: Not onely because the truth of the Prophesies ofGenes. 49. Iaacob, ofDeut. 28. Moses, ofEsa. 6. Esay, and other the Prophets is fulfilled in them, and because Gods iustice still exacteth the punishment of the betraying and murthering that iust one; but especially in this, that the bitterest enemies, cruellest persecutors, and wilfullest Haters that euer  were of the Christian truth, are dispersed into so many parts of the World, as witnesses of the same Truth; holding and maintayning to death the Scriptures of Moses, and the Prophets; then which, euen Reason being Iudge (as is said before) we will not desire sounder and fuller proofes of our profession. Neither is our Gospell wherein we differ from them, any other then the fulfilling of their Law: and Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill the same, the same truth being deliuered in both, veyled in the one, and reuealed in the other. In him the Promises, in him the figures, in him the righteousnesse of the Law, righteousnesse in Doctrine, righteousnesse in practice, righteousnesse of Doing, righteousnesse of Suffering, to satisfie the debt, to merit the inheritance, are the witnesses, that in him they are all, yea, and Amen, haue receiued their perfect being and accomplishment. But2. Cor. 3.15. the vayle is  ouer their hearts, eyes they haue and see not, eares and heare not: They hold out to vs the light of Scripture, themselues walking in darkenes; and reserued to darkenesse; like to a Lampe, Lanthorne, or Candlesticke, communicating light to others, whereof themselues are not capable, nor can make any vse.


@. IIII. Of the Miserable Dispersions of the Iewes.
WE haue shewed how they were vtterly cast out of their countrey: And Italie, and the Empire was filled with Iewish slaues. Nor was this their first dispersion;  but as the Assyrians had carried away the other ten Tribes: So the Babylonians carried away the two Tribes remayning, which might haue returned vnder
 the Persian Monarchie; but many remained in those Countries till the dissolution of that Iewish state and after. They had there diuers famous Vniuersities, and that at Bagdet endured till the yeere of Christ, one thousand three hundred (so writethG. Botero. Ben. Terza part. lib. 2. Viz. First at Bab. after at Bagdet. Boterus.) At which time they fleeing the persecutions of the Arabians, dispersed themselues intoRamb. Mor. No. l. 1. c. 70. and l. 3. c. 18. and 24. Tels of certaine sects of Iewes called, Separatists, and Incelligents, or Vnderstanders, which they learned of the Moores, and therefore in our Muhammodan reports, will be fitter place for them. Vid. l. 3. c 7. India; where many are found at this day. These, through continuall conuersing with the Gentiles and Christians, haue small knowledge of the Law, and lesse would haue; but for other Iewes that resort thither out of Egypt. Before that time also, if we beleeue the Ethiopian History, twelue thousandDamian a Goes. Ludouic. Carretus. Iewes (of each Tribe a thousand) went with the Q^eene of Sabaes Sonne, which they say, she had by Salomon, into that Country; and there remaine their posteritie to  this day.
Thus is ASIA and AFRIKE fraught with them, but EVROPE much more. AdrianBoter. ibid. banished fiue hundred thousand into Spayne, where they multiplied infinitely, and founded an Vniuersitie at Corduba, about the yeere of our Lord, one thousand: And at Toledo was a Schoole of twelue thousand Iewes, about the yeere of our Lord, one thousand two hundred thirty and sixe, as writethRab. Mosche. Mik. apud Buxd. c. 1. Rabbi Mosche Mikkatzi: from hence it seemeth they swarmed into England and France.
AnnoAddit. ad Lambert. Schafnaburg Sigeb. Gemblac. Otto frising. Fred. l. 1. c. 37. 1096. innumerable numbers of men and women of diuers Nations, according to the zeale of those times, trauelling to Ierusalem, compelled the Iewes in places whereby they passed to be baptized, euery where making terrible massacre and slaughter of such as  refused; may of the Iewes also killing themselues in zeale of their Law. At Mentz they slew of them 1014. of both sexes, and fired the greatest part of the Citie. The rest rested not long in their imposed Christianitie, butMarianus Scotus sayth, that Hen. 4. Emperor gaue them leaue. willingly renounced that which against their wils they had accepted. Auentinus numbreth 12000. Iewes slaine in Germanie in this irreligious quarrell. Otto Frisingensis attributes these Iewish slaughters to the zealous preaching of Rodolph a Monke, which furie was appeased by the preaching, and authoritie of Saint BERNARD. These Pilgrims (saith Albertus Aquensis which then liued) being a gallimaufry of all Nations, in pretence of this holy quarrell against the Turkes, gaue themselues to all vnholy and filthy courses amongst themselues, and against the Christians, where they passed, may whoores attending and following the Campe, to which they added excesse in dyet,  robberies, especially all cruelties against the Iewes, chiefly in the kingdome of Lorraine, thus beginning the rudiments of that war against the enemies of the Faith. First, they destroyed them and their Synagogues in Collen, and taking two hundred of them, flying by night to Nuis; they slue and robbed them all. At Mentz the Iewes committed themselues and theirs to the Bishop Rothard, who bestowed them with their infinite masse of treasure in his owne house, which yet could not protect them from the murthering and spoyling Souldier, who entring by force; slew seuen hundred of them; adding also the like butcherie on their wiues and children. The Iewes hereat Iewishly moued (pardon the want of a fitter word) layd violent hands on each other, and slew their owne children, wiues and brethren, the tender mother eschewing the souldiers cruelty by a greater, in cutting the throate of her  owne childe, and with obdurate concision, preuenting the sword of the vncircumcised. Laden with these spoyles, they passed by the way of Hungary, where for some outrages, GOD punished both those and these with the Hungarian forces. Their miseries here in our Land endured, are by our Authors mentioned,Foxe Acts and Monuments. History of Barnwell, etc. and you shall anon heare a particular discourse thereof by it selfeInf. @. 7.. Out of France they were thrice banished by three Philips, although in Auinion there still remayne some of them. Being expelled France, they sought habitation in Germany, where Conradus the Emperor admitted them into the countrey of Sueuia: and thence they flowed into other parts, into Bohemia (in the City of Prage, are about fifteene thousand of them) and into Austria, and into Hungaria, whence, for the crucifying of a child, they were banished by king Mathias: as at Trent, for the like fact, and poysoning of Welles, they sustained  much trouble in Germany; and many passed to Venice; many also went from thence into Russia (where the people cannot abide to here them named) and Poland, where Cassimere he Great, for loue of an Hebrew Lasse, gaue them many priuiledges. They liue dispersed in the townes and Villages, occupied in handi-crafts and husbandry. They haue great Synagogues in Craconia, Leopolis, and at Trochi, a towne of Lituania: and Master Barkeley, a Marchant of London, who hath spent many yeeres in Liuonia, Polonia,They here in Poland print what bookes they list. and other of those cold countries, told me, That the Iewes farme the Custome of the Kings, and at Samaiden in Cur-land, one of these Iewish Customers beat out the braines of a Polonish Marchant, for deferring to open his packe: but in regard of the peoples hatred, prouision is made, vnder great penalties, for their securitie, and yet many Iewes were there executed by occasion of a murren, procured  (as was suspected) by Iewish exorcismes, intending a plague to the men, and not a murren to the beasts, if their working had sorted: but the Iewes said, it was but a pretence to depriue them of their riches.

They were cast out of Spaine by Ferdinand and Isabella, in the yeere 1492. It is thoughtIoannes Reuclinus Cabal. l. 1. sayth 420000. persons. Chacamum. that there went out of Spaine a hundred and twentie thousand families of them (besides Moores) and out of their kingdomes of Naples and Sicill. Hence they passed, Anno Domini 1539. into Tuscane, and the Popes Dominions, whence they were banished by Paul the fourth, and Pius the fifth: and receiued againe by Pius the fourth, and Sistus the fifth; Rome and Venice hauing great store of them. This is the Popes holinesse: he that would not willingly endure a Protestant in the World; besides, the Stewes vnder his Holinesse Nose, can endure the Graecians, yea, and these Iewes, Rome it selfe hauing ten thousand, orRelat. of Relig. West. after others reckoning, twentie thousand of them priuiledged with heir fiue Synagogues, Liturgies, and publike Sermons; and to straine vp their vsurie to eighteene in the hundred:  hauing also in some pl ces (it may be in all) a peculiar Magistrate to decide controuersies, betweene Christians and them, with particular direction to fauour them in their trade. Dulcis odor lucri ex re qualibet. The beastly trade of Curtizans, and cruell trade of Iewes is suffered for gaine, these paying a yeerely rent for the heads they weare, besides, other meanes to racke and wracke them in their purses at pleasure, they being vsed as the spunge-like Friers, to suck from the meanest, to be squeezed of the greatest; insomuch that the Pope, besides their certaine tribute, doth sometimes (as is said) impose on them a Subsidie for ten thousand crownes extraordinarie for some seruice of State. So well is the rule of Paul obserued by this Bishop, not to be a louer of filthy lucre, from filthie Stewes, from filthie Iewes.
Out of Spaine they went into Barbarie, and diuers other countries, and some into Portugall:  where Iohn the second made them pay eight crownes for a poll, and yet limited them short time of departure. Emanuel his successor did the like 1497. except they would become Christians, for which he assayed diuers meanes. But not preuayling, he caused their children, vnder the age of foure and twentie yeers to be baptized; some rather hurling their children into pits, some killing themselues: many for feare were baptized, some went into Italie, and abode in Ferrara, Mantua, Venetia, in the name of Maranes, and haue a Synagogue at Pisa. But the greatest part of them went into the East to Constantinople and Salonichi, in which two Cities there are about an hundred and sixtie thousand of them. There are of them in all the chiefe Cities of traffike in the Turkish Empire.Theatrum vrbium ad Rom. Tyberias is wholly inhabited with Iewes,There is reported to bee an Vniuersitie of Iewish studies to haue beene as Drus. crieth out of Iuchasin. and Elias in rad. Tiberias, saith that the Iewes th re had the most elegant language of all the Hebrewes: and from thence were the Authors of the Masoreth. which Citie Zelim gaue to Gratiola a Iewish Matron. In Ierusalem  there are about an hundred houses of them. There abide not many, because of a superstitious opinion, That before the Messias shall come, a great fire from heauen will consume that Citie and Countrie, to purge it of the abomination committed there, by prophane Nations. At Zante they are so hated, that from Maundie Thursday, vntill Saturday noone, they dare not come abroad: for the people, in a foolish zeale, would stone them: and some refuse to eate of their meate or bread. The Turkes in their reproach vse such a kinde of imprecation; If this be not true, would God I might die a Iew. The old Testament is read of them in these parts in the HebrewLet. Bidu^ph., but their Kakamin and Cohens, that is, their wise-men and Priests preach in Spanish. Onely at Salonichi (anciently Thessalonica) in Macedonia, and at Safetta in the Holy Land (two Vniuersities) they speake Hebrew. They will rather in blasphemie testifie  their hatred of Christ, then any abilitie to dispute.


@. V. Of the Estate of the Iewes, and their dispersed Habitations in the time of Beniamin Tudelensis.
BENIAMIN TVDELENSIS, a Iew of Nauarre, who hauing trauelled Spaine, France, Italy, Greece, Natolia, Syria, and many other Countries of Asia, Africke, and Europe (worthily reckoned one of the greatest Trauellers that euer liued:) at  his returne into Spaine aboue foure hundred and fortie yeeres since, related what Iewish Synagogues he had seene in the world (one chiefe end as it seemeth, of his trauels) And because it appertayneth to this matter we haue in hand, and the booke (translated out of Hebrew by Arias Montanus) is very rare, I thought meete to adde here a briefe of those things which concerne the Iewes out of the same. At Barchinon they found a populous Synagogue, another, but smaller, at Gerunda: Narbone was, as it were, Ensigne-bearer of the Law to all the Countries about, where was chiefe, Kalonymus of the seede of Dauid, there were three hundred Iewes. Foure leagues thence was the Citie Bidrach, where was an Vniuersitie stored with Disciples of the wise: whereof also there were at Mompelier: Lunel was a famous Vniuersitie, where liued Asser the Pharisee, which studied night and day, fasting  and perpetually abstayning from flesh, with Messulam, Ioseph, Iacob, Aaron, which by the bounty of the Vniuersitie gaue foode, rayment, and teaching to such as came from far to
 studie there, as long as they stayed. Theremas a Synagogue of three hundred Iewes. At Bothiaquiers fortie, at Nogheres about an hundred, at Arles two hundred, at Massilia two Colledges, and three hundred Iewes. At Rome two hundred free from tribute, at Salern six hundred. At Beneuent an Vniuersitie of two hundred. At Taraam two hundred. At Tarentum three hundred. At Ornedo fiue hundred. At Thebes two thousand. At Corinth three hundred. There were people liuing in the Mountaines, which robbed and spoyled all, but dealt more fauourably with the Iewes (whose liues they spared) then with Christians, whom they not onely robbed, but slew also. These said they were descended of the Iewes: they were called Balachi. At Arimbon were foure hundred, at Seleuca fiue hundred. Constantinople  would not suffer a Iew to dwell in the Citie, nor to ride on horse-back, except one Solomon the Kings Physitian, yea, the people would beate them in the streets. At Pera liued two thousand Iewes. Two daies sayling from thence. At Dorostum was an Vniuersity of foure hundred, at Rhodes were foure hundred, at Dophros were Iewes, and Cyprian Epicures before mentioned. At Behalgad, were a Sect of Ismaelites with a peculiar Prophet of their owne. At Tripoli many Iewes and Gentiles had a little before perished with an Earth-quake, whereof dyed in all Israel twentie thousand. At Gebal was a place, where the Ammonites had somtimes a Temple, and it was an Idoll of stone couered with gold, sitting with two Images of women sitting by, and an Altar before. There were an hundred and twentie Iewes; At Beeroth fiftie, at Sidon twentie. Here-awayes liued a people called Dogzijn, of whom we shall speake more  fitly in another place. At Caesarea were few Iewes, but two hundred Samaritans, at Sebaste an hundred. This is betweene Garizim an hill fertile and well watred, and Gebal, an hill stony and drie. In the place of the sometime Sanctuarie at Ierusalem, was a faire and large Temple, called the Temple of the Lord, built of Ghemar ben Alchetab: there the Christians had no image but resorted hither only for prayer. Ouer-against it is a wall, made of the wals of the Sanctuarie, this they call the Gate of mercy: to this place the Iewes come to pray. The Pillar of Lois wife was then continuing, which was said to grow to the former bignes, if at any time the flocks had diminished it with licking. AtHebron. Hebron was a great temple: and in a vault six Sepulchres, of Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca, Iacob and Leah: a Lampe perpetually burning: and in the Caue it selfe were tubs full of bones of the ancient Israelites. At Benibera  or new Ascalon in the border of Egypt were two hundred Iewes, forty Carraim, and three hundred Samaritans. At Tiberias were fifty Iewes, and the Synagogue of Caleb, son of Iephunneh: atDamascus. Damascus were three thousand. There dwelt the Head of the land of Israel, called Esdras, and his brother Sarsalem, which was ouer the Iudgement, and Ioseph the fift of the Synedrian, and Matsliah head of the order of Readers: there were two hundred Carraim, and foure hundred Samaritans, amongst all which was peace, but no intercourse of marriages, in differing Sects. In Thadmar were foure thousand Iewes: here and at Baghala were buildings of stone, so great that it was said to be the worke of Asmodaeus (with as good reason as Diuels dike with vs.) At Hamath was an Earth quake in those times, which destroyed fifteene thousand people in one day, and only an hundred and seuenty remayned. Haleb in old times  called Aram Tezoba, had fifteene hundred Israelites. At Petra in the Desart were two thousand. At Dakia (sometime Chalne) seuen hundred. Here was a Synagogue built by Esdras in the returne from Babylon; and another also of his building at Charan, two dayes iourney thence, the place where Abraham had dwelt, had no building on it, but was frequented by the Israelites, to pray there. At Alchabor were two thousand Iewes, at Nisibis one thousand, at Gezir ben Ghamar, a Citie on the bankes of Tigris were foure thousand. It is foure miles from the place where Noahs Arke rested, which Arke Ghamar son of Alchetab brought from the top of the hill, to the vse of a Moschee: neere to which was the Synagogue of Esdras, whither the Iewes on festiual dayes resorted to Prayer. Two daies iourney thence wasMosal. Al-Mutsal, sometime called Assur, the beginning of the kingdome of Persia, retayning her ancient  greatnes, situate on Tigris, a bridge onely being betweene that and Niniue (now wholly destroyed, only Castles and streetes remayned in the circuit thereof) at Al-Mutsal were seuen thousand Iewes: and three Synagogues of the three Prophets, Abdias, Ionas, and Nahum. In Rahaban, anciently Rehoboth, were two thousand. At Karkesia (on the same banke of Euphrates with the former) fiue hundred; at Aliobar, two thousand; at Hhardan, fifteene thousand; at Ghukbera, built by Iectronia, tenne thousand. Two dayes iourney thence isBagdad. Bagdad of the kingdome of the Calipha, namedImperator credentium qui misere and moeste vitam degun. Vid. li. 3. cap. 2. Amir Almumanim Alghabassi Hhaphtsi, the chiefe of the Ismaelite Sect. Here was a thousand Iewes, and ten Synedria or Courts, the heads or chiefe whereof (he nameth them) are called Vacantes, because they attended no other function, but the administring of the societie. They giue iudgement  to all Iewes, which resort vnto them on any day of the weeke but the second, in which they all meet together before Samuel, the head of the Synedrium. But ouer all these was Daniel, son of Hhasdai, entituled the Head of theCaput Captiuitatis. Captiuitie, descended from Dauid, whom the
 Iewes called Our Lord; the Ismaelites, Sydna ben Dauid, Our L. son of Dauid. Hee had great Authoritie ouer all congregations of Israelites, warranted to him with the Amirs seale, who caused that all Israelites and Ismaelites should rise to him, vnder paine of an hundred stripes. When he goeth to see the King, it is with very great pompe. This dignitie is bought with a great summe of money giuen to the King and Princes at his confirmation; and then is the second Chariot of the King prouided for him. He exerciseth imposition of hands on the men of the Synedrium. There were eight and twentie Synagogues in Bagdad, and the Suburbe on the other side Tigris. But the Synagogue which pertayned to the head of the Captiuity, was of Marble of diuers colors, adornd with gold and siluer, spacious: and on the pillers were verses of the Psalmes, written in gold. Before the Arke were ten rowes of seates, with marble steps,  in the highest whereof sate the Head of the Captiuitie, with the Iewes of the family of Dauid.
In Gehiagan (sometime Rezen) two dayes iourney from thence, were fiue thousand Israelites. One dayes iourney from hence wasBabylon. Babel, now wholly ruinated, in which are yet seene the ruines of Nabuchodonosors Palace, but inaccessible, by reason of diuers kindes of Serpents. Twentie miles from these ruines dwell twentie thousand Israelites, which there pray in the Synagogues, the chiefe whereof is that of Daniel, of squared stones. There were at Hhilah (fiue miles thence) ten thousand Iewes in foure Synagogues. Foure miles thence it is to the Tower which the Sonnes of Diuisions built with Brickes, which the Arabians call Lagzar: the length of the foundation is about two miles, the breadth of the wals, two hundred and forty cubits: where it is broadest, it is an hundred  reedes; and betweene euery ten reedes space, are waies in manner of spires continued thorow the whole building, on the top of which one may see twentie miles about. Halfe a dayes iourney from hence is Naphahh, where were two hundred Iewes. And three leagues thence, the Synagogue ofEzechiel. Ezechiel neere Euphrates, and in the same place sixtie Towers one against another, and a Synagogue betweene euery one. The monument of Ezechiel was built by Iechonias with fiue and thirtie thousand Iewes. And this is a holy place, whither they resort from the beginning of the yeere, to the day of Expiation, to pray and keepe festiuall. Thither commeth the Head of the Cap^iuitie, and other chiefe men from Bagdad, and two and twentie miles about they pitch their Tents here and there: and the Arabians keepe then and there a great Faire. At this time they reade on the Expiation day out of a booke  which Ezechiel writ: and there is a holy house full of bookes since the time of the first and second Temple, the custome being, that they which die without children, should bequeath their bookes hither. The Iewes in Persia and Media make vowes to bee performed in this place, to which also the Ismaelites resort to pray. The Sepulchre of the three Saints, companions ofDaniel. 3. Daniel, is halfe a dayes iourney from hence, with fayre and great Arches. Three miles thence is Alkotsonath, and in it three hundred Iewes. At Kupha the Sepulchre of Ieconia, and seuen thousand Iewes. One and twentie daies iourney thorow the wildernes is the Region of Seba, now called the Land of Aliman, where dwell Iewes, the children ofRechabites, or men of Theima. Rechab. This Region extended sixteene daies along the mountaines, subiect to no forren Nation, hauing therein foure hundred strong Cities, two hundred Townes, an hundred  Castles. The Metropolis is Themai. In all those Cities are about three hundred thousand Iewes. In the Region of Tilmaas an hundred thousand. Three dayes iourney hence is Chibar, in it fiftie thousand. These (they say) are of the deportation of Ruben, Gad and Manasses. From hence twentie fiue dayes iourney is Vira, which is a Riuer running into Eliman, where were three thousand. And seuen iourneys from thence Neasar, and in it seuen thousand. Fiue daies iourneyes from thence Bosra vpon Tygris, and in it one thousand. Two dayes iourneyes from thence the Riuer Samura, the beginning of Persia, with a Towne of the same name, wherein, were fifteene hundred. The place is famous by the Sepulchre of Esdras, who in his returne to Babylon in Embassage, here died. There was a Synagogue honoured also by the Ismaelites. In Susan were seuen thousand Iewes in foureteene Synagogues, before  one of which was the Sepulchre of Daniel: about which rose a controuersie betweene the inhabitants of the one and other side of the Riuer: They which dwelt on that side where the Sepulchre was, seeming to the other the more fortunate; this caused blowes, but was after agreed, that euery yeere it should be remoued by course, which was done with solemne procession, tillSenigark. of Persia. Senigar the Persian King, thinking it a prophanation to the holy Coffin, caused it to be hanged in a chest of glasse for all men to see, and forbad to take fish within two miles of that place in the Riuer.
From hence was three dayes iourney to Robad-Bar, where were twentie thousand Iewes. Two iourneyes from hence was the Riuer Vaanath, where were foure thousand Iewes. Foure iourneyes further, Malhhaath: here they were not Ismaelites, nor vnder the Persian;  they had two Colledges of Israelites, which acknowledged, neuerthelesse, the Head of the Captiuitie in Bagdad. At Ghaarian, fiue iourneyes beyond, were fiue and twentie thousand.
 Here began the mountaines of Hhaphthon, wherein were an hundred Synagogues. This is the beginning of Media: they speake Chaldee: and there were amongst them theStudents of the Talmud vnder the RR. Disciples of the wise. Ghamaria is vnder the Persian, where Dauid Elroi was. It was ten dayes iourney thence to Hhamdan, chiefe Citie of Media, there were fiftie thousand Iewes in that Region, and the Sepulchre of Mordecai and Esther. Foure iourneyes further was Debarzethaan, neere this Riuer Gozen, in it foure thousand Iewes. Beyond that, seuen iourneyes, Asbahan the chiefe Citie, twelue miles in compasse, and therein fifteene thousand Israelites, ouer whom, and all the Persian Iewes, was Salom by authoritie from the Head of the Captiuitie. Foure iourneyes hence was Siaphaz, called of old Persis, whence the whole Region  was named Persia, therein ten thousand. Seuen dayes iourneys thence, Ginah vpon Gozen, a famous Mart; in which were eight thousand. Samarcheneth was the furthest Citie of that Kingdome, fiue iourneyes from Ginah, where were fiftie thousand. Foure iourneyes thence Tubot: and twentie eight further I passed to the mountaines Nisbon, which ouer looke the Riuer Gozen, where were many Israelites; and they say, there dwell the foure Tribes of Dan, Zabulon, Asser, Naphthali. Their Countrey extendeth twentie dayes iourney, and hath many Cities, free from subiection to any Heathen: They are gouerned of Ioseph Armacala Leuita: they till the ground, and hold warres with the children of Chus, trauelling through the desart thither. They are in league with the Copher Althorech a people that worship the Windes, and liuing in the Wildernesse: they haue neither bread nor wine, but eate raw flesh,  eyther new or dried: they haue noThe Tart^ ^ esteemed it beautie to presse downe their nose flat, and hence perhaps was this opinion of N^^ose. nose but onely two holes. Fifteene yeeres since, they tooke and sacked Rai, a chiefe Citie in Persia; whereupon the King warred against them, and passing through the wildernesse to them, was deceiued by his guide, and his people almost starued, and after forced to flie; with whom passed into Persia Moses one of the Iewes in those parts, which told me (Beniamin our Author) all this. Hence I went to Cheuazthaan vpon the Riuer Tigris; which runneth thence into Hoduor the Indian Sea, hauing in the mouth the Iland Nekrokin a famous Mart, where were fiue hundred Iewes. I sayled ten dayes thence to Kathiphan, where were fiue thousand Israelites. Thence to the Kingdome of Haaulem, a people of Chus which worship the Sunne: Thence after twentie two dayes sayling, I came to the Ile Chenerag, where they worship the fire, where were twentie three  thousand Iewes. Fortie dayes sayling from thence was the Kingdome of Sinne, from which to Gingalan was fifteene dayes; there were ten thousand Israelites. Thence I went to Ethiopian India, which they call Baghdaan, in which were high mountaynes, and in them many Israelites, subiect to none, which warred on the Hamaghtani, that is, the Libyans. From thence to Azzan was twentie daies iourney through the wildernesse Sebor, the King whereof was Sultan Alhabas an Ismaelite. Twelue dayes thence is Hhalauan, where were three hundred Iewes; from which they passe in troupes through the desartal-Tsahaca, into Zeuila in the tract of Geena or Ginaea, where they encounter showres of sands. This Region i^ in the land of Chus, and is called Alhhabas, towards the West. Thirteene dayes iourney from Hhaluan is Kits the beginning of Egypt. And fiue from thence Pium, once Pithon, where were  twentie Iewes, and many monuments of our fathers to be seene.Misraim o^ Cairo. Thence to Misraim is foure iourneyes, where were two thousand Iewes in two Synagogues, which differed in their distribution of the Lectures of their Law: the Babylonians finishing it in a yeere, as in Spaine, the Israelites in three. But twice a yeere they assembled together in Prayers, on the feast Laetitia Legis, and on the feast Latae Legis. Nathaneel was chiefe ouer all the Vniuersities (or Synagogues) of Egypt, and appointed Masters, and Aeditui. He was familiar with the King Amir Almumani^ Eli sonne of Abitalib. At Alexandria were three thousand Israelites. But for his trauels in Egypt, and the Synagogues which there he found, as also backe againe into Sicilia, Germany, Boheme, Prussia, etc. because there are yet knowne Synagogues of them, I surcease relation. And much may I feare I haue too much wearied the Reader in so long a  Iewish Pilgrimage; but seeing Authors of best note, Scaliger, Drusius, Lipsius, etc. cite him, and Arias Mont. hath taken the paines to translate him, and his trauels are such ample testimonies of this our present subiect of Iewish dispersions, I haue beene bold to annex these things. If any list not to beleeue such multitudes of Iewes, I will not vrge him; howsoeuer that deluge of Tartars in all those Asian Regions soone after Beniamins dayes, brought a new face of all things in these Easterly parts: as a Iew, and relating these things to Iewes, and by Iewes passing to vs, it is like he reported, and we haue receiued, with the most. For his Geographie, some of his names are easily reconciled to the present, some hardly, which I leaue to the Readers industrie.




@. VI. Of some Iewes lately found in China, and of their late Accidents in Germany.
Nic. Trigaut. exped. Sinlus. l. 1.AFter these relations of Beniamin, I thought it not vnfit to insert out of Ricci and Trigautius, Iesuites, lately residing in China, somewhat appertaining to these Iewish affaires. It is but few yeeres since the Iesuites could settle themselues at Paquin, the Royall Citie of China. Thither did a certaine Iew (moued with report of these strangers, hauing an imagination that they were Iewes) resort vnto them. This Iew  was borne at Chaifamfu, the mother-Citie of the Prouince Honan, his name was Ngai, his countenance not resembling the Chinois: he neglecting Iudaisme, had addicted himselfe to the China studies, and now came to Paquin to the Examination, in hope of proceeding Doctor. There did he enter the Iesuites house, professing that he was of their Law and Religion. Ricci leades him into the Chappell, where on the Altar stood the Image of the Virgin, Iesus, and Iohn Baptist kneeling; which hee taking to be the Image of Rebecca and her twinnes, did worship vnto them, contrarie (he said) vnto their custome. The Images of the Euangelists he supposed to be so many of Iacobs sonnes. But vpon further questioning, the Iesuite perceiued that he was a professor of the Law of Moses: he confessed himselfe an Israelite, and knew not the name of Iew; so that it seemed, the dispersion of the ten Tribes had  pierced thus farre. Seeing the Hebrew Bible, hee knew the Letters, but could not reade them. He told them, that in Caifamfu were ten or twelue Families of Israelites, and a faire Synagogue, which had lately cost them ten thousand Crownes; therein the Pentateuch in rolles which had beene with great veneration preserued fiue or six hundred yeeres. In Hamcheu, the chiefe Citie of Chequian, he affirmed, were many more Families with their Synagogue: many also in other places, but without Synagogues, and by degrees wearing out. His pronunciation of Hebrew names differed from ours, asSo the Abyssines call Osrael, Chrostos. Herusoloim, Moscia for Messia, Ierusalem. His brother (he said) was skilfull in the Hebrew, which hee in affection to the China preferment had neglected; and therefore was hardly censured by the Ruler of the Synagogue.  
To this Citie did Ricci send one of his to enquire, who found these reports true, which also copied the beginnings and endings of their bookes, which they compared and found to agree with their owne Pentateuch, sauing that they wanted pricks or points. He writ also in China Characters to the Ruler of their Synagogue, that he had the rest of the bookes of the old Testament, and other bookes of the New, which contained the acts of the Messias being already come. The Ruler doubted, saying, that he would not come till ten thousand yeeres were expired. He also promised, that because he had heard much good of him, if he would come thither, and abstaine from Swines-flesh, they would make him Ruler of their Synagogue. After this, three Iewes came from thence to Paquin, and were almost perswaded to become Christians. These complained, that through ignorance of the Hebrew, their  Religion decayed, and that they were likely all of them in a short time to become Saracens or Ethnikes. The old Archisynagogue was now dead, his sonne a young man succeeded in place, but ignorant of their Law. And that their Iewish Religion was indeede languishing, appeared by this, that they both, worshipped the Popish Images, and complained, that in their Synagogue and priuate houses they had none. They were offended that they were forbidden the eating of any creature, which themselues hadSee inf. c. 19. not killed, which had they obserued in this iourney, had cost them their liues. Their wiues and neighbours esteemed Circumcision of their infants on the eight day a cruell thing, which they could be willing to altar, with acceptation of the Christian Law, nor would much stand about Swines-flesh. They told them of certaine Christians also, or worshippers of the Crosse in China, which with the  Iewes and Saracens were all called by the Chinois, Hoei, adding some distinction from their differing Rites, calling the Saracens, Hoei which refused Swines flesh: The Iewes, Hoei which abstaine from the sinew; the Crosse-worshippers, Hoei which abstaine from roundfooted beasts, whereas the Iewes, Saracens and Chinois eate the flesh of horses, asses, and the like. This Historie I haue added, to shew how the Iewes haue bin dispersed into the furthest parts, and how time, the deuourer of all things, hath almost eaten them out, or their Religion at least. Somewhat also may be hence coniectured touching the deportation of the ten Tribes, the Hebrew pricks, and moderne Characters,Some thinke the Hebrew Letters which now we haue, to be inuented by Ezra since the captiuitie. which I leaue to others discussing. Once, it is by all Historie manifest, that by the inundations of Saracens, Tartars, Turkes, etc. both the Iewish and Christian Religions (sometimes frequent) haue beene by degrees consumed  and almost worne out of many parts of Asia.
The late miseries inflicted on the Iewes in Frankfort and Wormes may here be inserted.
 In Aug. 1614. at the same timeMerc. Gallob. Arthus and Janson. which they solemnize with fasting for the destruction of Ierusalem, their little Ierusalem (so they call the Iewes streete in Frankfort) was spoiled by the vnruly Citizens, and gaue them a new cause of mourning. The Iewes at first defended themselues, and the Magistrates sought to allay the furie of the people: but at last consented to depart the Citie, one thousand and foure hundred, presently passing downe the Maene in boates, and the rest following them the next day. It seemed a prodigious and dismall signe vnto them, that the Oxe, which they vse to keepe all the yeere in their Church-yard or buriall place, now being shut vp for the slaughter, brake away from them.
The Mother gaue fatal example to the Daughter for Frankfort they account the Mother  of Israel, which led the way to Wormes in expulsion of the Iewes. This should haue hapned the seuenth of April. 1615. being good Friday, but was deferred till Munday following, when early in the morning they sent word to the Iewes into their streete, that trussing vp their choisest goods, they should within one houre depart, which with much lamentation they did. Neither could the Magistrates preuayle in their defence, so odious had their vsurious exactions of long time beene to the Citizens. Thus the Iewes take their way to the Rhene: And the same day was the roofe of their Synagogue pulled downe, and a Decree made, not to leaue one stone thereof vpon another, six hundred of them presently putting the same in execution. These spared not the monuments and graue-stones, but brake them in peeces, notwithstanding some of them seemed scarce possible to be raised from the Earth.  The Iewes hearing this ruine of their Synagogue, which they say (if you beleeue it) had continued one thousand and eight hundred yeeres, rent their garments, and mourned in sackcloth and ashes.


@. VII. Of the Iewes sometimes liuing in England, collected out of ancient Records, by Master Iohn Selden of the inner Temple.
 ALthough I haue had already a long tedious iourney, wearisome to my Reader and my selfe, whilest I haue accompanied these miserable Iewes in their dispersions: yet did I conceiue, this following relation would rather seeme as a welcome recreation, then irkesome progresse; because wee shall containe our selues in our owne Countrie: Wherein I must acknowledge the laborious industrie of our learned Countriman and Antiquarie, Master Selden, who out of ancient Records hath thus traced the foote-prints of this antiquated and out-worne people: mine is but the transcribing and abbreuiating. Of the Iewes first comming to this Land is vncertaine: It seemes that some little notice was taken of them before the Conquest; after which we haue diuers testimonies, and besides others, the Statute de Iudaismo, both before and after, their state and condition  was very seruile, as appeareth in legib. Confess. cap. 29. Iudaes and omnia sua Regis sunt, etc. The Iewes and all they had was the Kings. What they suffered in succeeding ages, our common Stories discouer. There was one amongst them which had the office of Presbyteratus omnium Iudaeorum totius Angliae (which I take to be their chiefe Priest-hood in their Synagogues: For if it had signified a meere Lay Eldership, I ghesse I should haue met with it in the pleas of their Excheker) and this lay in the Kings grant, as by King Iohns Charter of it may be seene. In Rot. Chart. 1. Iohan. Reg. ch. 171. memb. 28. Omnibus fidelibus suis, and omnibus and Iudaeis and Anglis salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse, and praesenti charta nostra confirmasse Iacobo Iudaeo de Londonijs Presbytero Iudaeorum Presbyteratum omnium Iudaeorum totius Angliae habend, and tenend. quamdiu vixerit, libere and honorifice, and quiete and integre, ita quod nemo ei super  hoc molestiam aliquam aut grauamen inferre praesumat. Quare, etc, apud Rothomagum 31. die Iulij Anno Regni nostri primo. Therein is also mention of a former Charter granted by Rich. 1. Certaine Iustic^^ were appointed ad custodiam Iudaeorum, before whom pleas twixt them, and others and them, were held, and matters adiudged secundum legem and consuetudinem Iudaismi, as the entry often is. In most Townes of note were two Christians and two Iewes, or one of both sides, appointed as publique Notaries for all their Deeds of contract, and those Notaries had one chest and seuerall keyes for the safe-keeping of such Deeds, and they were called Cyrographarij Christiani and Iudaei arcae Cyrographicae Oxoniae or other such Towne. And hence must you interpret les houches Cyrograffes in statuto de Iudaismo. And by these Notaries or Cyrographers the Deeds of the Iewes were tried. These Deeds and such like they called  vsually starra, of their Hebrew word shetar, that is, a Deede or contract: as Salomon de Stanford agnouit per starrum suum, and the like. And howeuer land was not subiect to execution for debt, ^ill 13. Ed. 1. yet it seeme by 52. Hen. 3. That for debts of the Iewes, land was
 was seized by writ for the debtor. Constat Iustitiarijs and per inspectionem rotulorum de Scaccario nostro Iudaeorum, quod Aaron, etc. When any man had dealt much with them, and after all discharges doubted further ill measure by any such St^rres or Deeds lying hid, the course was to send out a processe to the Sheriffe of the County, or Constables of the Castles of great Townes, to make proclamation on their Sabbaths, Summoning all Iewes of this or that Synagogue to be at their Exchequer to account with such as doubted in that kinde. Thus 52. Hen. 3. praeceptum est vice-comiti Essex quod clamari faceret per seholas Iudaeorum Colcestriae per du^ vel tri^ Sabbata, si aliquis Iudaeus vel Iudaea aliquod debitum exigere poterit de Rogero filio Petri, etc. that then he or she should come ad computandam. Et Vice-comes mandauit tam li^erae Latina quam Ebraica, quod nullus Iudaeus nec Iudaea aliquod debitu^ exigit de praedicto Rogero.  So do all other Sherifes and Constables returne in Hebrew and Latine. For in those times both Languages were vsed not only in Deeds of the Iewes, which I haue often seene with the Hebrew on the one side, and the same in Latine on the other, but also in Records of Law, as in 43. Hen. 3. in regist. Monasterij de Boxgraue in Sussex, etc. And as both tongues were vsed, so in trialls twixt Christians and them, the venire facias was sex probos and legales homines, and sex legales Iudaeos, as often appeares. What Oath was giuen them I finde not, but R. Moses Mikkotxi that liued in the time of Hen. 3. writes in praec. affirmat. 123. that holding the booke of the Pentateuch betweene their Armes, they called to witnesse the God of Israel which is mercifull, etc.
Vpon their conuersion their goods were confiscate: which was (it seemes) after such  time as the Domus Conuersorum (that which is now the Rolles) was in 17. Hen. 3. built for them, where they might liue sub quadam honesta viuendi Regula, and certum haberent in tota vita sua domi^ilium, tutum refugium and sufficiens vitae sustentamentum, sine seruili labore and foenoris emolumento, as the words of Mat. Paris are. In 52. Hen. 3. Iospin ben Salomon a Iew of Marleborow shewes to the Court of the Iustices of the Iewes, that one Ioicets his sister was married to one Salon, the sonne of Lombard of Kirklade, and quod ipsa habuit in arca Cyrograph. Merlebrigie vnum Cyrograph. xxxij. marcarum, which vpon her conuersion became the Kings, as the Roll saith, and quod hoc totum sit verum, obligat omnia bona sua, etc. Which all were confiscate for not prosecuting the sute. But in the time of E. 1. it was granted, that the house should haue one halfe of the goods of the Conuert, and that he himselfe should haue the other  halfe. So placit. 9. Ed, 1. Io. de Sancto Dionys. custos domus conuersorum hath a writ for the moity of the goods of Beleager and Huccoth Iewesses of Oxford, late Conuerts, etc. the other halfe allowed to them.
One cruell and (to speake the properest phrase) Iewish crime was vsuall amongst them euery yeere towards Easter, though it were not alwayes knowne (see Mat. Paris in 39. H. 3.) to steale a young boy, circumcise him, and after a solemne iudgement, making one of their owne Nation a Pilate, to crucifie him out of their diuellish malice to Christ and Christians. For their circumcising alone, take this record inter Placita 18. H. 3. Rot. 21. N^rff. Benedictus physicus appellat Iacobum de Norwico Iudaeum, quod cum Odoardius filius suus puer aetatis 5. annorum iuit ludendo, etc. that foure yeeres before that, Iames the Iew, had taken his sonne  Ed. as he was playing in the streete, and carrying him to his house, circumcised him, and there detayned him one day and night, till by force of Christians hee recouered him, hauing his circumcised member then swollen, etc. The childe being examined, confessed that they tooke and carried him to the house of Iames aforesaid, where, while one held him and couered his eyes, another circumcised him with a knife; the peece cut off they put in a bason of sand (in quodam vacino cum sabelone; and quaesierunt peciam illam cum paruis suffletis) and there they with small puffes of wind out of their mouthes sought it, and the Iew which first found it, was called Iurnepin, and therefore they gaue the same name to the childe, calling him Iurnepin. The Archdeacons Officiall came to testifie this with a great companie of Priests, all in the word of GOD, saying as aforesaid, that they saw his members swolne: and the  Coroners of Norwich with thirtie six of the Citizens testified as much. Hereupon the Iewes were all put in prison, and found accessories except Mossy the sonne of Salomon. Order was taken, that because the case was strange, and they had no precedent of the like, it should first be enquired of by the Ecclesiasticall Ordinary, and that he should certifie to the King. The Iewes after procured the boy to be seene, and his member was found couered. But this is not repugnant to the former testimonie: seeing by Chyrurgery,Cels. de remed. l. 7. c. 25. Epiphan. de pond. and 1. Cor. 7.18. the skinne may bee drawne forth to an vncircumcision. In the yeere following of Hen. 3. Mat. Paris reports such a deede of the Iewes of Norwich, and in 24. H. 3. that they circumcised a Christian childe, and called him Iurnin, and meant to haue crucified him. All the Iewes of the Citie were questioned about it: and when they would haue referred themselues to Lay authoritie,  William de Ralegh the Bishop sayes, Haec ad Ecclesiam spectant, non ad regalem curiam, cum de circumcisione and de fidei laesione quaestio ventiletur. Foure Iewes conuicted hereof were
 drawne at Horses tayles, and hanged on a gibbet. In 39. H. 3. the case of Hugh Lincolne crucified is in the same Author, and for it eighteene Iewes were at once drawne and hanged. This Hugh is reckoned as a Saint in Chaucers Prioresses tale. By reason of their exactions and vsuries they were all banisht, (their moueables allowed them, but Walsingham sayes, only their expences for passage) in 18. Ed. 1. Math. Westm. numbers them one hundred and sixty thousand, fiue hundred and eleuen. The house of Conuerts in Pat. 51. Ed. 3. memb. 20. is giuen to the Master of the Rolles.
By the Statute Iudaisme they were to weare (euery one being past seuen yeeres olde) a cognisance of yellow vpon their vpper garment, thereby to be knowne (some such distinction  had beene generally enioyned in the Councell of Lateran) see the Statute, and cap. de Iud. 6. R. 1. Rog. de Houeden, fol. 424. They were forbidden to build new Synagogues, made subiect to the payment of Tithes, and were to weare on their vpper garment, on the brest two peeces of wollen cloth of another colour plainly to be discerned, each of them two fingers broade, and foure in length, by the Prouinciall Councell of Oxford vnder Stephan Archbishop of Canterbury in 8. Hen. 3.



CHAP. XI. A Chronologie of the Iewish Historie from the beginning of the World, briefly collected.
THe Floud happened (as Moses reckoneth the Parcels in the Ages of the Patriarchs) in the yeere of the World 1656. which are thus accounted: Adam at the hundred and thirtie yeere begat Seth: Seth at a hundred and fiue  begat Enos: Enos at ninetie Kainan: he at seuenty Mahalaleel, who at sixty fiue begat Iared: Iared being one hundred sixtie two yeeres olde, begat Henoch, who at sixtie fiue begat Methuselah; and hee at a hundred  eighty seuen begat Lamech, who in his hundred eightie two yeere begat Noah; in the sixe hundreth yeere of whose life the Floud came: Whereof euery Nation almost in the World hath some tradition; howsoeuer as Censorinus citeth out of Varro, from the beginning of the world to that first deluge, is called (...), or vnknowne; as from thence to the first Olympiade was (...) or fabulous; onely that deserueth the title of (...) from the Olympiads forwards, if we regard humane Historie. But the Diuine hath made the former more cleere then the later. Some difference is in what part of the yeere the World was created, which is supposed to be Autumne, because the trees were then in those parts of Eden laden with fruits: and the Iewes still obserue that time. Scaliger also sometime of a contrary opinion, hath now yeelded to this. And the Egyptians in the time of Fermicus held that the  world was created in the thirtith part of Libra. The Flood after Scaliger began in the yeere 1657. on Saturday the seuenth of Nouember.
The second age of the World is reckoned from the Floud to Abraham: Whose birth was after the Floud 292. yeeres: Sem two yeeres after the Floud begat Arpacsad: hee at thirtie fiue yeeres Selah, who in the thirtith yeere begat Heber: Heber at thirtie foure Peleg, who being thirtie yeeres old begat Regu, and he at thirty two Serug, in whose thirtith yeere Nahor was borne, who at nine and twenty begat Terah, who at seuentie yeeres begat Abram. Thus Scaliger, Caluisius, Buntingus, Arias Montanus, Genebrard, Pererius, Adrichomius, Opmeerus, etc. But Iunius, Broughton, Lydayt, Codomannus, etc. adde sixtie yeeres more. For Moses saith, Gen. 11.32. That Terah died in Charan, aged two hundred and fiue yeeres, and then  Abram (as it is in the next Chapter) was seuentie fiue yeeres old; so that Terah when Abram was borne, was a hundred thirty yeeres old. Whereas therefore he is said at seuentie yeeres to beget Abram, Nahor, and Haran, it is to be vnderstood, that he then began to beget:Anno Mundi 2008. Abram borne. Abram being named first for diuine priuiledge, not because hee was eldest. The like phrase is vsed, Gen. 5.32. Noah being fiue hundred yeeres old begat Shem, Ham and Iaphet, and yet neither were they all borne at once, nor was Shem the eldest: let the Reader choose whether of these opinions he best liketh.
In the seuentie fiue yeere Abram went out of Charan, hauing receiued the promise; from whence to the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, are numbred 430. yeeres. Rather herein we are to follow Pauls interpretation of Moses then Genebrards, who Gal. 3.17.  accounts those foure hundred and thirtie yeeres mentioned by Moses, Exod. 12.40. from the promise made to Abraham, and not from the time that Iacob went downe with his familie into Egypt. So that the departure out of Egypt, after Scaligers computation, and some others,
 Perkins, Adrichomius, etc. happened in the yeere of the World 2453. whereto if we adde those sixtie yeeres of Terahs life before mentioned, it amounteth to two thousand fiue hundred and thirteene. And so Broughton reckoneth. Iunius and Lydyat account two thousand fiue hundred and nine. The difference seemes to arise from hence, that one accounteth from Abrams departing out of Vr of the Chaldees; the other from his departure from Haran, after his fathers death about fiue yeeres after. But it were an endlesse worke to reconcile Chronologers in their different computations. Some reckon the fiue and twentieth,Jos. Scaliger annot. in Euseb. Scaliger the fifteenth of Aprill, the day of their departure. And then the Hebrewes began their yeere at the Spring-Equinoctiall, which before they began in Autumne.
From this departure, to the building of Salomons Temple,Ios. Scaliger. de Em T. lib. 5. and in opusc. p. 131. Lydyat. 2988. Troy was taken by the Graecians A. M. 2767. Scal. E. T. l. 5. Scaliger reckoneth foure  hundred and eightie yeeres, whose first foundations (he saith) were laid the nine and twentieth of May being Wednesday, Anno Mundi 2933. and of the great Iulian Period (which differeth seuen hundred sixtie foure yeeres from the yeere of the World) 3697. In this computation of foure hundred and eightie yeeres, betwixt the departure and foundation of the Temple, many Chronologers agree, Arias Montanus, Adrichomius, Broughton, Perkyns, Lydyat, etc. although some dissent much. The summe ariseth of these parcels. Moses died fortie yeeres after their deliuerance. Ioshua ruled seuenteene; Othoniel fortie; Ehud fourescore; Gideon fortie; Abimelech three; Thola twentie three; Iaer twentie two; Iephte sixe; Ibsan seuen; Elam ten; Abdon eight; Sampson twentie; Heli fortie; Samuel and Saul fortie; Dauid fortie; Salomon in the fourth yeere and second month beganne to build his Temple,  after which hee raigned thirtie seuen yeeres.
An. M. 3360.From thence to the destruction of the Temple vnder Zedekias, are accounted foure hundred twentie and seuen. This agrees withEzek. 4.5. Lydy. 3417. Ezekiels account, reckoning a day for a yeere, three hundred and ninety daies or yeeres after the Apostasie of Israel from God, the rebellion against the house of Dauid in the beginning of Rehoboams raigne, by the meanes of Ieroboam; to which if we adde seuen and thirtie yeeres which Salomon raigned after the foundation of the Temple, the summe is foure hundred twentie seuen. The same appeareth thus; Roboam reigned seuenteene yeeres; Abiam three; Asa fortie one; Iehoshaphat twentie fiue; Iehoram eight; Ahaziah one; Athaliah sixe; Ioash fortie; Amazia twentie nine; Azaria or Vzzia fiftie two. Betwixt Amazia and Azaria the kingdome was ruled eleuen yeeres  by the States, as some gather out of 2. Reg. 15.1. (others reckon it not.) Iotham sixteene; Ahaz sixteene; Ezekiah twentie nine; Manasses fiftie fiue; Amon two; Iosias thirtie one; Iehoahaz three moneths; Eliakim or Iehoiakim eleuen yeeres; Iehoiachin three moneths; Zedechiah or Mattaniah eleuen yeeres. The little difference from the former number may be ascribed to the current, and vnfinished yeeres of some of their raignes.
From this time of Sedekias ruine, some begin the reckoning of the seuentie yeeres captiuitie; in which time others comprehend all Sedekias raigne, and account the returne vnder Cyrus to bee fiftie nine yeeres after this desolation; and from thence a hundred and eight to the Edict of Darius Nothus; from which time are numbred two hundred fiftie nine to the Dedication of Iudas Maccabeus; and from thence a hundred sixtie two yeeres to the birth  of Christ. SoScal. de Em. lib. 7. Scaliger.
It were a worke irkesome to my selfe, and tedious to the Reader, to recite the variable opinions of Chronologers, or to trauerse their arguments about these points.
They which list to see the varietie of opinions of Iewish, Greeke, Latin, old and new Chronologers, may see Genebr. Chron. lib. 1. in fine. Likewise see our fourth booke, cap. 4.To recite here their high Priests and later Kings, with the time of their pontificalitie and raigne, out of Arias Montanus, I hold not vnfit. First, Iesus returned with Zorobabel, and built the Temple, whose time of Priest-hood, after Scaliger, Iunius, and those that reckon vpon the Edict of Darius Nothus, must needs be very long. To leaue that therfore his sonne IoacimIoseph. Antiq. and Car. Sigo. de republ. hebr. l. 5. haue set down the catalogue of high Priests from the first to the last. Iun in 1. Mac. 1. Scal. E. T. l. 5. succeeded in the Priest-hood twentie eight yeeres, besides twentie yeeres with his father. Eliasib held the Priest-hood one and fortie yeeres; Ioiada twentie fiue; Ionathan twentie foure; Ieddoa twentie seuen, till the time of Alexander; Onias twentie seuen, after  Philo: but Eusebius saith twentie three; Simon Iustus thirteene; Eleazar twentie, Manasse^ twentie seuen, Onias thirty nine.
Afterwards the Syrian Kings appointed high-Priests, of whom Iason was Priest three yeeres; Menelaus twelue yeeres, in whose seuenth yeere Iudas Maccabeus began to administer the Common-wealth. Ionathas brother of Iudas ruled eighteene yeeres, Simon his brother was both Priest and Captaine eight yeeres; Ioannes Hircanus his sonne, thirtie one. Whereas they had vsed to date their contracts according to the yeeres from Alexander, as we reade in the bookes of Maccabees; when Simon Hircanus was high Priest, that order was abolished, and another taken, that euery date should be expressed in such or such a yeere of N. high Priest of the great God. But lest the writing being cancelled, should bee neglected,  and perhaps the Name of God cast with it on the dung-hil, the wise-men abolished that order on the third of Tisri, which they instituted a holy-day. As for the name of Maccabees, Iunius
 saith, it came from the inscription of those foure letters M. C. B. I. in the banners of those Princes which deliuered the Iewes from the Macedonian thraldome. Scaliger saith, that Iudas onely and properly was so called, but by abuse of speech was not onely giuen to all of that kindred, but to all which suffered in those times persecution for Religion; as the seuen brethren and others. The name Hasmonaei began with that Hircanus, Scaliger thinketh, because in the sixty eight Psalme it is by the Iewes interpreted Prince.
Aristobulus sonne of Hircanus, first after the captiuitie called himselfe king, and raigned one yeere: Ioannes Alexander his brother, twentie seuen: after him his wife Alexandra, nine: Hircanus her sonne three moneths: Aristobulus his brother three yeeres: Ierusalem was taken  of Pompey, and Hircanus recouered the Priest-hood, which he held two and twentie yeeres: Antigonus by aide of the Parthians possessed Iudae a fiue yeeres, and in his second yeere Herod was proclaimed King by the Romans, who tooke the Citie the fift yeere of Antigonus, and raigned foure and thirtie.
ScaligerCan. Is^gog. l. 2. ascribeth to Herods kingdome the number after Eusebius account, reckoning from the birth of Abram 1977. he died 2016. Archelaus his son was made by Augustus Tetrarch of Ierusalem 2016. and was banished 2025. Agricola was made king by Caligula 2053. Agrippa his son by Claudius 2060. and died 2116. thirtie yeeres after the destruction of the Temple. The Dynastie of the Herodians lasted 139. yeeres. Thus Scaliger. He attributeth the Natiuitie of Christ to the 3948. yeere of the world.
 Here we must leaue the Chronologers contending of the yeere of the world, in which this blessed Natiuitie happened; some adding many more yeeres, some not allowing so many. It is certaine by the Scripture, that he was borne in the one and fortieth, or two and fortieth of Augustus, baptized in the fifteenth of Tiberius, then beginning to be about thirtie yeeres of age: in the thirtie three yeere he was crucified. In the seuentie two, as Baronius, and seuentie one yeere of Christ, as Buntingus and Liuely account, Ierusalem was destroyed by Titus, in the second of Vespasian. Arias Montanus reckoneth this the yeere of the World 3989. and saith, that the Hebrewes reckon it the 3841. which must needes be false. The fault ariseth from the false computation of the Persia^ and Graecian Monarchies.Ios. Antiq. lib. 20. Iosephus counteth from the time of Herod to the destruction of the Temple, twentie eight high Priests,  and a hundred and seuen yeeres. After Scaliger in his Can. Isag. l. 3. this yeere 1612. is the 1614. of Christ, of the World 5461. after the Iewish account of Hillel 5372. of the Armenians 1061. of the Iulian Period 6325. of the Hegira 1021. Anno 4. Olymp. 597. The Dionysian account, which wee vsually follow,Scal. E. T. 5. l. was not generally receiued till after the time of Charles the Great.


CHAP. XII. Of the Iewish Talmud, and the Composition and estimation thereof:  also of the Iewish Learned men, their succession, their Cabbalists, Masorites, their Rabbines, Vniuersities, Students, Rabbinicall creations, their Scriptures, and the translations of them.

@. I.  Of the Talmud.
RAbbi Mosche Mikkotzi,R. Mos. in S^pher. mitzuos gad^l. in a worke of his, set forth Anno 1236. as Buxdorfius citeth him,Synag. Iudaic. Buxd. latine reddit. ab Herm. Germberg. c. 1. saith, that the Written Law which GOD gaue to Moses, and Moses to the Israelites, is obscure and hard, because it speaketh some things contradictorie (which hee seeketh to proue by some placesExod. 12.15. Deut. 16.3. and Leuit. 23.6. Ex. 19.11. and Exod. 20.22. etc. mis-interpreted) and because it is imperfect, and contayneth not all things meete to be knowne. For who shall teach vs (saith he) the notes of Birds and Beasts? (a Franciscan might answere himLegend of Saint Francis, where hee is said to preach to the beasts, and speake to the Swallowes. out of the Legend of Saint Francis, the Patron of his Order) who shall teach them the proprietie and nature of points and accents of Letters?  Also, what fatte might be eaten, what not? etc. Many such things are defectiue in the Law, and therefore there is neede of some other Exposition of the written Law, whence these
 things might be learned. This Exposition (for-sooth) must be their Talmud, the generation of which Viper, touched before, we will here more fully declare.
They say, that Moses on Mount Sinai was not with GOD fortie daies and fortie nights to keepe Gees^. And GOD could haue written those Tables of the Law in an houre, and sent him away with them; so to haue preuented that Idolatrie with the Golden Calfe. But GOD brought Moses into a Schoole,Pircke seu capita R. Eliezer. cap. 1. and there gaue him the Law in writing first, and then in all that long time expoundedRadicalia praecepta auditores scriptis, acceperunt, annexa vero ^re expasita didicerunt. P. Ric. Epit. de Talmudica doctrina in praefat. ex Rambam. the same, shewing the cause, manner, measure, foundation, and intention thereof in the true sense. This vnwritten and Verball Law did MosesR. Aben. Ezra. R. Solom. Iarchi and alij in Deut. 4.14. teach Ioshua, be the Elders; from these it was deriued to the Prophets. After Zacharie and Malachie, the last of these, it came to the great Sanhedrib, and after them, by Tradion from father  to sonne.
AndR. Bechai. Exod. 34. Rabbi Bechai saith, That Moses learned the Law written, in the day time; and this Traditionall Law by night: for then he could not see to write. Rabbi Mosche Mikkotzi sheweth the cause why God would deliuer the same by mouth onely, and not in writing, lest (I wisse) the Gentiles should peruert this, as they did the other which was written. And in the day of Iudgement, when GOD shall demand who are the Israelites, the Gentiles shall make challenge, because of the Law written, but the Iewes onely shall be acceped, as hauing this Simani, this verball exposition. GOD also (say they) gaue them Chachamim, Wise-men, authors of diuers ordinances amongst them, as to blesse GOD at the Sunne-rising, and Sunne-setting: And of Schooles where children should be taught the Law of Moses in euery  Citie, and where the Law of Moses should be read weekely; and that the Israelites should not eate or drinke with the Gentiles, nor what they had dressed; after the example ofDan. 1.8. Daniel, etc.
But when the Temple was destroyed, and the Iewes carried away captiues, then arose vp Rabbi Iuda Hannasi, who is called (for his humilitie and godlinesse) our Great Master; to whom GOD procured such fauour in the eyes of Antoninus the Emperour, that hee had authoritie to assemble out of all places of the Empire, the most learned Iewes, to consult in this their almost desperate Estate, what course to take for the preseruation of the Law amongst the people. And although this Kabala or Law, giuen by word of mouth, might not bee committed to writing; yet in consideration and commiseration of their  miserie, whatsoeuer thereof was remayning in memorie; hee writ in a booke which hee called Mischna, that is, a(...). Deutronomie, or Law reiterated, contayning sixe summes, diuided into sixtie lesse parts or tractates, and these into fiue hundred thirtie two Chapters. Thus farre R. Mikkotzi: The contents of the sixe summes and their seuerall Tractates, you may see inBuxt. recens. op. Talm. Buxtorfius.
In this booke were contayned the Traditions and ordinances of the Elders, according to the prescript whereof, the Iewish Synagogue was to bee ordered; and it was receiued and approued of the Iewish Synagogue,Chron. Heb. Tzemach Dauid. in the yeere of Christ 219.The Talmud is (in manner saith Rambam) nothing but a commentary on that Misna: a worke full of diuine, naturall and politicall wis^dome, saith Galatinus, of the parts thereof, see his first booke. c. 5. and Buxd. Recons. op. Talm and Sixt. Sen. Bib. l. 2 I. Picus saith, it was composed about the yere 150 Others say, in the yere 120. Io. Wolf. lection. Memorab, Centenar. 2. Scalig. otherwise. vid. E.T. pag. 614. Some yeeres after, Rabbi Iochanan, Rector of the Vniuersitie of Ierusalem for the space of eightie yeeres, enlarged that booke, and called it the Talmud of Ierusalem (being fitted for their vse which dwelt in  the land of Israel, as the other for Forreners) which for the difficultie and obscuritie thereof was not had in such estimation as the former, nor is it at this day. After him, Rabbi Asse read in the Schooles those Tractates, handling euery yeere two of them; so in the sixtie yeeres of his Rector-ship, hee went twice through it all; but finished in writing onely fiue and thirtie Tractates. After him in the yeerePet. Galat. hath 436. 427. Maremar was made Rector, to whom Mar the son^e of Rabbi Asse adioyned himselfe. These perfected that which Rabbi Asse had left vnfinished. And that which they thus added, was called Gemara, or the complement.
Thus the Mischnaios, and Gemara made vp the whole TalmudTalmud is, the same that Doctrina or Disciplinatio. Elias This. rad. Thalmud.. These two spent in their labours threescore and thirteene yeeres. And so in the yeere of our Lord 500. the Talmud  was perfected, receiued for authenticall, and called the Babylonian Talmud, according to which the Iewes to this day behaue themselues in cases spirituall and temporall, accounting it as their ciuill and cannon Law. The Iewes ascribe the Ierusalem Talmud to the yeere of the World 4229. the other 4265. This is called the Talmud of Ierusalem saith Serarius) not because it was written there: But was compiled not in the Babylonian Vniuersitie, but in one of Israel, and in the Ierusalem language, which at that time was very corrupt and confused with Greekish, Persian and Roman mixtures. This was both begun and ended by R. Iochanan aforesaid, betweene the times of the Misna and Gemara. About the yeere 4860. and 1100. yeeres after Christ, R. Isaac ben Iaccb in Spaine writ (so it is called) The little Talmud. And in the great and true Thalmud are the additions of R. Barkaphra. Eldad Danius  fableth, that it is in Hebrew amongst his enclosed Iewes. Note also, that the name Thalmud or Talmud, is giuen sometimes to the whole worke, sometimes and often to the Gemara noly, calling it the booke of the Misna and Talmud.

And this is that Law verball, or deliuered by word of mouth, which is equalled to the other, without which the written law ca^not be conceiued or vnderstood: The ioy of the hart (saithAb. Ezra in Prooem. Pentateuch. Aben Ezra) and refreshing of the bones; betwixt which and the written Law hee can finde noSic Tridentina Synodus ses. 4. des 1 and dein. difference, but being deliuered to them from their Elders. In one of their bookes,Semak, vel Sephar mitzuos katon R. Isaac. printed at Cremona 1556. is this sentence. Thinke not that the Law written is the foundation, but rather the Law Traditionall is the right foundation: and according to this Law did GodExod. 34.27. make couenant with the Israelites; for God foresaw their captiuitie in time to come: and therefore lest the people, among whom they should dwell, should write out and interpret this Law, as they did the other, God would not haue it written. And although  in processe of time this Law be now written, yet it is not explained by the Christians, because it is hard, and requireth a sharpe wit. That which is spoken of the Law, is applyed to commend their Talmud: If you can frustrate (saith the Lord) my Couenant with thePsal. 1.2. Esa. 59. vlt. Ierem 32.25. day and the night, that is, according to their booke Tanchuma, when you will no longer learne and obserue the Talmud. And in theTractat. Bauamaziah. Talmud is thus recorded; To studie and reade in the Bible is a vertue, and not a vertue, that is, a small vertue: but to learne their Mischna or Talmud text is a vertue worthy reward; and to learne by heart Gemara (the complement of the Talmud) is a vertue so great, that none can be greater. TheVid. de bis plura ap. Buxd. Syn. Iud. and in lib. Recensionis operis Talmuds impress. 1613. Wise men (say they) are more excellent then the Prophets; and the wordes of the Scribes more louely then those of the Prophets: and therefore the one forced to confirme them with miracles, the other  simply to bee beleeued, as is said, Deut. 17.10. When some of his Schollers visited R. Eliazer in his sicknesse, and said, Rabbi, teach vs the wayes of life, that we may finde euerlasting life: his answer was, Giue honour to your fellow Students, and turne away your Children from the studie of the Bible, and place them betwixt the knees of the wise. Neither can hee (saith the Talmud in other places) haue a quiet conscience, which returnes from the studie of the Talmud to the studie of the Bible. And, Nothing is more excellent then the most holy Talmud. And, it is impossible to stand on the foundation of the written Law, but by the traditionall. And to dissent from his Doctor, is as to dissent from God; to beleeue the words of the wise, is as to beleeue God himselfe. They say, The Law is like to water, the Misna to wine, the Gemara or Talmud to Preserues: the Law like to Salt, the Misna to  Pepper, the Talmud to Spices. They blaspheme, that God studies the Bible in the day time, and the sixe orders of the Talmud by night.
Hence it is, that the Rabbins are more exercised in their Talmud, then in the Bible; as on which their Faith is founded more then on the other: and according to this doe they expound the Scripture. And as their Talmud is most certaine, so also is that (whatsoeuer) exposition of their Rabbins, according to the same. Thus saith Rabbi Isaac Abhuhabh, whatsoeuer our Rabbins in their Sermons and mysticall explainations haue spoken, wee are no lesse firmely to beleeue then the Law of Moses. And if any thing therein seeme repugnant to our sense, we must impute it to the weakenesse of our conceit, and not to their words, as for example: it is written in the Talmud,Tract. de Sabbat. c. 2. p. 30. that a Rabbin once preached, that the time  would come, when a woman should euery day bee deliuered of her burthen: according to the saying, Iere. 31.7. Concepit statimque peperit. One not beleeuing this, the Rabbin answered, that hee spake not of a common woman, but of a Henne, which should euery day lay an egge.
Such are their expositions, I know not, whether fitter to be heard of Heraclitus, or Democritus, more lamentable or ridiculous; and yet is it there said, that their wordes are the words of the liuing God, whereof not one shall fall to the ground; and must not bee derided either in word or thought, whether yee respect the persons, or workes of their Rabbins. Therefore in a Dutch booke, printed in Hebrew characters at Cracouia 1597. it is written, that the Iewes are bound to say Amen, not onely to their Prayers, but to all their Sermons  and Expositions, according to the Prophet Esay,Cap. 26.2. Open the gates, the people commeth (schomer amunim) which keepeth righteousnesse, that is (say they) which saying Amen, beleeueth all things which the wise Rabbins haue written. And if any bee so simple, that he cannot vnderstand, yet must hee beleeue.
When two Rabbins (saith their Talmud) maintaine contrary opinions, yet must not men contradict them, because both of them hath his Kabala or Tradition for the same: and this is a rule in their Rabbins, Remember rather the word of the Scribes, than of the Law of Moses. R. Salomon Iarchi vpon Deuteronomie, chap. 17. verse 12. Thou shalt not decline from the word that they shall shew thee, to the right hand, or to the left, hath these words; And when he saith vnto thee, Of the right hand, that it is the left; and, Of the left hand, that it isA.R. must be beleeued, though he say the right hand is the left. the  right, thou must beleeue it; how much more if hee saith, The right hand is the right, etc. They haue a storie in theirTalmud. tract. de Sabbat. Legend for the same, That there came a Goi (a Gentile) to Sammai, and asked how many Lawes they had? who answered two, a Written and a Verball.
 Hee replyed, the written Law I acknowledge no lesse then thou; make mee therefore a Iew, and teach me the other. Sammai refused; and hee went to Hillel (these both liued a little before the time of Christ) who admitted and instructed him; after hee bad him pronounce the letters in order, Aleph, Beth, Gimel, etc. which he did. The next day he bade him say the same letters backward, Gimel, Beth, Aleph. The Gentile said, Rabbi, yesterday you taught me otherwise: and yet, said Hillel you beleeue me, and so learne of me; which you must no lesse doe in the Traditionall Law, beleeuing all that is therein.
I had almost thought in reading of this Hillel, I had heard the Catechizing of some Romish Conuert, that with an implicite faith (beleeuing and worshipping hee knowes not what) repente prodit Catholicus, is foole Catholike in an hower, resigning himselfe to whatsoeuer  that Church teacheth vpon an Ipsa dixit; or else that I had beene reading the life and precepts ofIgnatij vita l. 3. c. 7. per P. Massaeum. Ignatius Leiola the Iesuite-founder (so like is the story, though the names d^ffer) who practised himselfe, and trayned vp others, Ad sapientem hanc sanctamque stultitiam caecae, vt ipse appellabat, obedientiae, saith Maffaeus in a large Discourse hereof: Pauls Omnia probate was in those dayes; but prudentiam non obedientis, sed imperantis esse respondit Ignatius: negabat obedientis nomine dignum haberi oportere, qui legitimo superiori non cum voluntate iudicium quoque suhmitteret: in superiorum iussu examinando esse arrogantiam. And thus writeth Ignatius himselfe:Ignatij Loiolae Episto^a de obedientia ad frat. in Lusitania and Kibadeneire vita Ignat. l. 5. c. 4. Perit celebris illa Obedientiae caecae simplicitas, cum apud nos ipsos in quaestionem vocamus rectene praecipiatur an secus: perit humilitas, perit in rebus arduis fortitudo, etc. To obey in outward execution, and effecting the command of a Superiour,  may proue no vertue of patience, but a cloake of malice, a very imperfect perfection, not worthy the name of vertue, vntill the inward affect bee ioyned to the outward effect: neither is this a whole sacrifice, except hee not onely will the same, but iudge, and bee of the same sentence with his superiour: hee must in the person of his superiour behold Christ, who can neither deceiue nor be deceiued; ready alway to defend, neuer to mislike his command; yea, whatsoeuer his superiour enioyneth, hee must accept as the precept and will of God; and as hee is readie to beleeue the Catholique faith, soSic ad ea facienda, quaecunque superior dixerit, c^co quodam impetu voluntatis p^rendi cupidae sine vlla prorsu^ disquisitione feramini. to be carryed without further search, with a blind force of the will, desirous to obey. Thus did Abraham when hee was commanded to offer Isaac; and therefore thus must the Iesuite doe when an Ignatian Superiour commands, or else hee is no Holocaust for the Loiolan Altar. Euen as a Carkasse,  saith the Iesuiticall Constitution,Vid. Reg. Soc. Iesu. sum. constitut. 31. ad 37. ac si cad^uer essent, quod quoquo versus ferri se sinit, atque senis baculus, qui vbicunque and quacunque in re, etc. Ribad. vbi sup. which will bee drawne any way, or a Staffe in an old mans hand plyant as he pleaseth: so, and so mustIesuites state diuinitie. our waxen Iesuites bee; Asses without vnderstanding; nay, carkasses without life, staues and slaues and blockes, guided by their guides, though it bee to cracke the Crownes of Kings. And as his legacie hee bequeathed this a little before his Death to the societie, that they should bee as plyant waxe, as an Image, flexible at pleasure: yea, though it seeme against Conscience, yet must a man beleeue his Superiour rather then himselfe. And if the Pope should bid him crosse the Sea in the next Boat hee met with, though destitute of sayles, oares, mast and helme, and without all kind of prouision, he would doe it willingly. This hee called Mortification. Others which are not thus blind, haue their sinnes still remaining, and haue but one foot in  Religion. This obedience (saith anotherOrlandini trist. soc. les. l. 12. of them) is the character imprinted by Diuine, and not humane hand in this societie.
What Diuell of Hell could euer haue taught Murthers and Treasons to be tollerable, nay commendable, nay meritorious, if his Scholler should not first passe this Iesuiticall Retrograde, from a Christian and a Man, with the losse of Religion and Reason, to become (as these Rome-Rabbins terme it) a Carkasse indeed, an Image, or a Staffe in the hand of That old one, which (like the Aegyptian Inchanters) hee might make a Serpent at his pleasure? But let the truth preuaile, and Moses Rod eate vp these Serpent-rods of the Aegyptians. And what more could old Hillel say to his Disciples? Or doth God himselfe exact? Bernard throughout his seauenth Epistle, teacheth more soundly of the Pope and those religious  Superiours;Bern. Epist. 7. Nec dico praepositorum mandata esse a subditis iudicanda, vbi nihil iubere deprehenduntur diuinis contrarium institutis. Sed necessariam esse dico and prudentiam qua aduertatur, si quid aduersetur, and libertatem qua ingenue contemnatur. Hanc ego nunquam aemuler obedientiam: talem mihi nunquam libeat modestians, vel potius molestiam imitari. Talis siquidem obedientia omni est contemptu deterior: talis quoque modestia vltra omnem modum extenditur. -- O patientia, omni digna impatientia! But to leaue this question and our Iesuites till fitter time; Iewish Rabbins auerre, that whosoeuer mocketh or contemneth their sayings, shall bee punished in hot and boyling Zoah, or excrement in hell. And thus much of their Talmud, the originall and authoritie thereof. More modest yet were those FathersSess. 4 dec. 1. Pari pietatis affectu and reuerentiae traditiones vna cum libris veteris and noui Testamenti suscipimus and veneramur. of Trent, that would ascribe but equalitie of reuerence, and respect to their Traditions with  the Sripture. (With equall affection and esteeme, say they, wee receiue and reuerence Traditions, and the bookes of the old and new Testament:) which must needs acknowledge themselues beholding
 to them; lest if they complaine they follow not their Traditionarie Masters in making sit lower: and they haue their Anathema as ready as the Rabbins their Zoah; and their Traditions, Canons, and Constitutions must interpret as well as their Kabala.
And some of that hotter societieCosteri Enchirid. de sac. scrip. haue found fiue priuiledges of Tradition aboue Scripture, as being written in the hearts of men by the finger of God, being more ancient, giuing confirmation to the Scripture, not subiect to wresting, and containing all truth: whereas poore Scripture (for no better defending of the Iesuiticall, Iebusiticall, Iezabelicall assertions) is condemned first of her meane originall, as being written but by the Apostles (not the finger of God.) Secondly, as a later vpstart: and thirdly, as receiued vpon the Churches authoritie:  and fourthly, a dead letter written in paper or parchment with Inke, subiect to wresting, like a sheath which admits any blade whether of leade, wood, or brasse, as well as the true one. And lastly, not containing all the mysteries of Religion explicitly, as being not therefore giuen to prescribe an exact forme of Faith, but written by some, vpon some occasions, to some Churches; and therefore in controuersies, as of Images, Inuocation of Saints and the like, where Scripture seemes to speake for heretikes, wee must haue recourse to the other kind of Scripture written in the heart of the Church, as Interpreter of all Scriptures, Iudge of all opinions, and whatsoeuer else foule-mouthed blasphemie with faire pretext can arrogate to this, or derogate from the other. O that men would therefore hate that Whore which these impudent Panders prostitute thus decked with the spoyles of diu^ne  Scriptures, which haue another testimonie of themselues; (and therefore the testimonie of God) that2. Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for Instruction in righteousnesse: yea, and hereunto sufficient, that the man of God (whose men, whose emissaries are these gaine-sayers?) may bee perfect (throughly perfected) vnto all good workes. But leaue wee Simeon and Leui, brethren in euill together. Yet, before wee leaue their Talmud (though highly esteemed amongst them) I thought meet also to speake more largely both of that and of their learned Rabbins, out of Petrus Galatinus, Sixtus Senensis, Paulus Ricius, Rambam, and others that write thereof.
TheGalat. de Arcanis lib. 1. per totum vid. and P. Ric. epit. de Talmud. doct. and praefat. 613. prac. R. Mos. Aeg. Misraios proaem. Reuchlin, de arte Cabal. lib. 1. etc. Traditionall Law they call Tora scebealpe, that is, the Law which is in the mouth, or deliuered by word of mouth, Rabbi Moses Aegyptius telleth the passages thereof thus;  Ioshua receiuing it of Moses, deliuered it to Phineas the sonne of Eleazar the Priest: Phineas to Heli the Priest: hee to Samuel the Prophet: Samuel to Dauid: hee to Achias the Prophet; who deliuered the same to Elias, the teacher of Elisha: Elisha or Elisaeus to Ioiada the Priest: this Ioiada to Zacharias: Zacharias to Hosea, and hee to Amos: Amos to Esay, of whom Micheas receiued it, and of him Ioel: Nahum from him, and from him againe Habacuck, who taught it Sephanie, the Instructer of Ieremie, of whom Baruch the Scribe learned it: Baruch taught it Ezra. Vntill this time the Iewes had none other but the written Scripture.
Now for their Scriptures; they call the same Arbaa Veefrim (that is, the foure and twentie) of theD. Whitak. de script. quaest. c. 6. sheweth, that the Iewes accounted so many bookes of the Bible, as they had letters in the Alphabet, to wit, two and twentie hee aledgeth au^hors, Gregor. Naz. Hilary, Cyrillus Hierosol. Epiph. Hieron. Isidorus, Niceph. Leontius, etc.As all wee write and speake is expressed by 22. letters, so all our Christian doctrine in 22. volumes, saith Hugo. As for 24. or 27. as some number. Epiph. haer. 8. and de Mens. and pond. Ruth is, saith hee, reckoned with the booke of Iudges, Nehemia with Ezra, and Samuel, Kings and Chronicles are not diuided.Inueniuntur in vetere Canone cap. 777. in lege versus 5845 in Prophetis 9294. Hagiog 8064. vid Sixt. S. B^bliothec. l. 1. The diuision into Chapters was first by St. Lagton Ar^hb. of Cant. for olde bookes are after the Canon of Euseb. C. R. number of the bookes after their computation, all which they reduce to  foure parts; The first of which they call Tora, the Law, or Humas, the Pentateuch, or fiue bookes: and they call euery booke after the first words in the beginning thereof. The second part hath foure bookes; Ioshua, Iudges, Samuel, and Kings. The third part comprehendeth foure other, which they call the last Prophets; Esay, Ieremie, Ezekiel, and the booke of the twelue smaller Prophets. The fourth part is called Chettuuim, and hth eleuen bookes, Paralipomenon or Chronicles, the Psalmes, the Prouerbes, Iob, Ruth, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Canticles, Ester, Daniel, Ezra, which they make one with Nehemia, Ecclesiasticus, Iudith, and Tobias; and the first booke of Maccabees they haue, but reckon not among the foure and twentie. The third and fourth bookes of Ezra I haue not seene (saith Galatinus) in Hebrew; but some of them say, that they are lately found at Constantinople: but the second  of Maccabees, and the Booke of Philo (called the Wisedome of Salomon) I neuer saw but in Greeke, nor those additions to Daniel. But after the Babylonian captiuitie, Ezra writing out the Law, which had beene burned in the destruction of the Citie, other Wisemen writ out the Exposition of the Law, lest, if another destruction should happen, the same might perish. And from that time, all the Wise-men, which are called the men of the Great Synagogue, in their teaching the Law, deliuered the same both in word and writing, vntill the Talmud was written. (It was then, saith Picus, in seuentie bookes, after the number of the seuentie Elders.)
These mens authoritie hath the next place to the Prophets. And are in this order mentioned in their Talmud. Ezra deliuered the same to Simon the Priest, called Iaddus, who was  honoured of Alexander. This Simon deliuered this explaination to Antigonus: Antigonus to Iosephus the sonne of Iohn, and to Iosephus the sonne of Iehezer: They to Nuaeus Arbulensis, and Ioshua the sonne of Peratria, whose Auditor the Iewes falsly affirme, that Iesus our
 blessed SauiourThe Talmud blameth Helisaeus for too much seueritie to Gehezi, and R. Iosben. Prahcia, for the like toward Iesus of Naz^reth, who had followed this his Master to Alexandria, b ing persecuted by King Iannai, who returning to Ierusalem, and commending his Inne; that his Scholler thinking hee had spoken of his Hostesse, said, Shee had round eyes. What, Varlet (said the R.) hast thou such a thought? and presently commanded him to be proclaimed an Anathema, with the sound of foure hundred Trumpets, nor would after vpon his repentance admit him, whervpon hee became an Idolater, a Magician, etc. This Iannai was Hircanus, sonne of Simon, 110. yeeres before our Sauiour, and therefore it was another Iesus: or else this is a malicious deuice of the Talmudist, which confuteth it selfe with the foolish computation of time. was, which liued an hundred and ten yeers after. Those two deliuered the same to Iuda the son of Tibaeus, and Simon the sonne of Sata. These to Samaia and Abatalion: and they to Hillel and Samaeus. Hillel flourished an hundred yeeres before the destruction of the second Temple, and had eightie Schollers or Disciples, all of excellent wit and learning: thirtie of them for their excellence, had the Diuinitie descending vpon them as Moses, and other thirtie obtained that the Sunne should stand still for them, as Ioshua; the rest were accounted meane. Of these, the greatest was Ionothas sonne of Vziel, the least Iohn the sonne of Zacheus, which yet knew the Scripture and Talmud, and all things else to the examples of Foxes, and Narrations of Diuels.
Hillel and Samaeus deliuered this explaination to this Iohn, and toLuk. 2.28. Simeon the Iust, sonne  of the said Hillel, who after receiued Christ in his armes, and prophesied of him in the Temple. Rabbi Moses proceedeth, and saith, that Simeon taught Gamaliel, Pauls Master; and Gamaliel instructed his sonne Rabban Simeon, who was slaine of Hadrian the Emperour, after he had taught his sonne Iudas, whom the Iewes for his Learning and Holinesse call Rahbenu Haccados, (that is, our holy Master) of which honourable name there had beene another in the time of the Roman Consuls. These for the most part, besides almost infinite others of their hearers, haue left many things written of the explaination of the Law; of which the Talmud was compacted.
Of the vnreasonable absurdities and impious blasphemies of the Talmud, howsoeuer abominable in themselues, yet let it not be irkesome to the Reader to see some mentioned,  therein to obserue the depth of diuine vengeance, which in this blinded Nation wee may heare and feare. For who would thinke it possible that any could entertaine in his heart, that which there they haue written of GOD? as, thatVid. Sixt. Sen. Bib. l. 2. vbi trac. and loci citantur. before the creation of this world to keepe himselfe from idlenesse, hee made and marred many other worlds: that he spends three houres euery day in reading the Iewish law? that Moses one day ascending to Heauen, found him writing accents therein: that GOD euery day maketh deuout prayers: that GOD hath a place a-part, wherein hee afflicteth himselfe with weeping, for bringing so much euill on the Iewes: that euery day hee putteth on their Tephilin and Zizis, and so falleth downe and prayeth: that as oft as hee remembreth their miseries, hee lets fall two teares into the Ocean, and knocks his brest with both his hands: that the last three houres  of the day, hee recreateth himselfe in playing with the Fish Leuiathan; which once in his anger he slew, and powdred for the feast, whereof you shall afterCap. 20. heare: that hee created the Element of fire on the Sabbath day: that the RR. one day reasoning against R. Eliezar, because GOD with a voyce from a heauen interposed his sentence for for Eliezer, the other RR. anathematized GOD, who thereat smiling, said, My children haue ouer-come me. But I am weary to adde the rest of their restlesse impieties against the Almightie. Neither haue the Creatures escaped them: Thus the Talmud telleth, That GOD once whipped Gabriel for a great fault with a whip of fire: that as Adam, before Eue was made, had carnally vsed both Males and Females of other Creatures; So the RauenLyr. in Gen. 8. mentioneth this, and Vict. Carb. lib. 1. c. 10. hath a long Iewish tale of the Rauen, euen still iealous, etc. which Noe sent out of the Arke, was iealous of Noah, lest hee should lye with his Mate; that Iobs storie was fayned:  that Dauid sinned not in his murther and adulterie, and they which thinke hee did sinne, are Heretikes: that vnnaturall copulation with a mans wife is lawfull; that he is vnworthy the name of a Rabbine, which hateth not his enemie to death; that GOD commanded them by any manner of meanes to spoyle the Christians of their goods, and to vse them as beasts: yea, they may kill them, and burne their Gospels, which they entitle, Iniquitie reuealed. Iniquitie reuealed indeed, is the declaration of these things: as of their opinion of the(...). soule; if it sinne in one body, it passeth into a second: if there also, into third: if it continue sinning, it is cast into Hell: the soule of Abel passed into Seth, and the same after into Moses: the soules of the vnlearned shall neuer recouer their bodies. Two RR. euery weeke on Friday created two Calues, and then did eate them. Nothing ought to be eaten by euen numbers,  but by vneuen, wherewith GOD is pleased. Perhaps they had read in Virgil, Numero Deus impare gaudet; but this is common to all Magicians. And what doe I weary you and my selfe, anticipating the following discourse, wherein wee shall haue further occasion to relate the like absurdities? which yet if any deny, they say hee denyeth GOD.




@. II. Of the ancient Iewish Authors, and their Kabalists.
AFter the Times of Christ, Philo and Iosephus are famous: and after the Resurrection of Christ, the Iewes were of three sorts; some true beleeuers, others absolute denyers, the third would haue the Christian Religion, and the Iewish Ceremonies to bee conioyned in equall obseruation; against which third sort the first  Councell, Act. 15. was summoned.
The moderne Iewes insist principally on the litterall sense of Scripture; the Elder sought out a spirituall and mysticall sense, accounting this a great matter: the literall but small, like to a candle of small valueR. Moses Ma^monius in proaem. Moreh. Neb. with the light whereof, the other (as a pearle hidden in a darke roome) is found. The Talmudists followed the allegoricall sense; the Cabalists, the Anagogicall.
As concerning this Cabala, in olde timesIf the wisemen would not a long time write the Talmud, how much lesse the secrets of the law? Idem. l. 1. cap 70. they communicated not that skill to any, but to such as were aged and learned; and therefore nothing thereof, or very little is found written of the Ancient, except of Rabbi Simeon Ben Iohai. But the Doctors of the later  Iewes, lest that learning should perish, haue left somewhat thereof in writing, but so obscurely, that few know it, and they which doe, account it a great secret, and hold it in great regard. So saith EliasThisbi. rad. Kibhel.: in the bookes of the Kabala are contained the secrets of the Law and the Prophets, which man receiued from the mouth of man, vnto ourYea Raziel the Angell taught it Ada^, from whom it passed to Enoch, Noe, Sem, Heber, Abraham etc. if you beleeue the Cabalists, vid. Reuch. lib. 1. Leon. Heb. Dial. 3. Master Moses (on him be peace) and therefore it is so called, and is diuided into two parts, Speculatiue and Practike. But I am not worthy to explaine this businesse, and by reason of my sinnes haue not learned this wisedome, nor knowne this knowledge of those Saints. The word Cabala signifieth a receiuing, and in that respect may bee supplyed to all their Traditionall receipts; but in vse (which is the Law of speech) it is appropriated to that facultie, which (asRic. de Coelest. Agricult. l. 4. Ricius describeth it) by the type of the Mosaicall law insinuateth the  secrets of diuine and humane things: and because it is not grounded on reason, nor deliuered by writing, but by the faith of the hearer receiued, it is called Cabala. Or (if you had rather haue it inReuchlin. de Arte Cabal. l. 1. pag. 620. and 632 and d. ex Edit. Basil. Reuchlines words) it is a Symbolicall receiuing of diuine Reuelation deliuered, to the wholesome contemplation of GOD, and of the seperated formes; and they which receiue it, are called Cabalici, their Disciples Cabalaei, and they which any way imitate them, Cabalistae. The Talmudists therefore and the Cabalists are of two faculties, both agreeing in this, that they grow from Tradition, whereunto they giue credite without rendring any reason: herein differing, that the Cabalist, as a super-subtill transcendent, mounteth with all his industrie and intention from this sensible World vnto that other intellectuall: but theThe Talmudist also goeth no higher then Moses: the Cabalist beginneth with Ada^, for his Tradition: Leo H. d. 3. in Dial. 2. hee playeth the Cabalist also with the E^hnike Theologie, more to the praise of his learning then their Diuinitie. grosser Talmudist abideth in this, and if at any time hee considereth  of GOD, or the blessed Spirits, yet it is with relation to his workes, and their functions, not in any abstract contemplation, bending his whole study to the explaination of the Law, according to the intent of the Law-giuer; considering what is to bee done, what eschewed; whereas the Cabalists most indeauour themselues to contemplation, leauing the care of publike and priuate affaires to the Talmudists, and reseruing onely to themselues those things which pertaine to the tranquillitie of the minde. As therefore the minde is more excellent then the body, so you must thinke the Cabalist superiour to the Talmudist. For example, In the beginning God created Heauen and Earth, saith Moses: HeauenVid. cap. 14. lege etiam, si placet, Leon. Heb. de Amore Dial. 3. de seasu. Gen. 1.1. here, after the Talmudist, is all that part of the World which is aboue the Moone, and all beneath it, Earth: also by Heauen hee vnderstandeth forme, and by Earth, matter; the composition whereof hee  effected not by labour of the hand, but by that nine-fold Oracle of his word: for so often is it mentioned,Gen. 1. and God said; likewise hee findeth the foure Elements in those words, Darkenesse, Spirit, Waters, drie Land. But the Cabalist frameth to himselfe two Worlds, the Visible and Inuisible; Sensible and Mentall; Materiall and Ideall; Superiour and Inferiour: and accordingly gathereth out of the former words, God created Heauen and Earth, That hee made the highest and lowest things, meaning by the highest the immateriall, by the lowest this materiall; and this is gathered out of the first letter Beth, which in numbring signifieth two, and insinuateth there these two Worlds. Yea, they also finde two Paradises, and two Hells, one in this World, and the other in the other and future, for the body heere, and the soule hereafter. Euen as, saith R. Saadia, the white of the  Egge comprehendeth the yolke, so that first intelligible World infoldeth the second: in this are nine Spheres, mooued of the immoueable Empyreon, in that nine orders of Angels, (Theorem. 26. Ricius reckoneth ten, Hayes, Hakadesch, Offanim, Erelim, Hasmalim, Seraphim, Malachim,
 Elohim, bene Elohim, Cherubim. Some Diuines count them thus out of Dionysius; Seraphim, Cherubim, Throni, Dominationes, Virtutes, Potestates, Principatus, Archangels, Angeli: The tenth Order, the Peripatetikes terme Anamastica, the Cabalists Ischim, that is, Men) moued of the vnchangeable GOD, who in vnmoueable silence first created altogether, and after by nine times speaking, moued and promoted each thing to its owne distinction. The Talmudists dreame of an earthly Messias to free them from this their slauerie: the Cabalists (if our Cabalists haue not seene these things through spectacles) expect a spirituall deliuerie from sinne. Doubtlesse they deliuer many excellent assertions, howsoeuer their collection seemeth curious and vncertaine, gathering the same on grounds without ground, beyond all Sense, Reason, Scripture, and therefore often leauened with other superfine absurdities. Buxtorfius  in his abbreuiat. Heb. saith, that by his abbreuiation (...) they vse to signifie the three parts of the Art Cabalastica, Gematria, Notarkon, Temurah. Gematria is that part which by like numbers contained in the letters of diuers words, explaineth one by the other, as Tzemach, Zach. 3.8. hath in the numerall letters 138. and so many are in Menachem, a name which they giue to the Messias, and therefore by Tremach, they there vnderstand the Messias. So in Gen. 49.10. Shilo shall come, containe 358. and so doth Messiah, which is therefore there meant; and many like examples. Notaricon, is when euery letter in one word shall note so many other words, and make vp a sentence. Thus the Maccabees are so called of these foure letters, which they inscribed in their banners. m. c. b. i. the first letters of so many words, Exo. 15.11. Who is like thee amongst the gods, O Lord? So in Adams name  they finde (as the cause thereof) words beginning with the same letters, signifying ashes, bloud, gall, whence are noted his corruption, losse and calamitie: as the Greekes in the same name find the the East, West, North and South, A, (...) D, (...) A, (...) M, (...). Temurah, is when one or two words are changed into one or more other by transposition of letters, or inuersion of qualitie. So out of the Hebrew words, Psal. 21.2. The King shall reioyce in thy strength, O Lord; they expound the King Messias; for this is gathered by transposition of the letters. So Chrerem, Anathema, is (...) mercy, and (...) which in the numerall letters hath 248. the iust number (in their anatomie) of the members of mans bodie. The glosse is, he which is anathematized, if hee repent, shall haue for (...), that is, mercy; if not, it pierceth his 248. members, and destroyes the whole man.  Hence came our Anagrammatismes and Chronogrammatismes, wherein some doe sometimes learnedly triflle, and spend their wits foolishly. This of all their Caball is true, that it may better serue to conuince the Iewes with testimonie of their owne, then for an instruction to vs, who cannot enforce arguments out of Symbolicall senses. If any be in loue with these mysteries, let him resort to Paulus Ricius his Theoremes, to Iohn Reuchlin, to Iohannes Picus and his Commenter Archangelus, to Abrahams supposed Booke of the creation,Sepher. Iezira to R. Ioseph Castiliensis his Porta lucis, which Ricius hath also translated and epitomized, to Galatinus and others.Vid. Catalog. Cabalist. script. in Reuch. lib. 1. pag. 6.0. Commendable is the labour of some of these, and of manyR. Samuel Maroch Victor. Carretus, Hiero^. a S. Fide, etc. Morn. de Verit. C. R. others both conuerted Iewes, which haue sought to reclaime their peruerse brethren; and of our owne, as Mornaeus, Gregentius, Pomeranus, out of whom, they which please, may borrow arguments  to conuince the Iewish incredulitie, and stubbornenesse, and to confound them by their owne testimonies, both from these elder Writers aboue mentioned, and also from the later. So great is the Truth, and mightily it preuaileth, that it extorteth not onely her owne weapons, vsurped and stollen by her enemies: but their owne also, wherewith they come armed against the Truth, and retorteth them on themselues; as Dauid serued the Philistims:1. Sam. 17.51. Who cut off Goliahs head, with Goliahs sword: as1. Chro. 11.23. Benaiah, (one of his Worthies) slew an Aegyptian, a man of great stature fiue cubits long, and in the Aegyptians hand was a speare, like a Weauers beame; and hee went downe to him with a staffe, and plucked the speare out of the Aegyptians hand, and slew him with his owne speare. Thus didQ. Curt. li. 9. Dioxippus the Champion (if forrainers delight any) deale with Horratus the Macedonian in a set combate; and thus  hath ourD. Mor. Apolog. C^tholica, etc. Worthie and Champion come often into the field against the Popish Giants, armed inwardly with Truth, outwardly with Arguments, wrested (without wresting) from his enemies. Hee, in his Latine, and English workes, hath obserued the two-fold rule of policie: Diuide and Rule, against the Papists: Vnite, and Rule, for the Protestants, which Breerely would haue brought into the like bryers. But those his troupes are shewed not to bee Men, but Apes, like those that held Alexanders Armie in suspence: and like Semiramis Elephants, which were but stuffed Oxe-hides, kill-cow-frayes. But Macte virtute esto (worthy Deane.) Euen so goe on still, and fight the Lords battels: that thy Sparta (so happily vndertaken) still adorne, and shew the confusion of Babels bablers: Diuide that Societie, which now in their last age haue hissed with their forked venemous Tongues; feared  and enuyed at home for their arrogance; no lesse then hated abroad for their heresies and treasons

Let Saint Iohns, Let England and the whole Church still sing the ten thousands, that thou doest thus slay with their owne weapons; and let the Apostolicall Truth escape, whiles her Apostaticall Enemies, the Pharisies and Sadducees, are set together by the eares. A happie and diuine stratageme, which (not to detract from others iust prayses, in this or other parts of the battell) hath beene singled, and singularly managed by thy prowesse, which speakest (more iustly then he which vsed those words) to these Babylonians,2. Reg. 18. in their owne Language, that they may eate their owne dung, and drinke their owne pisse together.
Doctor White also, in (that Lactea via, his Milke-white)Pag. 342. Way to the true Church, challengeth in all points of Poperie both authoritie of Scriptures, Fathers, and later Romanists,  and to produce the same against the Trent-Councell, and the Iesuites.
But how hath that fatall name of Babel confounded mee? Truely, the likenesse of these Traditionaries, Cabalists, muddie Talmudists, and Legendaries (as will appeare to an easie Obseruer and Comparer of this ensuing Historie to their practice) which haue beene mustered from the Easterne and WesterneBoth Bellar. and Baronius approue, and proue Rome to be Babylon. Babel, and the like manner of their confusion, hath almost made mee forget the Historie and my selfe, but neuer a whit the Truth. And this will be further manifested in the rest of this Booke, where their Superstitious Deuotion is related.
As for those Testimonies of the Iewes against themselues, besides the Scriptures (which, in regard of the true sense, the veile ouer their hearts will not suffer them to reade, but it is a  sealed Booke vnto them and they left the riches thereof vnto vnto vs, as the2. Reg. 7.7. Aramites left their Tents, with their Horses and Treasure, to the pined Israelites.) Their other Authours are so plaine and plentifull in the Mysteries of our Religion, as I know not whether it cause greater pleasure to reade their Writings, or astonishment and wonder at the Nation; so stricken with madnesse, and with blindnesse, and with astonishment of heart, since they haue shut their eyes against the Sunne of Righteousnesse: on whom that threatned plague is come,Deut. 28.29. Thou shalt groape at Noone-dayes, as the Blind doth groape in darknesse. For out of their Talmud-Authors is plainly deliuered the mystery of the Trinitie, the Incarnation of the Sonne of GOD, his two Natures, his Birth of a Virgin, his spiriuall Kingdome, the time of his Comming, the truth of his Prophesies, and power of his Miracles; the Redemption of  Mankind by his Death, his Crucifying, Descent, Resurrection, and Ascension: and that their Nation was to be reiected, the old Law to cease, New to succeed, etc. All which as they agree vnto that sweet and blessed Name and Person of Iesus (which name, and that of Emanuel, is also found in their Writings) so doe they argue the seueritie of GODS Iudgements, when men will not beleeue the Truth, that by the efficacie of errour, they shall haue eyes, and see not, eares, and heare not (neither ours nor their owne) as Paul, and CHRIST himselfe often told them. But those particulars, as rather appertayning to Disputation, then Historie, (and therefore too much impertinent to our purpose) the desirous Readers may at large find in Morney and Galatinus, not to mentionLud. Viu. de V. C. F. Seb. Munster. de fide Christ. and Iud. Censura. others.
The witnesse of Iosephus, being one, whose name we oftten vse in this Historie, may iustly  challenge me, if I should omit him, especially seeing hee liued in the very dayes of the Apostles, who, as he witnesseth of Iohn Baptist, and of many other things mentioned in the Gospell, fully agreeing therewith: so concerning our Lord and Sauiour, hath this Testimonie.Ios. autiq. 18. cap. 4. In the time of Tiberius, there was one Iesus a wise Man (if at least-wise he was to be called a man) who was a worker of great Miracles, and a Teacher of such as loue the Truth and had many followers, as well of Iewes as of Gentiles. This was Christ. Neuerthelesse, being accused vnto Pilate, by the chiefe of the Iewes, hee was crucified. But yet for all that, those which had loued Him from the beginning, ceased not to continue still. For hee shewed himselfe aliue vnto them three dayes after his Death, as the Prophets had foretold of him, both this and diuers other things: And euen vnto this day doe those continue still,  which after his name are called Christians. Thus much Iosephus. Thus did the Truth force him to confesse, whose Historie of the destruction of his Nation, what is it but as a Commentary on Iesus Prophesie thereof, and their fearefull Imprecation,Mat. 27.15. His bloud be vpon vs and our children, shewing that the wrath of God was come vpon them to the vtmost? From Mount Oliuet, where Iesus was first apprehended, and where last those blessed feet touched the Earth, (as if there Mercie had left a print of Iustice) was Ierusalem besieged, and at their Feast of Passeouer (when they had crucified Christ) they were cooped vp, as it were, assembled by Diuine Iustice from all quarters to destructron, together with that their Citie, where they had slaine the Lord. But of this before.
It will not bee vnsauourie to the Reader, obseruing herein Diuine vengeance, to relate as  vnsauourie a Tale as euer was deuised, which their Talmud telleth in derogation of Christs Miracles, in which I know not whether to call them beasts, or Deuils; so witlesse, and
 withall so wicked is their blasphemie. Forsooth, in Salomons Temple there wasVict. de Carben. lib. 1. c. 13. The Iewes haue a horrible and blasphemous curse directed against our blessed Sauiour: whom they will not call by his name fully pronounced, but abbreuiated with Relation to the Curse. Of which (for I loath to mention it) let him which will, see Bux. de abbreuiaturis Heb. (say they) a certayne stoue of very rare vertue, wherein Salomon by his singular Wisedome had engrauen the very true Name of GOD, which it was lawfull for euery man to reade, but not to conne by heart; nor to write out. And at the Temple doore were two Lyons tyed at two Chaines, which rored terribly, that the feare thereof made him to forget the name that had committed the same to memorie, and him to burst asunder in the middest, that had put it in writing. But IESVS the Sonne of Mary; say they, regarding neither the Curse annexed to the Prohibition, nor the roaring of the Lyons, writ it out in a Bill, and went his way with it ioyfully. And lest he might be taken with the thing about him, hee had a little opened the skinne of his legge, and put it in there, and afterwards wrought his miracles by  the vertue of that name. I should be almost as absurd as they, if I should dispute against it, seeing in this, and most of their brain-sicke Dreames, the very recitation is sufficient refutation.
It cannot be denyed, that there haue beene many Rabbines very Learned, as R. Moses Aegyptius, Abben Tibbon, which translated Euclide and other Authours out of Arabicke into Hebrew, and some parts also of Aristotle translated into Hebrew, are accounted his doing, many others of them writ in Philosophie likewise: and for Physicke, who haue beene more famous? But he which will haue notice of the RR. and their workes, let him reade Buxdorfius his Bibliotheca Rabbinica, printed 1613. yet euen the best of them haue much Chaffe, which needs much fanning from the Corne. Many wise Sentences and Prouerbs  haue beene byDrus. vet. sap. sententiae. Drusius and others gathered out of some of their workes which would haue beautified this Discourse; as these for a taste. Vowes are the hedge or wall of defence to holinesse; Tithes are the same to Riches: he which increaseth his flesh, encreaseth Wormes, Who is wise? he which learneth of euery one: Who is valiant? hee which brideleth his affections: Who is rich? he which is content with his portion: If I care not for my selfe, who shall care for me? And if I, what am I? and if not now, when? The day is short, and the worke much, and the Labourers slow, and the wages great; and the Housholder calleth vpon vs. But me thinkes you call vpon me to proceed. But of these and such like Sayings, there is a whole Treatise called Pirke Auoth, which is as it were their Medulla Patrum, or Flores Doctorum, gathered by R. Nathan Babylonius, set forth by Fagius, and since by  Drusius: yet hauing spoken thus much of their Learned men, I thinke it would to some louers of Learning not be vnsauourie, to adde somewhat of their Vniuersities, degrees of Schooles and the like, in the next Section.


@. III. Of the Rabbines, the Rites of their Creation, the Iewish Vniuersities, and Students.
Serar. Rabbinus. Prior. c. 1. and seqq. Buxtorf. de abbreuiat. Heb. affirmeth, that none of these titles were vsed till Christs time. Serarius thinks them more ancient.AMongst the Iewes all these Titles were of one Root, Rab, Rabrab, Rabba, Rabbi,  Rabban, Rabbana, Rabbanan, Ribbi, Ribbun, Ribbon, Ribbona, Ribbuni, Rabbuni, Rabboni, some of which are more vsuall then others, but all of them in generall signification betoken either a Prince or Lord, or a Master, and Doctor. Of the former signification are few Examples in Scripture, in their Thargumim, many; and those commonly with some word annexed, signifying the thing or mayne subiect: of the later the New Testament is full. The Root, from whence these Titles spring, is Rabab, or Rab, which signifieth to multiply: for a Prince multiplyeth his power; a Doctor his Learning, and one such is as many: according to the moderne vse which speaketh to great men, and they of themselues in plurallWee see. Pronounes. Of Rab is Rabbim and Rabboth in the plurall number;  that vsed for any multitude in other things, this appropriated to signifie Rabbins. Some also of those Titles are Hebrew, some Chaldee or Syriake; some indifferently signifie a Lord or Master, some more especially the one or the other; also in regard of place, one of Babylon was called Rabbi, of Israel Ribbi, of those two famous Vniuersities in Babylonia and Iudaea. In regard of excellence, one of lowest esteeme was stiled Rab; of higher, Rabbi or Ribbi; of of highest, Rabbenu, Rabban and Rabbanan. Yet doe not these rules alway hold: for they haue much altercation amongst themselues, why some are named without any Title, as Hillel, Shamai, and diuers others; and why some more eminent are called Rab or Rabbi, as Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Iuda Hakkadosh. R. Hakiba, Rab Ase, Authour of the Gemara, Rab Haai, Rab Baruch; and why the Title of Rabban is appropriated to some few,  Rabban Gamaliel, R. Symeon, etc. This is affirmed for currant, that he which hath Disciples,
 may bee called Rab or Rabbi; that the younger are not so called by the elder; that they which want Imposition of hands, may not be so called; that the Rulers amongst the people called Nesijm, were in manner onely called Rabban; and for Rabbenu, that is, our Master, it was ascribed to very few, as to Moses first, and after to Hakkadosh, Hillel, Gamaliel, etc.Buxtorf. de Abbreu. hebreor. dict. (...). Those Rabbans were only seuen, all of the posterity of Hillel, as Buxtorfius witnesseth: and these were so called, rather because they were Princes or Lords, then Doctors.
Other Titles besides these were also giuen them, as Chacham, that is, wise, so Hierom. The Doctors of the Iewes are called (...); from which Greeke word perhaps came that other Title giuen them, Sopher: so that which Esay hath Sopher,Es. 33.18. 1. Cor. 1.20. the Apostle interpreteth  (...); They were also called by other Doctorly Titles, as Mascilim, Malphan and Malphana, Moreh (whence commeth the Moderne Title Morenu, that is, our Masters, attributed to their Arch-rabbines) Mar, Abba and Abbothenu, Zekkenim, that is, our Fathers old men, and the like.
The RR. were of two sorts: one numbred by a succession of time, another, named of their studies and employments. Of the first kind were the Thanaei, Amoraei, Sebor^i, Geonim, Marbithe Thoraz, Chechame Thalmudim. Of the other, the Masorites, Cabbalists, Thalmudists, Medakdekim, Methargemim, and others. For the former ranke, thana signifies to learne, whence those Masters, which followed the times of the last Prophets till the Reigne of Commodus, were called Thanaim. Of these are numbred twelue Generations. R.  Abraham Dauidicus reckoneth from Zorobabel to the destruction of the Temple ten, and fiue after. These Thanaei are sometimes reckoned by couples, of which before the destruction of the Temple, one was called NasiVid. sup. c. 2. or Prince, the other Ab beth Din, the Father of the Councell: of these Colleagues or paires they reckon fiue, the last of which was Hillel Nasi, and Schamai Ab beth Din. Hillel had thousands of Disciples, but eightie principall, the chiefe of which was Ionathan, Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase. He and his House or Sect held many peculiar Opinions, to which Shamai and his House or Schoole opposed themselues, and maintayned the contrarie. To these succeeded the Amoraim, which were so named, because hain omerim memoroth, They vttered wise Sentences. Of these they account seuen Generations. These continued till about fiue hundred yeeres after Christ.  The Seboraei succeeded: so called of Sabar, that is, to bee of opinion: for they made not Canons and Constitutions as the former, but onely shewed their Opinions. Of them were fiue Generations, which ended about A. D. 680. and then followed the Geonim. The word gaon signifieth both proud and magnificent. Of these they number eight Generations, continuing till Anno Dom. 1038. Some of them being of Europe, in France, Germanie, and especially in Spaine, their Easterne Academies then decaying. Of their Chachime Thalmidim afterwards.
The other ranke or classis of RR. hath first the Masorites, of Masor to deliuer, tradere, so called, in respect of their Traditionall Law in a generall sense, and more especially, of their Tradition of reading the Bible, as the Distinctions, Accents and Prickes obserued, prescribe,  and that other tradition of Marginall Notes concerning the diuers Readings of the Text. They which committed this MasorethSee the next @. following. to writing, beeing before deliuered by word of mouth only, were called Masorites. These Masorites, by Caninius, Genebrard, Galatinus, Bellarmine, and (whom in this part of our Discourse we principally follow) Serarius, that I speake not of Scaliger, Martinius and others, are acknowledged Authors of the Prickes and Accents as they are now in vse (howsoeuer there were some other vsed before) which some ascribe to Ezra, and some to Moses: So doth Sohar Chadasch printed at Cracouia, 1603. which sayth, the Points were deliuered by the secret of the Law in Sinai: And without them, words are as women without clothes, may not come abroad, there is no light in them, etc. These Masorites are holden to haue liued after the Talmud was finished (and therefore to  be of the Seboraei Rabbines) and that at Tiberias, where they had many Synagogues and Libraries, sometimes also if Zacuths testimony be true) the Sanhedrin it selfe.Sup. @. praeced. Of the Kabbala, and the Kabbalist called Kabbelan and Mekubbal you haue heard a little before: and likewise of the Thalmud and Thalmudist.
The Medakdekim are the Grammarians, as Dikduk signifies Grammar. R. Iuda is reported to be the first Hammedakdek or Grammarian, before whom was no Dikduk of the holy Tongue: after him R. Ionah, and after him R. Saadias Haggaon: after whom innumerable others, Ioseph, Moses, and Dauid, all Kimchi's, Elias, etc. That which is said of R. Iuda, is to be conceiued of the moderne Prickes and Accents: for before his time R. Ioseph Caecus, the Amoraei, the Scribes, and Moses himselfe were therein expert.
 Thargum signifies an Interpretation, and thence Thurgemana and Mechurgeman an Interpreter, as Dargoman with the Arabs and Turkes at this day. And as the bodie of Scripture was diuided into three parts, the Pentateuch, Hagiographa and Prophets, so haue
 they three Thargums, of Onkelos, Ionathas and R. Ioseph the blind, which liued about Anno Dom. 400. And as the Thalmud, so the Thargum is of two Dialects, the Babylonian and of Ierusalem; of this the Authour is vnknowne: the Babylonian was written, the Pentateuch by Onkelos, the Prophets by Ionathan, the Hagiographa by R. Ioseph Caecus. As for the Iewish Fables of a Voyce to Ionathan, and of the consuming with fire from Heauen, any flye that should disturbe him in his writing, his super-excellence among the most excellently learned Schollers of Hillel, etc, and of their many other supposed Thargums, with other Rabbinicall workes, testifying truly of Christ, collected and related by Galatinus, and others, I forbeare further recitall. I might heere amongst their Doctorall Titles reckon the Archiperecitae mentioned by Iustinian;Nouel. 146. a stile giuen to such as were skilfull, either in times,  or rather in the Thalmud, as chiefe Masters and Archrabbines. Of their Sanhedrin is alreadie spoken.Sup. cap. 2. The name is (if wee receiue Serarius) borrowed of the Greekes, with whom (...) signifies Senators. These may well be reckoned amongst their learned men. Bahal Midrasch is the Author of a Commentary, or a Preacher, as Darsan also. But I haue too long examined Titles.
If in the next place we obserue the power of the Rabbines, they were had in great reuerence and respect: they sate in loftie and stately seates, had power to create others Masters and Doctors, to weare Rings and Hoods, and enioyed other Priuiledges, differing according to the times, places, and differing Estates of the Iewes vnder diuers Lords. For as we haue obserued in this Countrey of England, so in other Countries their power was  lesse or more after the will of their Lord: in Babylonia, Egypt, and Spaine somewhat, in some places nothing. In Iustinians time they challenged power of Excommunication, which the Emperour forbad vnder paine of bodily punishments, and losse of all their goods. The like Ecclesiasticall ce^sure was lately sought by the Iewes of Frankford, examined by the Emperours Commissioners at Men^z.
Now for the Rites of creating the R. in this Doctorall or Rabbinicall Degree. First, there was some tryall of his worth. So Lampridius testifieth of the Emperour Alexander, that hee nominated those which were to be sent to gouerne the Prouinces, and to will such as could say ought against them, to make good proofe thereof, or else as Slanderers to lose their heads, alleaging that if the Iewes and Christians made such tryals of the Priests, it was necessary  in these to whom the liues and goods of men were to bee committed. By the Iewish Priests wee vnderstand the RR. as the chiefe of them at Wormes is by the vulgar called Iuden Bischoff, receiuing some Iurisdiction vnder the Bishop. Next after this tryall followed Imposition of hands, called by them Semicah, which was done by some Rabbine whom they stiled Somech: neither before this Imposition might any rightly be termed Rab, Rabbi, Rabban or Gaon.Num. 27.23. Acts 8 etc. This Rite is ancient, Moses hauing vsed it to Ioshua, and the Apostles and Christian Bishops still obseruing. He was also placed in a Chaire which the Hebrewes call Cisse, whence come those Phrases, he sate in the seat of such or such a Rabbine: as of R. Iose,In Kab. 75 b. the hand being imposed, he was there (in Babylon) made Gaon, and placed in the Throne Rab Haai. To this seemes to allude the sitting in Moses Chaire. A fourth Rite was, a set forme of words, anciently these, Eni somech otheca: Thihieh Samuch: that is, I lay hand  on thee, be thou hee on whom hand is laid: or, I make thee Master, bee thou a Master. R. Iuda (whom Adrian the Emperour slue) added a fuller forme of words. This Imposition was publikely done in their Schooles where their Chaire was. This Imposition of hands (some conceiue) might not be done extra terram,The present manner of making a Rabbine. but onely in the Land of Israel: which howsoeuer it bee true or false, this is certayne that now in their Rabbinicall Creations it is omitted, as the chiefe RR. of Frankford, in their Epistle to other Iewes complaine: and therefore they ordayne, tha none in Germany bee esteemed a Morenu (our Master) without the Approbation of their Archrabbines, which keepe an Academie in Germany. None shall bee Chaber, which hath receiued Imposition of Hands out of Germany.  None Bachur till the second Yeere after his Marriage, especially if hee dwell in a place where is not an Academie, that tryall may bee had of his Life and Learning. These are three Degrees, Morenu, as a Doctor, Chaber, as a Licentiate, Bachur as a BachellourOr with vs a M^ster of Arts, Bachelour and Doctor in Diuinitie. in the Christian Vniuersities. Of the Morenu there is difference, one beeing chiefe, the rest vnder him; and these are made of the RR. and if a Rabbine will bee a Morenu, he must be examined vsually of three Morenu: But to become a Rabbine, needs no Examination, their Masters testimonie beeing sufficient, who is a Morenu, or else one chosen by the Congregation to this purpose: for one simple R. cannot make another. The place is in the Synagogue, the day commonly the Sabbath: at which time and place the Morenu standing before the Arke, or place where the Law is kept, speaking to the Assembly, saith,  that such and such haue now spent many yeeres profitably in studie of the Law, and is thought worthy of the honour of a Rabbine or a Morenu: And then cals the partie foorth
 by name, and appoints him to reade presently to the people, and then is he accounted a R. or Morenu. And if he be to trauell into any place farre distant, he carryeth the testimoniall of this Doctor of the Chaire, or Father of the Act, which conferred his degree vpon him. A Chaber is the Colleague or Companion of a Rabbine, but inferiour to him.Scal. Elench. cap. 10. For as (in Vniuersities there are Regents and Non-Regents, so a Rabbenu or Morenu, as one which actually teacheth, and as it were a Regent) is more then a Rab or Rabbi. Scaliger saith that he was not presently after this his Commencement or Proceeding intituled Master, but Chaber, which had also his Relatiue annexed, as R. Ismael Chaber of R. Eleazar: which was the same with (...) amongst the Greekes, as Speusippus, (...) Platonis: and whiles hee  was so called, he neuer sate whiles his Master sate, but was prostrate on the pauement. And when they were both Masters, the younger stood whiles the elder sate and taught, as in the Primitiue Church, the younger Bishop called the Elder Papa. Serarius and he cannot agree about these points. Elias sayth,El. Thesbi rad. Gaon and Aben. that the Doctorall Title of Gaon was giuen them for their perfection in the Talmud, for Gaon signifieth sixtie. And so many parts are there of the Misna. These Wisemen in Spaine added Aben to their Titles, as R. Abraham Aben Ezra; his Fathers name was Meir, but Aben the name of the Family. As Paul and Aquila sometimes, so many of those Iewish Masters exercised some Handicraft to sustayne themselues without trouble of others. So was R. Iose a Dresser of Leather, Nahum and Meir Scriueners, Iochanan a Shoomaker, and R. Iuda a Baker.
 Next vnto the Masters it is meet to say somewhat of the Schollers, Thalmidim. If hee were a Boy, he was called Ianik, and Katon (rather for his little Learning then age or stature) a forward Scholler was named Bechir and Bachur, in which time Scaliger affirmes (Serarius denies) that he was called by his Fathers name, his owne not added, as Ben Bethira before, after Imposition R. Iosua ben Bethira. Thalmid chabar is spoken of: Beniamin often mentions in his Iournall, the Disciples of the wise Thalmidim charam: which some thinke to be a name attributed to themselues in modestie, as the name (...) in Greeke turned to Philosophi: but generally all Students are called the Sonnes of the Wise, as sometimes the Sonnes of the Prophets. In Pirke Auoth is this speech of Bagbag: a Boy of fiue yeeres to Mikra, or the Text of Scripture; at ten yeeres to Misna; at thirteene yeeres to the Precepts; at fifteene  to the Thalmud or Gemara: As Paul sayth, He was brought vp at the feet of Gamaliel:Acts 22.3. so it was a Rule in their Pirke Auoth, Teipsum puluerisa in pedum illorum puluere, that the Student should all to bedust himselfe in the dust of his Masters feete, and with assidious diligence attend his Sayings, drinking his words with thirst. That person of whom hee hath learned but one Chapter, or Lesson, or Verse, or word, is to be had in honour. The Student is to be obsequious and seruiceable to his Master. They heard with great silence, sitting or else prostrate on the floore or pauement at the feete of the Doctor: and if at any time they stood, it was a good distance from him, for reuerence sake: yea, the Chaber durst scarce (if scarce) sit while the Rabbine sate. The Disciple (say they) must arise to his Master as farre as he can see him; and if hee doe not stand vp to him, hee is wicked, shortens his life, and forgetteth the Thalmud.  They might not reprehend their Masters, nor depart from their Assertions: and when they recited any thing which they had learned of them, they did it in their Masters name, euery way seeking to winne them credit: yea, they called him an Epicure which did sit before his Master, or citing him, did it by his bare name without some honourable Title annexed, as my Lord, or Masters, etc. excluding such out of the World to come. To conclude, this sentence of R. Eleazar ben Shamua, in their Pirke Auoth briefly expresseth these mutuall duties: Let the credit of thy Disciple bee as deare vnto thee as thine owne; and let the honour of thy companion (Chaber) bee as the feare of thy Master, and the feare of thy Master or Rabbin, as the feare of God.
As for the IewishSome say, this name Academie was so called of Cadmus, inuenter of learning and Letters in Greece: some of a god Academus, etc. Vid. Iun. de Acad. Academies, they call them Mekom thorah, the place of the Law, and  the holy Congregation of them which are occupied in the Law, and vsually Ieschibah and Methibata of sitting, for there was the Rabbinicall Chaire. It seemes, all the fortie eight Cities of the Leuites were such: and all the Schooles of the Prophets, where the Sonnes, or Scholers of the Prophets abode, as in the dayes of Samuel, Elias, etc. is mentioned. Ierusalem could not but be most eminent. And after the Babylonian Captiuitie, they had two Vniuersities famous, one Nehardea in Babylonia vpon Euphrates, by Iosephus called Nearda, the other Ierusalem, which beeing destroyed with the Citie, it was called the Vniuersitie of Israel, of which the first Rector was R. Iochanan, the second Rabban Gamaliel, the third R. Akiba: and when Adrian had forbidden all Iewes to enter the Land, it is like it was subuerted, yet after renewed, and the Rector thereof R. Iochanan the Authour of the Ierosolymitan  Thalmud, who dyed, Anno Dom. 279. In meane while two other Vniuersities were famous in Babylonia, one at Sura, and the other at Pombaditha: Betwixt which in processe
 of time grew great contentions, factions and remouings to Kamisin fiue dayes Iourney Eastward, and to Neres. That of Sura somewhat eclipsed that of Nehardeha, because there for the most part resided the Chiefe of the Iewish Captiues. These decayed, and almost vanished about Anno Dom. 668. which it seemes happened by the fatall alteration of the World in that new Saracenicall Deluge, although many Ages after, the Iewes held vp their head highest in these parts, as appeares by Beniamins Head of the Captiuitie, resident in Bagdat before mentioned. But the Iewes now dispersed, haue through the World erected in places of their abode, such Academies as they could,Tiberias of old, and Thessalonica since, are of principall note. as ye haue seene in Beniamins Relations alreadie; and Rabad mentions some in Spaine and Afrike, and some yet remayne at Constantinople, Cairo, Cracouia in Poland, Prage in Bohemia: and lately the Synagogue  of Frankford, which cals it selfe the Mother of Israel in Germany, constituted fiue, viz. Frankfort, Wormes, Fridberg, Fulda, Kinsbirg. YetBuxt de Abbr. these three are accounted the ancientest Synagogues in Germany, Spire, Wormes, Mentz; and therefore their Matrimoniall Contracts are signed with these three Letters S. W. M. if they write short, to shew that it is according to the ancient custome and constitution of Spire, Wormes and Mentz. The Iewes had Schooles wheresoeuer were any store of them, but ten (saith Rambam) was a number fit to haue a Synagogue. They call their Schoole beth Midrasch, the house of exercise, Gymnasium; the Syn^gogue Beth ceneseth, the Congregation house. Sometimes these are distinguished (for in the Synagogue they must pray for him that neeseth, in the Schoole they might not) sometimes the same; and their Synagogues in Germany are now called  Schooles. Of these are reported foure hundred eightie one in Ierusalem before the destruction. The Ruler thereof was called Archisynagogus.
As they vse to giue glorious Titles one to another, according to their supercilious Conceits of themselues, as the glorie of thy Excellence, for the second person, Thou, or the glorie of their Excellence, for they, so especially their RR. Names are not mentioned without smokie fumes of arrogance, as the glorie of our Master Doctor, etc. For an instance take these Titles giuen to the Author of the Talmudicall Lexicon Aruch in the Title thereof. Illustris Dominus R. Nathan Iustus, benedictae memoriae, filius honorificentissimi and sanctissimi Doctoris and Rabbini nostri Iechielis faustae memoriae, filij honorifice^tissimi magnificentissimi and sanctissimi Doctoris and Rabbini nostri Abrahami faustae memoriae. So vastly ambitious are their hearts, so wide gaping mouths  in their sesquipedalia and decempedalia verba haue these Thrasonical Pyrgopolyniceticall Braggadochio's after so long captiuitie, and so extreme seruitude and basenesse: that it may appeare how farre God hath forsaken them, so farre from humilitie in this humiliation, that they swell euery day into greater vanitie, as the Sunne then greatest when lowest, and bladders then biggest, when they haue nothing but wind to fill them. Euen their glorious Titles so much insisted on in this Discourse, then seeme to haue had beginning, or at least to be in greatest vse, when they were neere the end and Sun-set of their glorie, and since haue encreased to this rabble of Rabbinicall stiles here deliuered; and that which in these dayes is of greatest reckoning,Buxt. Abbr. Heb. the Title Morenu, our Doctor, hath beene hatched (saith Buxtorfius) in Germany within these two hundred yeeres, and thence passed into Italy, in imitation  of our Academicall degree of Doctors (say some) or else (as others) it was ordayned to be a speciall Title of honour, with a kind of Iurisdiction ouer other R R. to preuent their lauish loosenesse in granting Bils of Diuorce, that this power should bee appropriated to the Morenu. The first which enioyed this Title in this proper sense (for in a common it was common before, as in Rambams Moreh Nebuchim appeares) were Maharasch, and his Scholer Maharil who dyed Anno Dom. 1427.


@. IIII.  Of the Scriptures and their Interpretations.
BEfore we shake hands with the Learned Writers of the Iewes, it is not vnmeete in my opinion, heere to meete with some question which some haue mooued concerning them, and their dealing in and with the Scriptures. For since that the Councell of Trent hath decreed, in the yeere 1546. both the diuine authoritie of Scriptures Canonicall, to the Apocrypha-bookes, which the Iewes receiue not, nor euer did; and hath made the vulgar TranslationSes. 4. Iu publicis lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, aut expositionibus, pro authentica habeatur: and quod eam nemo reijcere quouis praetextu audeat vel praesumat. Authenticall in publike Lectures, Disputations, Preachings and Expositions, that none, vnder any pretence whatsoeuer, shall presume to reiect it: it is wonder to see how eagerly (that I say not impudently) diuers of them haue  sought to slander the originall Text: and haue blamed, as Authors thereof, in the New Testament, Heretikes; and in the Old, Iewes; couering their malice to vs with pretence of the
 malice of Heretikes and Iewes, and forgetting the true Rule, That it is a shame to belie the Diuell. Thus haueLib. 2. cap. 13. Canus and Pintus, and Gregorius de Valentia, Sacroboscus, and others, traduced the Iewes in this behalfe; themselues refuted by their owne (which yet by consequent ouerthrow that former Decree) Sixtus Senensis, Ribera, Cardinall Bellarmine himselfe, Andradius, Andreas, Masius, Arias Montanus, Isaac Leuita, etc. Besides, of ours many, and especially our owne learned Countrimen, Whitaker, Reynolds, Morton, etc.
Bellar. de ver. Dei lib. cap. 1.Bellarmine hath both taught vs the vanitie of their opinion, that hold, That the Scriptures were all lost in the Babylonian Captiuitie, and were by Ezra renewed miraculously (who is ratherEzra 4.14. commended for his industrie in interpreting and obseruing them, and for  ordering and compacting them in one Volume, then for such needlesse reuelation, to finde that which was neuer lost: an Author rather, asHier. Prolog. Galeat. Hierome hath obserued, of the present Hebrew Letters, then of their ancient Scriptures) and hath also prooued the absurditie of their conceit, that imagine the Hebrew Fountaines corrupted. First, byBel. ibid. cap. 2. the Argument of Origen and Hierome, That such corruption must haue beene either before or after Christ: if that; Christ would haue reproued and not commended the Scriptures to their search: if this; how commeth it, that the Testimonies, cited by him and his Apostles, are found now in Moses and the Prophets, as they were then cited? Secondly, out of Augustine, That it is not likely they would put out both their eyes (in depriuing their Scriptures of truth) that they might put out one of ours: nor was it possible that such a generall conspiracie could be  made. Thirdly, from their more then reuerent estimation of their Scriptures, for which they would die, if it were possible, an hundreth deaths, and euen still (as IsaacIsaac Leuita def heb. ver. in Epist. ded. answereth B. Lindan his Scholler) they proclaime a Fast to expiate, if by some accident that Booke but falls to the ground. Fourthly, some places in the Hebrew are more strong against the Iewes then our Translations are, and the Prophesies, which make most against them, remaine there vncorrupted. And lastly, the prouidence of GOD would neuer herein faile his Church, but hath left them, with their bookes, to bee dispersed through the world, to beare witnesse to that Truth, which they hate and persecute.
These are Bellarmines Arguments; which, because they are the Truth, are also ours: and therefore we haue beene bold with the Reader to insert them. LeuitaI.S. L^^. l. 2. addes, that the Hebrew  Texts concerning Christ, are more cleere and perspicuous then in any translation whatsoeuer: who affirmes also of himselfe, that reading the fiftie third Chapter of Esaias 1000. times (by which he was conuerted to the Christian Faith) and comparing it diligently with many translations, he found a hundred times more, touching the mysterie of Christ, in that, then in these. Many Prophesies are in the Hebrew, which make for the Christians, and yet in the 70. are omitted. The Iewes hold it a crime inexpiable to alter any thing therein, which if any (say they) should doe but in one word of ignorance, or malice, it would bring the whole world in danger of perishing. They will not lay their Bible but in a pure place, nor touch it but with pure hands, and are not religious alone, but superstitious also in respect thereto. As for that Emendation or Correction of the Scribes, which Galatinus  mentioneth, wherein they haue corrupted the Text, hee proueth it to bee a late dreame of the Talmud, and answereth the Arguments of his fellowes, herein not so Catholike as himselfe.
Now although this may seeme more then enough to conuince that folly, yet it shall not bee impertinent to adde out of Arias Montanus somewhat touching the same, because it openeth another mysterie touching the Hebrew Learning, and the Masoreth.Refort Renoldus expraes. Bibl. part. 6. Aniuerp. When the Iewes (saith he) returned into their Country after the Captiuitie threescore and ten yeeres in Babylon, it befell them partly by occasion of their long troubles, which did distract their mindes, partly by corruption of their Natiue Tongue, which was growne out of kinde, first into the Chaldee, and afterward into the Syriacke, that they neither knew nor pronounced  so well the words of the Scripture, written (as the manner was) without vowels. Whereby it came to passe, that in the writing of them there crept in some fault, either through iniurie of the Times, or by reason of troubles which fell vpon the People, or by negligence of some Scriueners. But this inconuenience was met withall afterward by most learned men, such as Esdras was, and afterward Gamaliel, Ioseus, Eleazar, and other of great name, who prouided by common trauell, with great care and industrie, that the Text of Scripture, and the true reading thereof, should bee preserued most sound and vncorrupt. And from these men, or from their instruction, being receiued and polished by their Schollers in the Ages following, there came, as wee iudge, that most profitable Treasure, which is called Masoreth, that is to say, a Deliuerie, or Traditionall, because it  doth deliuer aboundantly and faithfully all the diuers Readings that euer were of the Hebrew Bibles. Wherein there appeareth an euident token of the prouidence of GOD, for the preseruation of the sacred Bookes of Scripture whole and sound, that the
 Masoreth hath beene kept till our times these many hundred yeeres, with such care and diligence, that in sundry Copies of it, which haue beene written, no difference was euer found. And it hath beene added in all the written Bibles that are in Europe, Africke, or Asia, each of them agreeing throughly therein with other, euen as it is printed in the Venice Bibles, to the great wonder of them, who read it. Thus farre Montanus: and by this Masoreth, their Obiection of Caari, and Caaru, in the two and twentieth Psalme, is answered, in that certayne Readings haue the later and truer, as the Masoreth testifieth. Wee haue alreadie shewed, That these Masorites inuentedMart. Gram. Heb. (...). Vid. Drus. Praet. in Luc. 16.17. Phil. Ferdinand. Ait, Post euersionem templi 2. periere doctores and scientia, postea surrexerunt Tiberitae vel Majoritae, inuentaque nobis dederunt. Sic Elias in Mazoret Hamozoret. Vid. Buxdorf. Thes. Grammat. the prickes wherewith the Hebrew is now read, to supply the lacke of vowels, herein vsing religious care, lest by inuenting new Letters to that purpose, they should haue changed that ancient forme of writing, and somewhat impayred  the Maiesty thereof. They tellIsaac. Leuita defens. Heb. v. that when a certayne Rabbine had read Zacar for Zecer, he was slaine of his Scholler Ioab, for violating Scripture.
Genebrard. Chron. 4.Genebrard denying their opinion, that make Ezra or Esdras Authour of these Hebrew prickes and Accents, saith, That they were inuented after the times of Honorius the Emperour, in the yeare, after the Temple was destroyed, 436. which is (sayth hee) from Christ, 476. in Tyberias a Citie of Galilee; the chiefe Authours were Aaron, Aseries, and Iames, Sonne of Nephthali, whose dissenting one from another caused a diuision among the Iewes, the Westerne Iewes following the former, the Easterne, which dwelt in Babylonia, the later.
The Syriake Tongue some hold to haue sprung from the corruption of the Chaldee and Hebrew mixt. The Editions and Translations of the Scriptures, out of the Hebrew into  the Greeke, areBell. q. sup. c. 5 Strom. l. 1. reckoned nine, besides that which Clement Alexandrinus sayth, was before the time of Alexander, whereof Plato and the Philosophers borrowed not a little. The first (already mentioned) of the Seuentie. The second, of Aquila, first a Gentile, after a Christian, and now last a Iew, in the time of Adrian, whom Serarius thinketh to bee Onkelos, or Ankelos, Author of the Targum. The third, of Theodotian, a Marcionist, vnder Commodus. The fourth of Symmachus; first a Samaritan, and after that a Iew. Of the fift and sixt are not knowne the Authors. Of all these Origen compounded his Hexapla. The seuenth, was the correction rather then a translation. The eight was of Lucian, Priest and Martyr. The ninth of Hesychius. But the most famous and ancient, which the Spirit of GOD hath by often allegations, in some measure, confirmed, is that of the Seuentie.  
As for that conceit of the Celles, whichParan. ad Gen. Iustine sayth, were threescore and ten, in which they were diuided, and whichEpiph. de Pon. Epiphanius placeth by couples, and numbreth sixe and thirtie Celles, in which, by Miracle, these thus diuided did all agree, in words and sense.Hier. praefat. in Pentatench. Bellar. l. 2. c. 6. de verbo Dei. Vid. praefat. And. Masq. in Ios. Hierome derideth the same as a Fable, because neither Aristaeus, which then liued, nor Iosephus, doe euer mention it. Now whereas Iosephus mentioneth onely the Law translated by them; Iustinus, Irenaeus, Clemens, Eusubius, write, That they translated all. And although Aristaeus name but the Law, yet who knoweth not, that by this generall name they sometime comprehended all the Scripture, as in the New Testament is seene? as 1. Cor. 14.21. and Iohn 10.34. SomeScal. in Epist. extat. Arist. in Bibl. Patrum. accuse this Aristaeus for a Counterfeit.



CHAP. XIII. Of the Moderne Iewes Creed, or the Articles of their Faith, with their Interpretation of the same, and their Affirmatiue and Negatiue Precepts.

@. I.  Of their Creed.
STayEsay 29.9.your selues and wonder (sayth the Lord of this people:) they are blind, and make blind: they are drunken, but not with Wine: they stagger, but not by strong drinke, etc. And after, because of their Hypocrisies, And their feare toward me is taught by the Precept ofVerse 14. Men. Therefore behold, I will againe doe a maruellous worke in this People; euen a maruellous worke and a wonder: for the wisedome of their Wise-men shall perish, and the vnderstanding of their prudent men shall bee hid. This day is this Scripture (as it hath beene many Ages heretofore) fulfilled in our eyes: as  it hath appeared by our former declaration of the Talmud, and further followeth, in rehearsing the thirteene Articles of their Creed,^ux. Syn. c. 1. thus briefly expressed in their daily Prayer-bookes.


1. I Beleeue with a true and perfect Faith, that GOD is the Creator, Gouernour, and Preseruer of all Creatures, and that he hath wrought all things, worketh hitherto, and shall worke for euer.
2. I beleeue with a perfect Faith, that GOD the Creator is one, and that such an Vnitie, as is in him, can be found in none other, who alone hath beene OVR GOD, is yet, and for euer shall continue OVR GOD.
3. I beleeue with a perfect Faith, that GOD the Creator is not bodily, nor indued  with bodily properties, and that no bodily Essence can be compared to him.
4. I beleeue that GOD the Creator is the first and last, and that nothing was before him, that he shall abide the last for euer.
5. I beleeue that he alone is to be adored, and that none else may be worshipped.
6. I beleeue that all whatsoeuer the Prophts haue taught and spoken, is sincere Truth.
7. I beleeue that the Doctrine and Prophesie of MOSESHe attayned (saith R. Moses hereon) to the height of humane perfection, and is reckoned among the troope of Angels. Neither sensitiue facultie, nor appetite was amisse in him, nothing left but only Spirit and spiritual vnderstanding. The difference betweene him and other Prophets he handleth Morch. Neb. lib. 2. cap. 36. that the name of the Prophet is aequiuoce, of him and others, and his signes were of another kind then others, thereunto applying those words, Exod. 6.3 etc. They alleage foure excellencies in Moses. First, That hee prophesied not by mediation of an Angell. Secondly, Others prophesied in the night, and in dreames. The Scripture saith, God appeared in Visions: But Moses in the day, standing betweene the two Cherubims. Thirdly, Their Members were in manner disioyned, and their Minds distracted: But God spake to Moses as one doth to his friend. Fourthly, they prophesied not at their will, but when the Spirit was sent, Moses alway when hee would. Moses otherwise, Deutronomie 18.15. Acts 3.21. And Paul, Hebr. 1.1, 2. and 2.2, 3. was true; that hee was the Father and Chiefe of Wise men, that liued then, or before his time, or should be in times to come after.
8. I beleeue that all the Law, as it is this day in our hands, was so deliuered by GOD himselfe to MOSES.
9. I beleeue that the same Law is neuer to be changed, nor any other to bee giuen vs of GOD.
10. I beleeue that he knoweth and vnderstandeth all the works and thoughts of men, as it is written in the Prophet, He hath fashioned their hearts together considering all their works, Psal. 33.15.
11. I beleeue that GOD will recompence to all men their works: to all, I say, which keepe his Commandements, and will punish all Transgressers whomsoeuer.
12. I beleeue that the MESSIAS is yet to come, and although he doe long deferre his comming, yet will I hope, that he will come, wayting for him euery day, till he doth come.
13. I beleeue with a perfect Faith, that there shall be an awakening of the dead, at that time which shall seeme fit to GOD the Creator: the name of which GOD the Creator be much blessed and celebrated for euermore. AMEN.

Genebrard out of the Spanish Breuiarie hath annexed this their Creed-prayer. O GOD and King, which sitteth on the Throne of Mercies, forgiuest Iniquities, etc. O GOD  which hast taught the thirteene Articles of Faith, remember this day the Couenant of thy thirteene Properties, as thou reuealedst them to Moses in thy Law. 1. Lord, Lord. 2. Strong. 3. Mercifull. 4. Gracious. 5. Long-suffering. 6. And of great goodnesse. 7. And Truth. 8. Which keepest Mercy for thousands. 9. Which takest away the Iniquitie. 10. Transgressions. 11. And sinnes. 12. Which absoluest not. 13. But rendrest the Iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the Children to the third and fourth Generation: then follow those thirteene Articles in forme of an Hymne, with the Exposition of R. Moses: which also you may reade in the Treatise of Philip Ferdinand a Polonian Christned Iew. And hee which thus beleeueth, sayth Ferdinand, is a Iew, and as a Brother to bee loued; and though hee commit all the sinnes of the World, howsoeuer hee shall bee punished for  his sinne, yet shall he haue part in the Kingdome of Heauen, though he be reckoned among the Sinners of Israel. But he which shall ouerturne one of these Precepts, shall bee blotted out of the number of the Saints, and be reckoned an Heretike, Apostata, Epicure, worthy to bee hated of all.
This is the Iewish Faith, in which with much vexation, doubting, and lamentation, they liue and dye; vpon which, their Religion hath beene alway founded: but it was first put in writing, and brought into this Order by R. Mosche bar Maimon,Patria Cordubensis, in Egypto educatus and studijs consecratur: de quo dictum, a Mose ad Mosen non fuit sicut iste Moses. Vid. Bux. de ab. Heb. and Scal. Ep. who dyed in the yeere after their reckoning 4964. Anno Dom. 1104. and straite charge was giuen, That the

 Iewes thenceforth for euer confessing it in this Order, should according to the same, liue and dye. This their Creed, howsoeuer Charity may construe much of it to a better sense, yet according to their vnderstanding doth it principally ayme at the subuersion of Christian Religion; as appeareth in a more strait Examination, after their sense of the 2, 3, 4, and 5, the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Articles: All which make against the person or the Office of the Sonne of GOD, as they vnderstand them; denying his God-head, and disanulling his Office, affirming, as a Iew shamed not to professe and vtter vnto M. Buxdorfius, That it needed not that any should satisfie for them; for euery Fox must yeeld his owne skinne and haires to the flayer. And the Iewish Faith, saith R. Ioseph Albu, is founded vpon three foundations: vpon the vnitie of the Diuine Essence; vpon the Law of Moses, and vpon the eternall reward  of good workes, and punishment of euill, contemning the Passion of Christ,Esay 53.5, 6. by whose stripes we are healed, and on whom GOD hath laid the iniquities of vs all. It is written also in theirTract. Sanhedrin. cap. 13. Talmud, that all the Israelites haue their portion in the World to come, not all alike, but he shall haue a greater part that hath done more good workes, and the wicked and Impenitent shall be punished twelue moneths in Hell or Purgatorie, after which time they also (and some sooner, if they haue beene lesse sinners) shall haue their part, but a lesse then the former: but to them which deny GOD (which become Christians) their fore-skinne groweth againe, and as vncircumcised, eternally are punished in Hell. And the Sonne of a deceased Iew is bound to say, for the space of one yeere,See Cap. 19. a Prayer called Kiddisch, thereby to redeeme him from Purgatorie, in which respect the Father dyeth with ioy. A good  woman may doe the like for her Husband. But R. Bechai (who excludeth all other Nations from their part in the Resurrection, preferring the Iewes in a foure-fold Priuiledge, viz. the Land of Canaan, the Law, the Prophets, and the Resurrection) reciteth out of the greatTract. de nouo anno, cap. 1. Talmud, That three sorts of men shall rise againe at the Day of Iudgement: one of the best Israelites; a second sort, of the wicked and worst; the third of a meane, who haue done as much good as euill. The good shall presently goe into life eternall; the wicked shall be cast into Hell, as in the twelfth of Daniel, and shall be for euer in torments of bodie and soule. The third and meaner sort of sinners shall bee tormented for twelue moneths space for their sinnes in Hell; at the end of which time their bodies shall be consumed, and the wind shall scatter their ashes vnder the soles of the feet of the Iust, etc. and as worthily doe they proue  it out of theZach. 13.^. Prophet: And in that day two parts shall be cut off, and dye, and the third shall be left therein: and I will bring that third part thorow the fire, and will fine them as siluer is fined and will try them as Gold is tryed. And in another place,1. Sam. 2.6. The Lord killeth, and maketh aliue, bringeth downe to Hell and raiseth vp; Iust as fitly applyed, as 1. Cor. 3. and such like places by our Purgatory Spirits. R. Dauid Kimchi vpon the first Psalme, and Esay 26. commenteth, That the wicked shall not rise, but in the day of death their soule shall dye together with their bodie. And Aben Ezra in his Exposition of Dan. 12. writeth out of R. Higga^n, That many shall rise, and many not rise, but suffer euerlasting reproch; and expoundeth it thus, That the good Iewes which dye in Exile, shall rise againe when the Messias shall come, and shall liue as long as the Patriarkes before the Floud: and then they shall make merrie  with the great Fish Leuiathan, and the great Bird Ziz, and the great Oxe Behemoth,See Cap. 20. of which we shall speake after. When this is done, they shall dye, and at the last Day shall be raysed vp againe, and shall possesse eternall Life, where shall bee no eating nor drinking, but glory, etc. IacobGen. 47.30. desired to be buried in Canaan, not in Egypt, for three causes (saith R. Salomon Iarchi) because he foresaw, That of theExod. 8.17. Dust of Egypt shall bee made Lice: Secondly, because the Israelites which dye out of Canaan, shall not rise againe without much paine of their rolling thorow the deepe and hidden Vaults of the Earth: Thirdly, left the Egyptians should make an Idoll of him. For the better vnderstanding hereof, let vs heare what is said out of the Booke Tanchum (an Exposition of the Pentateuch) concerning this subiect. The Patriarkes (sayth he) desired to be buried in Canaan, because they which are  there buried, shall first rise in the time of the Messias. And R. Hananiah sayth, That they which dye out of Canaan, must endure two deaths: and the same appeareth, Ier. 20. where it is said, Pashur should go into Babel, and should there dye, and there be buried. What (quoth R. Simon) shall then all the Iust perish, which dye out of Canaan? No, but God will make themNote that the Moderne Iewes pronounce Thaulene like the Letter S. Buxtorf. in fine Bibliot. Rab. and therefore I haue followed him, in setting downe many words ending with S. which haue Thau in the Hebrew termination, as Mekillos, Lilis. So we as, hee sees, saies, ha's; forseeth, sayth, hath. Mechillos, that is, deepe Clifts and Caues vnder the Earth, by which they may passe into the Land of Promise; whither when they are come, GOD shall inspire into them the breath of life, that they may rise againe, as it is written,Ezek. 37.12. I will open your Graues, and cause you to come out of your Sepulchres, etc. The like is written in their Targum, or Chaldaean Interpretation of the Canticles: When the dead shall rise, Mount Oliuet shall cleaue asunder, and the Israelites which haue beene dead shall come out of the same, and they which haue  dyed in strange Lands, comming thither by holes vnder the Earth, shall come forth. And for this cause I my selfe (saith our Author) haue heard the Iewes say, That sometime some of
 the wealthiest and deuoutest amongst them goe into the Land of Canaan; that their bodies may there sleepe, and so be freed from this miserable passage vnder so many deepe Seas and rough Mountaynes. There be three sorts ofDrus. Praet. in Io. 5.24. and 31. men, sayth Salmanticensis in the Booke Iuchasin, which see not the face of Hell; those which are extremely poore, those which are in debt, those which are troubled with the Collicke (the Hasidaei chastised themselues tenne or twentie dayes before their death with this paine of the bowels, that so they might clense all, and goeShrew Purgatorie. pure to the other World) some adde in this exemption from Hell, or comming to Iudgement, him which had an euill Wife, and some also Magistrates. But in Pauls time, they themselues did allow (saithActs 24.15. he) a Resurrection of the dead, both of the Iust and Vniust.  They did then hold also a (...), in which sense it is likely, the Iewes thoughtMat. 16.24. Christ to be Elias, or Ieremie, or one of the Prophets: and the Disciples somewhat sowred with this Leauen, asked of the blind man,Io. 9. whether he had sinned, vnderstanding, as it seemeth, according to the Iewish Errour, when his soule had beene in some former bodie. And the Cabalisticall Authors, saythThis. rad. Gilgul. Elias Leuita, are of opinion that euery soule is three times created, they meane, it rolleth or passeth thorow three mens bodies, according to that ofIob. 33. Iob, GOD worketh all these things with a man thrice. So the soule of the first man (saith hee) rolled it selfe into the bodie of Dauid, and shall thence returne into the bodie of the Messias. So they say that the soules of Sinners passe into the bodies of beast; as if a man committeth Sodomie, his soule passeth into a Hare, because that creature is somtimes Male,  sometimes Female: the soule of the Adulterer passeth into a Camell.
Now to come from their Faith to their Workes: The wise Rabbines perswade the silly people, That they are the only Elect people of God, who easily can keepe, not the Decalogue, or ten Commandements alone, but the whole Law of Moses. They diuide the whole Law into sixe hundred and thirteene Commandements, and them againe into Precepts and Prohibitions: Of the commanding Precepts, they number two hundred fortie and eight; iust so many as (according to the Rabbines Anatomie) a man hath members in his bodie. Of the prohibiting Commandements, they reckon three hundred threescore and fiue,Rambam de praec. as many as are dayes in the yeere,Brandsp. or (as in the Booke Brandspiegel) veines in a mans bodie. Therefore if euery member of a man doe euery day performe one of the Precepts, and omit one of  the things prohibited, the whole Law of Moses shall be euery yeere, and so for euer, fulfilled. Their wise Rabbines say further, That the men only are to obserue those sixe hundred and thirteene Commandements, the women are onely subiect to the Prohibitions; yea, of those prohibitorie Mandates, onely to threescore and foure are they obliged by some, and to sixe and thirtie of the former; and this because of their other houshold-businesse, and subiection to their Imperious Husbands. Some of their deeply-wise Rabbines adde to those sixe hundred and thirteene, seuen other Commandements, making vp the number of sixe hundred and twentie; iust so many as are p Letters in the Decalogue,In decem. pra^^ sunt tot litera quot sunt praecepta in Biblijs: sc. 613 and 7. litera sunt praet^rea quae ostendunt 7. plagas quae debentur leges transgressoribus, Leuit. 26.28 Et hoc est quod dixit Moses, Ego vobis proposui vitam and mortem, id est, 613. praec. ad vitam, and septem plagas ad mortem. R. Abben Katt^n. prac. 21. and as arise of the word Keter, signifying a Crowne: for were it not for the Law, God would not haue created the World; and for the obseruation thereof it yet subsisteth. And they which keepe  all the Commandements, doe set a Crowne on the head of God, and hee vpon the head of those which crowne him, shall set seuen Crownes, and make them to inherit seuen Chambers in Paradise, and will keepe them from the seuen Infernall Dungeons, because they haue obtayned the seuen Heauens, and the seuen Earths.
Their Wise-men affirme, that euery veine of the bodie of a man doth prouoke him to omit that which is forbidden, and he which doth omit such their vaine veine-warning, hath no good veine in him: euery of his members also doe prouoke him to performe those iussory Inuentions. But as veine should I be as they, if I should not make some end, where they can find none. We would now from these generalities proceed to the particulars of their Superstitions, tracing them herein from their birth to their graues, Religion being in the pretence  of their Law, the square of all their (otherwise ciuill) actions; a^ least to speake of their Superstitions in the same. But first, seeing Sebastian Munster hath written a whole Booke, both in Hebrew and Latine, of those sixe hundred and thirteene Precepts, taken out of Moses, with the Exposition of their Rabbines, as also P. Ricius hath done, and Philip Ferdinand likewise out of Ben Kattain, I thought good to cull out some which seeme most remarkeable and strange to entertayne our Reader.




@. II. Of the negatiue Precepts expounded by thePraec. Mof. cum exp. Rab. Munster. Vide haec apud Ramb^m in fine Moreb. N. and P. Ricium. and Genebrard and R. Abben Kattani per Phil. Ferdin. Rabines.
1. THou shalt haue no strange Gods in my sight, Exod. 20. The Name of God is forbidden to be communicated to any creature.
2. Thou shalt not violateLeuit. 22.32. mine holy Name. Thou shalt not destroy a Synagogue or Temple bee it neuer so old, nor shalt blot out one of the holy names, wheresoeuer thou findest it written. The Rabbines say, If any doe against any Affirmatiue Precept, and repent, his sinne is forgiuen him: but hee which transgresseth a Negatiue Precept,  is not clensed by repentance, but it remaineth to the day of Expiation (which is the day of their solemne Fast and Reconciliation.) But hee which committeth a sinne, whereby he deserueth Death, or Excommunication, is not then purged, but must abide thereunto the diuine chastisements: and hee which violateth the Name of GOD, cannot bee absolued from that sinne but by death.
5. Thou shalt notLeuit. 19.17. hate thy brother in thy heart. He which is wronged by another, should not hate him, and hold his peace, but reproue him openly; and if hee repent, he ought not to be cruell to him: But if any be often reproued, and will not amend, it is lawfull to hate him. This ChristMatth. 5.43. confuteth.
12. NoExod. 34 14. Vid. Expositionem huius pracepti ap P. Ricium, contra Pap. quorum ipse pros^lita. Idoll as to bee adored. If a man haue a thorne in his foot, hee may not bow before  an Image to pull it out: and if money fall out of his hand, hee may not there, before an Image, stoope to take it vp, lest he might seeme to adore it, but he must sit downe on the ground to doe it. And if the water of a Fountaine be caused to passe thorow the mouth of an Image, he may not drinke thereat, lest he should seeme to kisse the Image.
22. AnExod. 20.23. Image may not bee made, viz. The Image of a man in siluer or gold, if it be embossed or set out, but if it bee stamped in metall (in manner of a seale) it is lawfull. But of Beasts, Birds, Trees, and Flowers, those prominent Images (which are made standing out) are lawfull. Otherwise of the Sunne, Moone and Starres.
45. NoDeut. 7. commoditie is to bee raised from Idols. If a tree be planted neere an Image, one may not sit vnder the shadow thereof, nor passe vnder it, if there bee any other way: and if  he must passe, it must be running. Things imployed to Idolatry, may be vsed of vs, if the Gentiles haue first prophaned them. It is not lawfull to sell them Waxe or Frankincense, especially at their Candlemasse Feast; nor bookes to vse in their seruice. Our women may not performe a Mid-wiues office to them, nor nurse their children.
65. Thou shaltExod. 20.10. doe no worke on the Seuenth day. Nothing that belongeth to the getting of Food or Rayment. It is vnlawfull to walke on the grasse, lest thou pull it vp with thy feet; or to hang any thing on the bough of a tree, lest it breake; or to eate an Apple, plucked on the Sabbath, especially if the tayle or woodden substance, whereby it groweth, be on it; or to mount on a horse, lest he bee galled; or to goe into water, lest thou wipe thy clothes: which holdeth also, if they be moystened with Wine or Oyle (but not in a woman that giueth suck, who may wipe her cloathes, for the more puritie of her prayers) The stopple  of a Vessell if it be of Hempe or Flax, may not be thrust in, though it runne, especially if any other Vessell be vnder. To mixe Mustard-seed with wine or water; to lay an Apple to the fire to roast; to wash the bodie, chiefely with hot water; to sweate; to wash the hands; to doe any thing in priuate, which may not bee publikely done: (but some say, it is lawfull priuately to rubbe off the durt with his nayles from his cloathes, which publikely hee may not:) To reade by a Light, except two reade together: To set sayle: (but if thou enter three dayes before, it is not necessarie to goe forth on the Sabbath) to be carryed in a Waggon, though a Gentile driue it: If fire happen on the Sabbath, to carrie any thing out, but thy food, rayment, and necessaries for that day, and that wherein the holy Booke lyeth: to  put to pasture Horses or Asses, coupled together: to receiue any good by the Light, or Fire, which a Gentile hath made for the Iew; (otherwise, if he did it for himselfe:) To play on any Instrument; to make a bed; to Number, Measure, Iudge, or Marry, lest they should write any thing: To reade at home, when others are at the Synagogue: To speake of buying and selling (which it seemeth they obserue not:) To visite Field or Garden: To Runne, Leape, or tell Tales, etc. All these on the Sabbath day are vnlawfull. For dangerous diseases it is lawfull to violate theImminente vitae discrimine, non modo Sabbata sed and vniuersalegis constituta praetermitterelicet fornicationis, homicidij, idolorum cultus mandatis seclusis. Ric. in hoc praec. Sabbath: Such are the three first dayes after a womans trauell, etc. But of this seeCap. 17. also the obseruation of their Sabbath. It is not lawfull to walke out of the Citie, but their limited space: but within the Citie, as farre as they will, though it bee as big as Niniuie.  
120. It is forbiddenLeuit. 22. Non facies aliquid quod causa esse potest vt retegatur nuditas mulieris: id est, velosculari, vel cum illa saltare, vel manum tangere, R. Ben. Kattan pr. 186. to hurt the Seed-members of Man or Beast. Neither Males nor Females may be gelded or spayed: and yet wee may vse such Beasts.

126. It is punishable to know, kisse, or embrace one which is forbidden by the Law, Leuit. 18. Therefore our Masters haue forbidden to smile on such, or vse any meanes or tokens of Lust. Likewise they haue forbidden men to know their Wiues in the day-time, vnlesse it bee in the darke, or vnder some Couering. The same is forbidden to a drunken man, and to him which hateth his wife, lest they get wicked Children betweene them. Also to follow a woman in the streets, but either to goe before or besides her. And hee which is not married, may not put his hand beneath his Nauell, nor touch his flesh, when he maketh water. And becauseIdem. a man may not weare Womans attire, neither may hee looke in a glasse, because that is womanish.
 138. The fat may not bee eaten. The fat of the Heart may: but not that which is on the Inwards, and Reines, and Stomake, and Guts, and Bladder; the rest may be eaten.
176. If thy Brother beeLeuit. 25.39. poore, thou mayest not abuse him; to wit, to base Offices, as to vntie the shooe, or to carrie Vessels to the Bath. Concerning liberalitieR. Leui Ex. 33. ap. Drus. praet. adrom. 5.8. to the poore, they limit it at the fift part of a mans goods; lest men should become poore by releeuing the poore.
191. Thou mayestDeut. ^3.19. not lend to an Israelite on Vsurie, nor borrow on Vsurie. Nor be a witnesse or suretie in cases of Vsurie; nor receiue any thing besides the principall, especially on any Couenant going before.
201. Hee that by constraint doth any thing worthy of Death (although hee violate the Name  of God) ought not be slaine.
213. WickedExod. 23.1. men are not competent witnesses. Hee is accounted wicked, which transgresseth any Precept, for which hee is worthy to be beaten. A Theefe and a Robber is not sufficient to bee a witnesse, after he hath made restitution: Nor a Vsurer, nor a Publicane, nor he which is enriched by play, nor Children, till they haue beards, except hee be twentie yeeres olde.
222. TheDeut. 17.17. Rex. habebit legem dupliciter: vnum librum sibi emat, alterum sibi scribat. Ph. Ferde. 500. King ought not to multiply Wiues. Our Masters say, that the King may haue eighteene Wiues.
225. If any of the seuen (Canaanitish) Nations shall come in the hands of a Iew, hee ought to slay him.
 242. The Father or the Husband may disannull the vowes of their Children or Wiues. And the Wise-men may release the vowes of those which repent of their vow. A Sonne of thirteene yeeres and a day, and a Daughter of twelue and a day (if they be out of their Parents tuition) haue power to vow.Deut. 23.3. A bastard may not marry an Israelites daughter to the tenth generation.
308. Their are fiftie defects which make a Man or Beast vncapeable of Sacred Functions; to bee either Sacrificer, or Sacrifice: fiue in the Eares, three in the eye-lids, eight in the eyes, three in the nose, sixe in the mouth, twelue in the seed-vessels, sixe in the hands and feete, and in the bodie foure, etc. Besides, there are foure-score and tenne defects in Man, which are not in a Beast. No defect, vnlesse it bee outward, maketh a  man vnfit.


@. III. Of theirPraec. Mos. cum Exp. Rah. affirmatiue Precepts.
12. EVery oneDeut. 11.19. ought to teach his Sonne the Law: Likewise his nephew; and Wisemen their Disciples: and he which is not taught it of his Father, must learne it as he can. He which teacheth another the written Law, may receiue a reward;  but not for teaching the Traditionall.
13. Rise before thineLeu. 19.32. Elder: That is, (saith R. Iosi) a Wiseman, although young in yeeres. To him thou must rise when hee is foure cubites distant; and when he is passed by, thou mayest sit downe againe.
16. The sinner must turne from hisNumb. 5.7. sinne vnto God. And being returned, he must say, I beseech thee, O Lord, I haue sinned and done wickedly before thy face: so and so haue I done, and behold, it repenteth mee of my wickednesse, I am confounded for my workes, I will doe so no more. And thus ought all to say, which offer sacrifices for sinne; and they which are condemned to death for their crimes, if they will that death doe away their offences. But hee which hath sinned against his Neighbour, ought to make restitution, and aske pardon;  otherwise his sinne is not remitted. And if his neighbour will not pardon him, let him bring three other to entreat for him: if hee then grant not, he is to bee accounted cruell. If the offended partie bee dead before, let the offender bring ten men to his Graue, and say
 before them, I haue sinned against God and this man, and let restitution bee made to his heyres.
19. PrayerDeut. 11.1. must bee vsed euery day. Therefore they of the great Synogogue, Ezra, Zerubbabel, and the rest, ordained eighteene blessings, and other prayers, to be said with euery sacrifice. They ordayned these Rites of Prayer; the eyes cast downe to the ground, the feet set together, the hands on the heart, in feare and trembling, as a seruant speaketh to his Master: a place where is no dung, especially of an Asse and a Henne; a window in the roome which looketh toward Ierusalem, turning his bodie that way. He which is blind, let him direct his heart to his Father which is in heauen.
23. The Sentence Heare Israel, etc. and another sentence is to beeDeut. 6.9. written on the posts of the House. He which hath his Phylacteries on his head and armes, and his knots on his garment,  and his Schedule on his doore, is so fenced that he cannot easily sinne.
24. Euery Israelite is bound to write for himselfe a booke of theDeut. 31.11. Law.
29. Sanctifie the Sabbath; that is, Remember those things on the Sabbath which make to the honour and holinesse of that day. And wee are perswaded that Sathan and the Diuels flie into darke mountains, abhorring the holinesse of the day; and after it is past, returne to hurt the Children of men.Citat. Drus. ex Ilmedenu. To apply spittle to the eyes is then prohibited, because it is a medicine.
40. Hee which is twentie yeeres olde and marryeth not, breaketh the Precept of increasing and multiplying: except it bee for contemplation and studie of the Law. But if hee feele in himselfe Iezer, Lust to preuaile, he must marrie, left he fall into transgression.  
52. If a man refuse to marrie the wife of his brother deceased without issue, he must by the sentence of the Iudges, pull off his shooe, which must not be made of Linnen, but of the Hide of a cleane Beast; and the woman, whiles she is yet fasting (for then it is most truely spittle) shall spit in his face, saying, So let it be done to him which will not build his brothers house.
63. Hee which will eate the flesh of Beast or Birds, must kill them after the due manner. Nor may any be allowed to be a Butcher, except hee know our Rites.
98. When the Iudges dissent in any case,Exod. 23. Vid. sup. c. 2. the greater part is to bee followed. When Sentence is past, Execution must follow the same day; and the Cryer must goe before, proclaiming the Crime and Penaltie, with the circumstances of Time, Place, and Witnesses. If any can say any thing for his innocencie, he may cause him to be carryed backe to the Iudges: if he be  led againe to death, hee must haue two Wise-men by to heare his words, that if they see cause, he may be carryed backe to the Iudges. If hee yet be found guiltie, he must be led to the place of execution, and there slaine by two Witnesses. But before his death, let them exhort him to say, Let my death bee vnto mee for the remission of all my sinnes. After this confession let them giue him a cup of Wine, with a graine of Frankinsence to drinke, that hee may be depriued of the vse of reason, and made drunke, and so slaine.
112. Honour thy Father and Mother. R. Simeon saith, That the Scripture more esteemeth the honour of Parents, then of GOD: for we are bidden honour GOD with our substance; but for thy Parents, if thou hast nothing, thou oughtest to labour in the Mill to succour them: yea, saithHiscuni ap. Drus. praet. in Mat. 15. another, thou must beg for them from doore to doore.  
132. At this time wee can sanctifie nothing, because wee haue no Temple.
I might adde diuers other things of like moment, which (to auoyd prolixitie) I omit: and for the same cause I let passe many things which I might hither bring out ofS. Munster. Euang. Matth. cum Annotat. Munster, in his notes vpon Matthew, by him set forth in Hebrew and Latine; where hee both relateth and refuteth diuers of the Iewish vanities; especially their blasphemous cauils against CHRIST.
Such is that their foolerie (by himAnnot. in Matth. 15. recited) in Matth. 15. Annotat. about their scrupulous niceties in their Festiuals: They may not then take Fish; Geese and Hennes they may: When one maketh fire, and setteth on the Pot, hee must order the stickes so vnder it, that it may not resemble a building. No more then shall be spent that day, may then bee made  readie. No Cheese may then be made, nor hearbs cut. Heat water to wash thy feet; not so for thy whole bodie. Touch not (much lesse mayest thou eate) an Egge layde on a festiuall day: yea, if it bee doubtfull whether it were then layd, and if it be mixt with others, all are prohibited. But hee which killeth a Henne, and findes Egges in the bellie, may eate them. According to the number of the three Patriarches, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, they expect a third Temple, after those two alreadie perished,In Mat. 22. interpreting the Scriptures; of the first, Hee heard mee from his holy Hill; ^f the second, ISAAC went to meditate in the field; of the third, The glory of this last house shall be greater then of the first, etc. Fit Iewish handling of the Scriptures. But I haue beene so plentifull of their barrennesse, that I feare to ouer-lade or ouer-loath the Reader.  
MunsterMunsteri tractatus Heb. and Lat. contra Iudaeos. hath likewise written seuerall small Treatises of the Faith of the Christians, and of the Faith of the Iewes, and of the Iewish Cauils against our Religion, and of diuers
 fabulous fictions which they haue deuised in disgrace thereof; they that will, may in them further see their blindnesse. For what greater blindnesse then to thinke that their Messias was borne that day the Temple was destroyed, and to remaine at Rome till that time, when hee shall say to the Pope, Let my people goe, as Moses borne so long before, at last said to Pharaoh? That he should bee anoynted by Elias? That he should destroy Rome? That Elias shall re-vnite the soule to the bodie in the Resurrection, which shall bee of all the Iust, but not of all the wicked; not in the same bodie, but another created like to the former? which resurrection shall bee effected by Messiahs prayer: That the Temple at Ierusalem shall be the very middle of the world? That in the Messiahs dayes Wheate shall grow  without renewing by Seed, as the Vine? But of these and the like, more then enough in this booke following. L. Carretus a Conuert from the Iewes, setteth downe these size,L. Carretus Iudaus conuersiu. as the maine differences betwixt them and vs. The Trinitie, the Incarnation, the manner of his comming, whether in humilitie or royaltie, the Law ceremoniall, which the Iew holdeth eternall, saluation by and for our owne workes, which the Christian ascribeth to Faith in Christ crucified, and lastly, of the time of his comming, whether past or present. To these he thinketh all other may be referred. But let vs examine the particulars.



CHAP. XIIII. Of the Iewish opinions of the Creation, their Ceremonies about the birth of a Child: Of their Circumcision, Purification and Redemption, of the first-borne, and Education of their Children.

@. I.  Of their Exposition of Scripture, a taste in Gen. 1.1.
THeir Exposition of Scripture is so absurd, that wee haue hence a manifest argument, that as they denyed the Sonne that Eternall Word and Truth, whose written word this is; so that Spirit which indited the same, the Spirit of Truth, hath put a vayle on their heart, and iustly suffered the spirit of errour to blind their eyes, that seeing they should see and not vnderstand. This will appeare generally in our ensuing Discourse; but for a taste let vs begin with the beginning of Moses, whereon R. Iacob Baal Hatturim hath left to the world these smoakie speculations.Of this their Cabalasticall interpreting Scriptures see before cap. 12. @ 2. R. Iac. B.H. in Gen. 1. vid. Ph. Ferd. The Bible beginneth with Beth, the second letter in the Alphabet, and not with  Aleph the first, because that it is the first letter of Beracha, which signifieth blessing, this of Arour, that is, a curse. Secondly, Beth signifieth two, insinuatingTwo world^ are hence gathered by the Cabalists, materiall and immateriall. vid. Reuchlin. lib. 1. I might haue added other as strange conceits of the Cabalists on these words, out of P. Ric. de cael agr. l. 4. We finde the father in Beth, the sonne in Beresheth, Bara, Elohim, the Spirit and Wisedome, etc. the two-fold Law, written and vnwritten: for Bereshith hath the letters of Barashetei, first, hee made; secondly, Lawes; thirdly, Bereshith (the first word of Genesis) hath as many letters as Aleph be Tishrei, that is, the first of Tishrei or Tisri, on which the Iewes say the world began: fourthly, Bereshith hath the letters of Baijth roshe, that is, the first Temple, which he knew the Iewes would build, and therefore created the world: fiftly, it hath the letters of Iare shabbath, that is, to keepe the Sabbath; for God created the world for the Israelites which keepe the Sabbath: sixtly, also, of Berith esh, which signifieth the Couenant of fire, to wit, Circumcision and the Law, another cause of the creation: seuenthly, likewise it hath the letters of Bara iesh, that  is, hee created as many worlds as are in the number Iesh, (that is, three hundred and ten) that the Saints mightAd possidendum Iesh. pro. 8. 21. reioyce therein. Now if I should follow them from these letters and spelling, to their mysticall sententious exposition of greater parts of the sentence, you should heare Moses tell you out of his first words that the world was created for the Talmudists, for the sixe hundred and thirteene precepts, because hee loued the Israelites more then the other people: Againe, that hee foresaw the Israelites would receiue the Law (but hee is now an Asse, saith he, which beareth Wine and drinketh water.) There are in the first verse seuen words, which signifie the seuen dayes of the weeke, seuenth yeere of rest, seuen times seuenth the Iubilee, seuentimes seuen Iubilees, seuen Heauens, seuen lands of Promise, and seuen Orbes or Planets, which caused Dauid to say, I will praise thee seuen times a day. There are 28. letters  in it, which shew the 28. times of the World, of which Salomon speaketh, Eccles. 3.1. There are in it sixe Alephs, and therefore the world shall last sixe thousand yeeres. So in the second verse, The earth was without forme and voyde, are two Alephs, which shew the world
 should bee two thousand yeeres voyde: now in the thirdLet there be light: Thus is the light darkned. verse are foure Alephs, which shew other foure thousand yeeres, two of which should bee vnder the Law, and two vnder Messias.


@. II. Their Dreames of Adam.
NOw for the first man, his body (saith R. Osia in theTract. Sanhedrin. Talmud) was made of the  earth of Babylon, his head of the land of Israel, his other members of other parts of the world. So R. Meir thought hee was compact of the earth, gathered out of the whole earth, as it is written, Thine eyes did see my substance: now it is elsewhere written,Psal. 139.16. The eyes of the Lord are ouer all the earth. There are twelue houres of the day, saith R. Aha, in the first whereof the earth of Adam, or earthly matter was gathered: in the second, the trunke of his body fashioned: in the third, his members stretched forth: in the fourth, his soule infused: in the fift, hee stood vpon his feet: in the sixt, hee gaue names to the Creatures: in the seuenth, Eue was giuen him in marriage: in the eighth, they ascended the bed two, and descended foure; in the ninth, hee receiued the Precept, which in the tenth he brake, and therefore was iudged in the eleuenth; and in the twelfth was cast out  of Paradise: as it is written, Man continued not one night in honour. The stature of Adam was from one end of the world to the other, and for his transgression, the Creator by laying on his hand lessened him: for before, faith R. Eleazar, with his head he reached (a reacher indeed) the verie firmament. His language was Syriacke or Aramitish, saith R. Iuda, and as Reschlakis addeth, the Creator shewed him all generations, and the wise-men in them. His sinne, after R. Iehuda, was heresie; R. Isaac thinketh the nourishing his fore-skin.
He knew or vsedReuchlin de Arte Cabal. l. 1. carnall filthinesse with all the beasts which GOD brought vnto him before Eue was made, as some interpret R. Eleazar, and R. Salomon: but Reuchline laboureth to purge them of that sense: who affirmeth, that hee had an Angell for his Master or Instructor: and when he was exceedingly deiected with remorse of his sinne, GOD sent the Angell  Raziel to tell him that there should be one of his progenie which should haue the foure letters of Iehouah in his name, and should expiate originall sinne. And heere was the beginning of their Cabala: and also presently hereupon did hee and Eue build an Altar, and offer sacrifice. The like offices of other Angels they mentionSo (say they) Iophiel another Angell instructed Shem, Zadkiel, Abraham, Raphael, Isaac, Peliel, Iacob, Gabriel, Ioseph, etc. vid. Rench. l. 1. and Archangeli Comment in Cabalist. Dogm. to other Patriarchs, and tell that euery three moneths are set new watches of these watchmen, yea euery three houres, yea and euery houre is some change of them. And therefore wee may haue more fauour of them in one houre then another: for they follow the disposition of the starres; so said the Angell Samael (which wrestled with him) vnto Iacob,Gen. 32.26. Let mee goe, for the day breaketh: for his power was in the night. But let me returne to Adam: of whom they further tellVictor de Carben. l. 1. c. 10. Gen. 1.27. and 5.1, 2. Leo Hebr. Dial. 3. de Amore. Rambam. Mor. Neh. l. 2. c. 3. that he was an Hermaphrodite, a man-woman, hauing both Sexes and a double bodie, the Female part ioyned at the shoulders, and backe parts to the Male, their countenances turned from  each other. This is proued by Moses his words. So GOD created man in his Image, Male and Female created hee them. And he called their name ADAM: yet after this is mention of Adams solitarinesse, and forming of Eue out of his side, that is, cutting the female part from the Male, and so fitting them to generation. Thus doth Leo Hebraus reconcile the Fable of Platoes Androgynus with Moses narration, out of which he thinketh it borrowed. For as hee telleth that Iupiter in the first forming of mankinde, made them such Androgyni, with two bodies of two sexes ioyned in the brest, diuided for their pride, the nauill still remaining as a skarre of the wound then made: so with little difference is this their interpretation of Moses.  


@. III. Of the Iewesses Conception and Trauell, and of Lilith.
WHen a Iewish womanBuxdorf. Syn. Iud. c. 2. Elias This. rad. Lilith. is great with Childe, and neare her time, her chamber is furnished with necessaries; and then some holy and deuout man (if any such may bee had) with Chalke maketh a circular line round in the chamber vpon all the walls, and writeth on the doore, and within and without on euery wall, and about  the bed in Hebrew Letters, Adam, Chaua, Chuts, Lilith or (after the Iewish pronuntiation) Lilis, that is, Adam, Eue, away hence Lilis. Hereby they signifie their desire, that if a
 woman shall bee deliuered of a sonne, GOD may one day giue him a wife like to Eue, and not a shrew like Lilis. This word Lilis is read in theJsa. 34.14. Prophet, interpreted a Skritch-Owle: but the Iewes seeme to meane by it a diuellish Spectrum in womans shape, that vseth to slay or carry away Children, which are on the eight day to be Circumcised. Elias Leuita writeth, that hee hath read, that a hundred and twentie yeeres Adam contained himselfe from his wife Eue, and in that space there came to him Diuels which conceiued of him, whence were ingendred Diuels and Spirits, Fairies and Goblins; and there were foure mothers or dammes of Diuels, Lilith, Naemah, Ogereth, and Machalath. Thus is it read in Ben Sira, when GOD had made Adam, and saw it was not good for him to bee alone,Ben. Sirah. quaest. 60. hee made him a woman of the earth, like vnto him, and called her Lilis. These disagreed for superioritie, not sufferingLucan. lib. 1. Caesarue priorem, Pompeiusue parem: Lilis (made of the same mould) would not be vnderling, and Adam would not endure her his equall. Lilis seeing no hope of agreement, vttered that sacred word IEHOVA, with the Cabalisticall interpretation thereof, and presently did flie into the Ayre. Adam playning his case, GOD sent three Angels after her, viz. Senoi, Sensenoi, Sanmangeleph, either to bring her backe, or to denounce vnto her, That a hundred of her Children should dye in a day. These ouertooke her ouer the troublesome Sea (where one day the Aegyptians should bee drowned) and did their message to her: shee refusing to obey, they threatned her drowning: but she besought them to let her alone, because shee was created to vexe and kill children on the eight day, if they were men; if women children, on the twentieth day. They neuerthelesse forcing her to goe, Lilis sware to them, That whensoeuer she should finde the name or figure of those Angels, written or painted on Schedule, Parchment, or any thing, shee would doe Infants no harme, and that she would not refuse that punishment, to lose a hundred children in a day. And accordingly a hundred of her children or young Diuels, dyed in a day. And for this cause doe they write these names on a Scroll of Parchment, and hang them on their Infants neckes. Thus farre Ben Sira.
In their Chambers alwayes is found such a scroll or painting; and the names of the Angels of Health (this office they ascribe to them) are written ouer the chamber doore. In their BookeBrandsp. Brandspiegel, Printed at Cracouia 1597. is shewed the authoritie of this Historie,  collected by their Wise-men out of those words;Gen. 1.27. Male and Female created hee them, compared with the forming of Eue of a Rib in the next Chapter, saying, That Lilis the former was diuorced from Adam for her pride, which shee conceiued, because she was made of earth, as well as hee; and GOD gaue him another, Flesh of his flesh. And concerning her, R. MosesMoreh. Neb. lib. 2. c. 31. tels that Samael the Diuell came riding vpon a Serpent, which was as bigge as a Camell, and cast water vpon her, and deceiued her.
When this Iewesse is in trauell, shee must not send for a Christian Mid-wife, except no Iewish can bee gotten: and then the Iewish women must be very thick about her, for feare of negligence or iniurie. And if she be happily deliuered of a sonne, there is exceeding ioy through all the house, and the father presently makes festiuall prouision against the Circumcision  on the eight day. In the meane time ten persons are inuited, neither more nor fewer, which are all past thirteene yeeres of age. The night after her deliuerie, seuen of the inuited parties, and some others sometimes, meet at the Child-house, and make there great cheere and sport all night, Dicing, Drinking, Fabling, so to solace the Mother, that shee should not grieue too much for the childs Circumcision.


@. IIII.  Of the Iewish manner of Circumcision.
THe Circumciser is called Mohel, who must bee a Iew, and a Man, and well exercised in that facultie: and hee that will performe this office, at the beginning giueth money to some poore Iew, to be admitted hereunto in his children, that after his better experience hee may be vsed of the richer. And this Mohel may thence-forwards bee knowne by his thumbes, on which he weareth the nayles longIn arctum acumniatos vngues. Buxd. and sharpe, and narrow-pointed. The circumcising Instruments is of stone, glasse, yron, or any matter that will cut: commonly sharpe kniues like Rasors, amongst the rich Iewes closed in siluer, and set with stones. Before the Infant be Circumcised, he must be washed and wrapped in clouts, that in the time of the Circumcision hee may lie cleane: for otherwise they  might vse no prayers ouer him. And if in the time of Circumcision (for paine) he defileth himselfe, the Mohels must suspend his praying, till he be washed and laid cleane again. This is performed commonly in the morning, while the child is fasting, to preuent much fluxe of bloud.

In the morning therefore of the eight day all things are made readie. First, are two seates placed, or one so framed, that two may sit in the same apart, adorned costly with Carpets, and that either in the Synagogue, or some priuate Parlour: If it bee in the Synagogue, then the seat is placed neere the holy Arke, or Chest, where the Booke of the Law is kept. Then comes the suretie or God-father for the child, and placeth himselfe at the said seat, and neere him the Mohel or Circumciser. Other Iewes follow them, one of which cryeth with a loud voyce, That they should bring presently whatsoeuer is needfull for this businesse. Then come other Children, whereof one bringeth a great Torch, in which are lighted twelue waxe Candles, to represent the twelue Tribes of Israel: after him two other Boyes, carrying cups full of red Wine. After them another carrieth the circumcising knife: another brings  a dish with sand; another brings another dish with Oyle; in which are cleane and fine clouts, which after the Mohel applyeth to the wounds of the child. These stand in a ring about the Mohel, the better to marke and learne: and these their Offices are bought with money by those children. Some come thither also with Spices, Cloues, Cinnamon, strong Wine to refresh, if any happen to swoune. These being thus assembled, the God-father sitteth downe vpon one of ^hose two seats: right against him the Mohel placeth himselfe, and sings theExod. 15.1. song of the Israelites, and others. Then the women bring the child to the doore, all the congregation presently rising vp. The God-father goeth to the doore, taketh the child, sitteth downe on his seat, and cryeth out, Baruch habba, that is, Blessed be hee that commeth; in their Cabalisticall sense, habba, being applyed either to the eight day, which  is the day of Circumcision, or the comming of Elias, whom they call the Angell of the Couenant, (so they interpretMal 3.1. the Prophet) and say, that Elias commeth with the Infant, and sits downe on that other emptie seat. For when the Israelites were prohibited Circumcision, and Elias complained thus,1. Reg. 19.10. The children of Israel haue forsaken the Couenant, that is, Circumcision, God promised him, That from thence-forwards hee should be present at Circumcision, to see it rightly performed. And when they make readie that seat for Elias, then they are bound in set words to say, This seat is for theNam vulgus credit eu^ adhuc viuere. Doctores opinantur anima^ eius reuersurum in aliud corpus simile. Na^ corpus eius priu^ ait R. Dauid, Malach. 23. redij^ ad terram suam, cum ascenderet ipse, videlicet omne elementum ad elementum suum, postquam vero revixerit in corpore illo mittet cum Deus ad Israelem ante diem iudicij Drus. praet. ad Io. 1. The Rabbines haue another as senselesse a dreame, that Phineas was Elias, and therfore Elias in his Thisbi gathereth that Elias liued when Iabes Gilead was destroyed Iud. 21. and was one of the Inhabitants thereof, which escaped, and after returned. Rad. Thischbi. Prophet ELIAS, otherwise (as a vnbidden ghest) he commeth not. This seat remaineth for him three whole dayes together.
Then when the God-father holdeth the child in his lap, the Mohel takes him out of his clouts; and layeth hold on his member, and holding the fore-skinne, putteth backe the top  thereof, and rubbeth the fore-skinne, so to make it haue the lesse sense of paine. Then he taketh from the Boy the circumcising-knife, and saith with a loud voyce; Blessed bee thou, O God our Lord, King of the World, which hast sanctified vs with thy Commandements, and giuen vs the Couenant of Circumcision: and whiles he thus speaketh, cuts off the fore-part of the skin, that the head of the yard may bee seene, and presently hurleth it into theThe Eastern Iewes circumcise ouer water the Inhabitants of the Citie called Mattha, Mahasi^, and Sura vse water wherein is boyled mirtle, and some kindes of spices. Altare aureum ap. Drus. Sand-dish, and restoreth his knife to the Boy againe: taketh from another a cup of Red Wine, and drinketh his mouthfull, which hee presently spitteth out on the Infant, and therewith washeth away the bloud; and if he see the child begin to faint, he spitteth out some thereof on his face. Presently he taketh the member of the child in his mouth, and suckethIf the Circumciser doe not suck in this fashion, he is degraded from his office, and if he doe not rend the skin of the yard, it is as no Circumcision. Drus. ^raet. l. 7. out the bloud, to make it stay from bleeding the sooner, and spitteth out that bloud so sucked into the other cup full of Wine, or into the dish of Sand. This hee doth at least thrice. After the bloud is  stayed, the Mohel with his sharpe-pointed thin nayles rendeth the skinne of the yard, and putteth it backe so farre, that the head thereof is bare. Hee is more painefull to the Infant, with this rending of the remaining skinne, which action is called Priah, then with the former. This being done, hee layeth the clouts (dipped in oyle aforesaid) to the wound, and bindeth them three or foure times about; and then wrappeth vp the Infant againe in his clouts. Then saith the Father of the child; Blessed bee thou, O God our Lord, King of the World, which hast sanctified vs in thy Commandements, and hast commanded vs to succeed into the Couenant of our Father ABRAHAM. To which all the Congregation answerth, As this Infant hath happily succeeded into the Couenant of our Father ABRAHAM; so happily shall hee succeed  into the possession of the Law of MOSES, into Marriage also, and other good workes. Then doth the Mohel wash his bloudie mouth and his hands. The God-father riseth with him, and standeth ouer-against him; who taking the other cup of Wine, saith a certaine prayer, and prayeth also ouer the Infant, saying; O our God, God of our Fathers, strengthen and keepe this Infant to his Father and Mother, and make that his name, in the people of Israel, may bee named (heere he first nameth the Child, calling him Isaac) ISAAC, which was the sonne of ABRAHAM. Let his Father reioyce in him that hath come out of his loynes; Let his Mother reioyce in the fruit of her wombe, as it is written,Prou. 23.25. Make glad thy Father and Mother, and her that bare thee to reioyce. And GOD saith by the Prophet,Ezech. 16.6. I passed by thee, and saw thee troden in thy bloud, and I said vnto thee, In thy bloud thou shalt liue; yea, I said vnto thee, In thy bloud  thou shalt liue. Heere the Mohel puts his finger into the other cup of Wine, wherein hee had spit the bloud, and moysteneth the Childs lippes three times with that wine, hoping, that
 according to the former sentence of the Prophet, he shall liue longer in the bloud of his Circumcision, then otherwise he should. Dauid also saith,Psal. 105.8. He is mindfull of his marueilous acts which hee hath done, and of his wonders, and the iudgements of his mouth, etc. Then hee continueth his prayer for the present assembly, and that God would giue long life to the Father and Mother of the Boy, and blesse the child. This done, he offers the blessed Cup to all the yong men, and bids them drinke. Then with the Childe (who is thus made a Iew) they returne to the Fathers house, and restore him to his Mothers armes. This last prayer he makes neere the Arke, and some of the deuouter Iewes, before and after Circumcision, take the Childe, and lay him vpon Elias pillow, that Elias may touch him.Glos. Talmud. The skinne cast into the sand, is in memorie of that promise,Gen. 32.12. I will make thy seed as the sand of the Sea; and of Balams saying,Num. 23.10. Who can number the dust of IACOB, that is, his posteritie, whose fore-skin is cast in the Sand or Dust, and because the CurseGen. 3.14. on the Serpent is thus fulfilled, Dust thou shalt eat, that is, this skin in the dust: thus to their enemie the Serpent fulfilling also that precept,Prou. 25.21. If thine enemie hunger, feed him. And by this meanes the Serpent can no more seduce this man.
If a Childe bee sicke on the eight day, they deferre Circumcision till his recouerie: they hold also the blowing of the North winde necessarie to this action, and therefore thinke that their Fathers for bare circumcision those fortie yeeres in the Wildernesse, because the North winde blew not all that time, lest it should haue blowne away the piller of smoake and fire: and besides, this winde is wholsome for wounds, which else are dangerous. But lest they should stay beyond the eighth day expecting this Northerne breath, their Talmud tels that euery day there blow foure windes, and that the North is mixed with them all, and therefore they may Circumcise euery day. If the Child dye before the eight day, he is circumcised at the graue without any prayers: but a signe is erected in memorie of him, that GOD may haue mercie vpon him, and raise him at the day of the Resurrection. In some places all the people stand, except the God-father, because it is written, All the people stood in the Couenant. But to pursue the rest of their niceties, grounded vpon such interpretations, would bee endlesse. We will follow the childe home, if you be not alreadie wearie, and see what rout is there kept.
Ten must bee the number (you haue heard) of the inuited ghests, and one or two of these  learned Rabbins, who must make a long prayer and Sermon at the table, although others meane while are more busied in tossing the cups of Wine. I was once present (saithCap. 2. pag. 94. Buxdorsius) at one of their Circumcision feasts, and one of their Rabbins preached on Pro. 3.18. Wisedome is a tree of life; but more woodden or ridiculous stuffe, I neuer heard in all my life. This feast they obserue by example of Abraham, whoGen. 21.8. made a great feast when the childe was weaned: their Kabal peruerts it, when hee was circumcised.Ph. Ferdinan. praec. 164. The Circumciser abideth sometime with the Mother, lest the bloud should againe issue from the childe. The mother keepeth within, sixe weekes, whether it bee a male or female: all which time her husband must not so much as touch her, or eate meate in the same dish with her.
If a female childThe Iewes make small accompt of women, be^ause they are not Circumcised, and because it is written, Pro. 8. O men, I call vnto you, they thinke women are not worthy of life eternall. Yet are they more eagerly zealous of their superstition then the men. Vict. Carb. lib. 1. cap. 15. bee borne, there is small solemnitie; onely at sixe weekes age, some young wenches stand about the Cradle, and lift it vp with the child in it, and name it; shee  which stands at the head, being God-mother: and after this they iunket together.


@. V. Of the Iewish Purification, Redemption, and Education.
WHen the fortie dayes are accomplished, before the wife may accompanie or haue any fellowship with her husband, shee must bee purified in cold water, and put on white and cleane garments. Their washing is with great scrupulositie, in a  common watering, or in priuate Cisternes, or Fountaines; which must bee so deepe, that they must stand vp to the necke in water: and if it bee muddie in the bottome, they must haue a square stone to stand on, that their whole feete may stand in cleere water, and that the water may passe betwixt their toes: for the least part not couered with water, would frustrate the whole action: and for this cause they lay aside all their haire-laces, neck-laces, rings: they diue vnder the water, so that no part may bee free from the same. Some Iewesse must stand by for witnesse hereof, which is twelue yeers old and a day at least.
The redeeming of the first borne.They redeeme their first-borne in this sort; when the child is one and thirtie dayes old, his Father sendeth for the PriestThere is none of them now so impudent, that dare sweare he is a true Priest or Leuite: and therefore this is but a shadow of that which it selfe was but a shadow, and now is nothing: as appeareth by their owne doubtfull Ifs that follow. Vid. Schal. Diatrib. de dec. with other friends, and sets the child on a Table before him; adding so much money, or monies-worth, as amounteth to two Florens of gold, or two  Dolars and a halfe: My wife (saith he) hath brought me forth my first-borne, and the Law
 bids me giue him to thee. Doest thou then giue me him, saith the Priest? He answereth, Yea. The Priest asketh the Mother, if she euer before had a childe, or abortion? If shee answere, No: then the Priest asketh the Father, Whether the childe or the money be dearer to him? he answereth, The childe: then doth the Priest take the money, and lay it on the head of the Infant, saying: This is a first begotten child, which God commanded should be redeemed, and now, saith hee to the childe, thou art in my power, but thy parents desire to redeeme thee; now this money shall be giuen to the Priest for thy redemption: And if I haue redeemed thee, as is right, thou shalt bee redeemed: If not, yet thou being redeemed according to the Law and custome of the Iewes, shalt grow vp to the feare of God, to marriage and good workes, Amen. If the father dye before the childe be one and thirtie dayes old, the mother  hangeth a scroll about his necke, wherein is written: This is the first-borne, and not redeemed: and this child when he commeth of age must redeeme himselfe.
The Iewish Chachamim, or Wise-men, haue left no part of life vnprouided of their superstitious care: as we haue seene concerning the birth and circumcision of their children, with the Purification of the mother, and Redemption of the first-borne. To proceed with them: they enioyne the mother, while she giueth sucke, to eate wholesome food of easie digestion, that the Infant may sucke good milke; so that the heart and stomacke be not stopped, but may come so much more easily to obtaine wisedome and vertue. For God hath great care of children, and hath therefore giuen a woman two brests, and placed them next her heart; yea, in the dangerous persecution vnder Pharaoh, Exod. 1. heeIn the booke Medrasch. caused the earth to open it  selfe, and receiue their Male children, and created therein two stones, from one of which the Infant sucked milke, and from the other honie, till they were growne, and might goe to their Parents: yea, and if you beleeue their Gemara (can you choose?) a poore Iew hauing buried his wife, and not able to hire a nurse for his childe, had his owne brests miraculously filled with milke, and became nurse himselfe. Yea, Mardochaeus (saith their Medrasch) sucked the brests of Hester, and for this cause did she, after her exaltation, so preferre him. The conclusion is, if she giue grosse food to her Infants, she shall be cast into hell. She must not go naked brested, nor too long fasting in a morning, nor carrie her Infants, or suffer them to goe or be naked, lestPsal. 121.6. the Sunne hurt them, if it bee in the day, or the Moone in the night: and that they may soone learne that the earth is filled with the Maiestie of diuine glory: and for this cause  must they beware, that they neuer goe bare-headed: for this were a signe of impudencie, and ill disposition. And as religiously they must prouide, that they be alway girded with a girdle: for the girdle distinguisheth betwixt the heart and the priuities; and in his morning prayer, he saith, Blessed be thou, O God, which girdest Israel with the girdle of strength: which, if he should not haue a girdle on, would be in vaine. Their Mothers therefore sow their girdles to their coats: with great care they auoid going bare-foot, especially in Ianuary and February.
When they can speake, they are taught sentences out of Scripture, and to salute their Parents with good-morrow, good-Sabbath, etc. and after seuen yeeres they adde the name of God, God giue you good-morrow, etc. but they must not name the name of God but in a pure place. These teach them the names of things in the vulgar, and some Hebrew names among,  that so they may not commonly be vnderstood: for pure Hebrew they cannot speake, except their most learned Rabbines onely. Their Children must not conuerse with children of Christians, and their Parents make all things in Christians odious to them, that they may season them from their child-hood with hatred of them. When they are seuen yeeres old, they learne to write and reade: and when they can reade, they learne to construe the Text of Moses in their vulgar tongue. When the Mother carrieth him first to the schoole to the Rabbi, she maketh him cakes seasoned with honie and sugar, and as this cake, so (saith she) let the Law be sweet to thy heart. Speake not vaine trifling words in the schoole, but onely the words of God. For if they so do, then the glorious Maiestie of God dwelleth in them, and delighteth it selfe with the ayre of their breath. For their breathing is yet holy, not yet  polluted with sinne: neither is heeFilius mandatorum. Bar-mitzuah, bound to obey the Commandements, till he bee thirteene yeeres old.
When he is ten yeers old, and hath now some smattering in Moses, he proceedeth to learne the Talmud: at thirteene yeeres, his Father calleth ten Iewes, and testifieth in their presence that this his sonne is now of iust age, and hath beene brought vp in their manners and customes, their daily manner of praying and blessing, and hee will not further stand charged with the sinnes of his Sonne, who is now Bar-mitzuah, and must himselfe beare this burthen.
Then in their presence hee thanketh God, that he hath discharged him from the punishment of his sonne, desiring, that his sonne by diuine grace may be long safe, and endeuour to  good workes. At the fifteenth yeere of their life, they are compelled to learne their Gemara, or the complement of their Talmud, Disputations, and subtill Decisions about the Text of
 their Talmud. And in these they spend the greatest part of their liues, seldome reading any of the Prophets, and some not in the whole space of a long life reading one Prophet through, and therefore know so little of the Mossias.
At eighteene yeeres their male children Marrie, according to their Talmud-constitution, and sometimes sooner, to auoyde fornication. Their Maydens may marrie, whenPostquam produxerit pilos, vocatur puella vsque ad sex menses integros (R. Dauid postquam germinauerint duo pili.) A principio autem diet quo sex illi menses consummati sunt and deinceps, vocatur adulta, nec sunt amplius quam sex menses inter puellam (...) and adultam (...). Drus. ex R. Mos. de Cotsi. are twelue yeeres old and a day. At twentie yeeres they may traffike, buy, sell, and circumuent all they can: for their neighbour in the Law, is (in their sense) such a Iew as you haue heard described. But because these things are ioyned together in one of their sentences or Apophthemes of the R R. called Pirke Aboth, I thought good to adde the same, as containing a mappe of  the Iewes life. A sonne of fiue yeeres to the Bible: a sonne of ten yeeres to the Mischna: a sonne of thirteene yeeres to the Precepts: a sonne of fifteene yeeres to the Thalmud: a sonne of eighteene yeeres to marriage: a sonne of twentie yeeres to follow (the affaires of the world,) a sonne of thirtie yeeres to strength: a sonne of fortie yeeres to wisedome: a sonne of fiftie yeeres to counsell: a sonne of six^ie yeeres to old age: a sonne of seuentie yeeres to gray haires: a sonne of eightie to the height: a sonne of ninetie to the graue: a sonne of one hundred yeeres is as a dead man departed out of the world.



CHAP. XV.Pirke Ab. and Fag. not. Of their Morning Prayer, with their Fringes, Phylacteries, and other Ceremonies thereof.

@. I. Of their Behauiour before they goe to the Synagogue.
 THe good-wife is to waken her Husband,Buxdorf. Syn. Iud. c. 5. Orant ter in die, and mane, and hora quarta pomeridiana, and ante cubitum. Pro Anathemate habe^t qui opus etc. sine oratione aggreditur. Ph. Ferd. praec. 89. P. Ric. praec. affirm. 19. and the Parents to awaken their Children, when after thirteene yeeres they are subiect to the Iewish Precepts: before their Penticost, they rise before it is light, and after, the nights being shorter, when it is now day. They are to awaken the day, not to tarrie till it awaken them. For their Morning-prayer must bee made whiles the Sunne is rising, and not later: for then is the time of hearing, as they interpret, Lamen. 2.19. And hee which is deuout, ought at that time to bee sad for Ierusalem, and to pray euerie morning for the re-edifying of the Temple and Citie: if in the night-time any sheddeth teares for their long captiuitie, God will heare his prayer, for then the Starres and Planets mourne with him: and if he suffer the teares to trickle downe his cheekes, God will arise and gather them into his bottle: and if any decree be by their enemies enacted against  them, with those teares he will blot out the same. WitnessePsal. 56.9. Qui pudenda sua inspe xerit, arcus seu nerui eius robur prosternetur. Ric. Epit. T. Prohibe^t etiam inspicere quadrupedes coeuntes: erigere membrum vel motu vel alio sacto; and cum acciderit inuito, conuertere cogitationem, etc. Rambam lib. 3. cap. 50. M. N. Lin^ua hebraea tam sancta est, ait ille, cap. 9. vt proprium nomen fornicationi aut membro quo committitur, non habeat. Dauid, Put my teares in thy bottle, are they not in thy booke? And if any rub his fore-head with his teares, it is good to blot out certaine sinnes that are there written. In there beginn^ng of the night, God causeth all the gates of heauen to be shut, and the Angels stay at them in silence, and sendeth euill spirits into the world, which hurt all they meet: but after mid-night, they are commanded to open the same. This command and call is heard of the Cocks, and therefore they clap their wings and crow, to awaken men: and then the euill spirits lose their power of hurting: and in this respect the Wise-men haue ordained them a thanksgiuing to be said at Cock-crowing: Blessed art thou, O God, Lord of the whole world, who hast giuen vnderstanding to the Cocke.
They must not rise vp in their beds naked, nor put on their shirts sitting, but put their heads  and armes into the same as they lye, lest the walls and beames should see their nakednesse. It is a brag of Rabbi Iose, that, in all his life, hee had not herein faulted. But to goe or stand naked in the chamber, were more then piacular: and much more, to make water standing naked before his bed, although it be night. Hee must not put on his garments wrong: nor his left shooe before the right, and yet he must put off the left foot shooe first; When he is clothed, with his head inclined to the earth, and a deuout minde (in remembrance of the destruction of the Temple) hee goeth out of the chamber, with his head, feete, and all couered, because of the holy Schechinam (diuine glorie) ouer his head. Then hee goeth to stoole in some priuie place; for so hath Amos commanded,Amos 4.12. Prepare thy selfe (O Israel) to meete thy God: and DAVID;Psal. 103.1. All that is within mee praise his holy name: That is, all within  the body emptie and cleane: For else must not God bee named; and therefore his garments must not be spotted and fouled. To restraine nature too long, were a sinne, and would cause the soule to stinke: and (sauing your reuerence) hee must wipe with the left hand,
 for with the right he writeth the name of God, and the Angels. And in this place and businesse hee must take heed, he thinke not of God or his Word; much lesse name him, for God will shorten the dayes of such a one. R. Sira told his Scholers, that the cause of his long life was, that in an impure place hee neuer though of the Word, nor named the name of God. Besides, hee must turne his face, and not his hinder-parts toward the Temple of Ierusalem. Hee ought not to touch his body with vnwashen hands, in regard of the euill spirits which rest thereon till they be washed; and if hee should touch his eyes, hee would be blinde; his eares deafe; his nose dropping, his mouth stinking, his hand scabbed with these vnwashed, and therefore venemous hands: and when hee washeth, he must powre water three times on his right hand, and as oft on the left, before one hand may touch the other: hee  must not bee sparing in his water, for store of water, store of health: after the hands, the mouth and face must bee washed, because they were created after the Image of God: and how should the name of God be vttered out of a foule mouth? hee must wash ouer a bason, not ouer the ground: he must drie his face very well, for feare of wheales and wrinkles: and that with a cleane Towel, not with his shirt, for this would make them blockish and forgetfull. After all this followeth his Brachah, or blessing, Blessed bee thou, O God, our God, King of the whole world, who hast commanded vs to wash our hands. Their hands they must alwayes wash on these occasions: in the morning; at their returne from the stoole; from bathing; when they haue cut their nayles; haue scratched their naked bodie; hauing pulled off their shooes with their hands; haue touched a dead bodie; haue gone amongst the  dead; haue companied with their wiues; or haue killed a louse; If hee respect not washing after these, if he bee learned, he shall forget his learning; if vnlearned he shall lose his sense.


@. II. Of their Zizis and Tephillim and Holy Vestments.
THeyOf the Iewes Arba-canphos, and Zizis: they call this garment Talish. vid. El. Thisb. rad. Talith. vid. R. Mos. M. N. l. 3. c. 33. haue a foure-cornered garment, which some put on with the rest, when they rise, others then, when they will pray. The foure cornered parts thereof are made of linnen silke, tyed together with two winding bands, of such length, that  they may draw through their head betwixt them, so that those two quadrangular pieces may hang downe, one on his brest, the other on his backe. In euery of those foure corners hangeth a labell, made of white woollen threds, by a little knot, downewards to the ground, and the same is foure, or eight, or twelue fingers broad. These labels they call Zizis. Those which are deuout, weare this garment euery day, vnder a long outward coat, in such sort, that those labels may appeare out a little, so that they may alwayes see them, as monitories of the Commandements of God. When they put them on, they praise God that hath commanded them to weare these Zizis. Hee (say they) that keepeth duely this PreceptNum. 15.38. Fringes and Phylacteries. of Zizis, doth as much as if hee kept the whole Law: for there are in all fiue knots, compared to the fiue bookes of Moses: eight threds added to them, make thirteene.  And the word Zizis, maketh sixe hundred, altogether amounting to sixe hunded and thirteene, the number (as you haue heard) of Gods Commandements. They ascribe the continencie of Ioseph in Potiphars house; and of Boaz, when Ruth slept by him, to the Zizis. May it please your patience, a storie out of the Talmud. One Rab. Iochanan saw a boxe full of Iewels, which one of his Schollers, Bar-Emorai purposed to steale, but was forbidden by a voyce sounding out of the ayre, Let it alone, Bar-Emorai, for it belongeth to R. Chaninas wife, which in the other world shall put into the same violet wooll, to make thred for Zizis, that of them, the iust men there may haue their fringed garments sewed. Once, hee which weareth this garment without intermission, is fortified against the Deuill, and all euill Spirits.
Of their Tephillim.Besides this memorable Vestment, they weare a certaine knot neare their nose, out of Deut. 6.8. They shall bee frontlets betweene thine eyes. They make it thus: They take a little blacke foure-square calfe-skin, which they fold eight times, that it may haue foure double folds and distinct breadths. They put into these, distinct Scriptures, the same being fourefold of parchment. These Scriptures are takenThe foureteene first verses in Exod. 13. and 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. of Deut. 6. Pagn. out of Exod. 13. and Deut. 6. Then take they haires out of a Cow or Calues tayle, and wash them cleane, and binde them about those writings of Scripture, so that any one may see, that they are good, by the ends of them appearing out of the skin. This skinne they sew with cleane and fine strings, taken out of Calues or Kines bodies, or made of Bulls sinewes, or if such strings cannot bee had, with strings of Calue-skin-parchment. Then doe they sew a long and blacke thong to that thick hide or skin, and knit a knot about it. This piece of worke they call Tephillim, to put them  in minde of often prayer: and tye it so about their heads, that the thicke knot, wherein the Scriptures are, may hang betwixt the eyes. After this, they take another foure-cornered skin,
 which they fold as the former, and write certaine verses out of Exodus in parchment, and put it into a little hollowed skinne, and sew it vpon the thicke-folded skin; to which they adde a long thong, and call it the Tephillim of the hand. This they tye to the bare skin, aboue the elbow of the left arme, that so that which is written may bee ouer-against the heart, which may hereby be the more enflamed to prayer. That long string is so fastned, that it commeth to the fore-part of the hand, thus fulfilling that Commandement,Deut. 6.6, 8. The words which I command thee this day, shall bee on thine heart, and thou shalt tye them for a signe in thy hand. They tye on first this Tephillim of the hand, and then that of the head, and make their brachah or prayer, saying; Blessed bee thou, O God, our Lord, who hast sanctified vs in thy Commandements,  and hast commanded vs to put on Tephillim; looking, while hee speaketh, diligently on the knot on his fore-head. In folding, sewing, knitting, and tying them, they verie subtilly frame the name of God Schaddai: Other their manifold ceremonies about these Tephillim, I willingly omit. Their sanctitie is such, that he which weareth them, must be pure within and without: and if hee lets them fall on the ground, all that shall see them so lying, must fast with him one whole day: they must not bee hanged vp bare, but in a bagge: nor may they be left in a chamber, where a man and his wife lye together, except in a triple chest or bagge. A man must not sleepe while he hath them on, nor may hee breake winde; and if he haue list to the stoole, he must lay them foure ells from the place of his easement, or lay them against his heart in a double bagge. Their women seruants, and sicke folkes, are free  from wearing them. It is sufficient for women to say Amen to their prayers. And all this Moses learned in Mount Sinai.


@. III. Of their Schoole or Synagogue, Rites, and their Mattins.
WEE haue beene tedious in furnishing our Iew to his Mattins; at Sun-rising is their houre, as you haue heard: but their Rabbins haue inlarged and lengthened  that time to about nine of the clocke. Where many of the Iewes liue together, they resort at a set houre to their Synagogue. Thither they must goe cheerfully: before their Synagogue they haue an Yron fastned, to make cleane their shooes, according to Salomons counsell,Eccles. 4.17. Keepe thy foote when thou goest into the house of God. He that hath Pantofles, must put them off, as it is written,Exod. 3.^. For the place where thou standest is holy ground. At the entrance in at the doore, he pronounceth some things out of Dauids Psalmes: they must enter with feare and trembling, considering whose presence it is; and for a while suspend their praying for the better attention. And euerie Iew must cast in a halfe-penie at least into the Treasurie, as it is written; I will see thy face in righteousnesse, that is, in almes, as they interpret it. In this attention they bow themselues towards the Arke, in which is the  booke of the Law, and say,Num. 24.5. How faire are thy Tents, O IACOB? and thy dwellings, O Israel? AndPsal. 5.7. I will enter into thy house in the multitude of thy mercie, I will bow downe in thy holy Temple in thy feare. And,Psal. 26.28. It seemeth 1. Cor. 11.4. that they prayed bare headed: but in the booke Musar cap. 4. It is said, a man ought to couer his head when hee prayeth, because he standeth before God with fear and trembling, and Cap. 6. he giueth a reason why a man is bare, a woman couered, because saith he, Eue first sinned. O Lord, I haue loued the habitation of thy house, and the place of the Tabernacle of thy glorie: and diuers other verses out of the Psalme. After these things they begin to pray, as is contained in their common Prayer-booke; and because these prayers are verie many, therefore they runne them ouer; hee that cannot reade, must attend and say Amen, to all their prayers. These prayers are in Hebrew rimes. Their first prayer is, The Lord of the World, which raigned before any thing was created, at that time, when according to his will they were created, was called King, to whom shall bee giuen feare and honour. He alway hath beene, is, and shall remaine in his beautie for euer. Hee is One, and besides  him there is none other, which may bee compared or associated to him, without beginning and end; with him is rule and strength. He is my GOD and my deliuerer which liueth. He is my Rocke in my need, and time of my trouble, my Banner, my Refuge; my Hereditarie portion, in that day, when I implore his helpe. Into his hands I commend my Spirit. Whether I wake or sleepe, hee is with me, therefore I will not be afraid.
This done, they say then their hundrethGrounded on Deut. 10.12. Now Israel, what doth God require of thee? they reade not Mahschoel, but Meahschoel, hee r^quireth an hundred. And in the Treatise Porta lucis, is hereof a Cabalisticall speculation, that hee which any day shall misse any of his hundreth benedictions, he shall not haue one blessing to his minde, etc. See P. Ric. de Coelest. Agric. lib 4. benedictions one after another, which are short, and twice a day repeated. First, for the washing of their hands, that if hee then forgot it, he might now in the Congregation recite it. Then for the creation of man, and for that hee was made full of holes, whereof, if one should bee stopped, he should dye: then a confession of the Resurrection: then for vnderstanding giuen to the Cocke (as you haue 
 heard) to discerne day and night a sunder, and with his crowing to awaken them; and in order, Blessed, etc. That he hath made me an Israelite or Iew, Blessed, etc. That hee hath not made me a seruant, Blessed, etc. That he hath not made me a woman (The women heere say, that he hath made me according to his will) Blessed, etc. That exalteth the lowly, Blessed, etc. That maketh the blind to see; which they should say at their first wakening, Blessed, etc. That rayseth the crooked; at his rising, Blessed, etc. That cloatheth the naked; at his apparelling, Blessed, etc. That raiseth them vp that fall, Blessed, etc. That bringeth the prisoners out of prison, Blessed, etc. That stretcheth the world vpon the waters; when hee setteth his feet on the ground, Blessed, etc. That prepareth and ordereth the goings of man; when hee goeth out of his chamber, Blessed, etc. That hath created all things necessarie to life; when he puts  on his shooes, Blessed, etc. That girded Israel with strength; his girdle, Blessed, etc. That crowneth Israel with comelinesse; when he puts on his hat, Blessed, etc. That giueth strength to the wearie. Blessed bee thou God our Lord, King of the world, who takest sleepe from mine eyes, and slumber from mine eye-lids. Then adde they two prayers to be preserued against sinnes euill spirits, and men, and all euill. After this, humbling themselues before GOD, they confesse their sinnes, and againe comfort themselues in the couenant made to Abraham, Wee are thy people, and the children of thy Couenant, etc. O happie wee! how good is our portion? how sweet is our lot? how faire is our heritage? Oh happie we, who euery morning and euening may say, Heare, Israel, The Lord our Lord is one God. Gather vs that hope in thee from the foure ends of all the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth may know that thou art  our God, etc. Our Father which art in Heauen, be mercifull vnto vs for thy names sake, which is called vpon vs: and confirme in vs that which is written,Zephan. 3.20 At that time will I bring you, and gather you, and make you for a name and praise among all the people of the earth, when I shall turne your captiuities, saith the Lord.
Then follow two short prayers for the Law giuen them. And then they goe on to the Sacrifices, which, because they cannot execute in action out of the Temple, they redeeme with words, reading the precepts concerning sacrifices, according to their times, comforting themselues with the saying of HOSE,Hos. 14.3. We will sacrifice the calues of our lippes. Then repeat they an Historie of Sacrifice, and a Prayer of the vse of the Law, and how many wayes it may bee expounded. This done, they (with a still voyce that none can heare) pray for the  re-edifying of the Temple, in these words; Let thy will bee before thy face, O GOD our Lord, Lord of our Fathers, that the holy house of thy Temple may bee restored in our dayes, and grant vs thy will in thy Law. After, rising with great ioy and clamour, they sing a prayer of prayse in hope hereof; and sitting downe againe, they reade a long prayer, gathered heere and there out of the Psalmes; and some whole Psalmes, and part of 1. Chron. 30. And lastly, the last words of Obadiah,Obad. ver. 21. The Sauiours shall ascend into Mount Sion, to iudge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdome shall bee the Lords. Which they speake in hope of the destruction of the Christians, whom they call Edomites, and of their owne restitution. (In some of their close writings, which they will not suffer to come into the hands of Christians, they say that the soule of Edom entered into the bodie of Christ, and that both hee and wee are no better  then Esau.) They proceedMonster. praecept. Mes. cum expos. Rab. singing, And God shall bee King ouer all the earth: In that day GOD shall bee one, and his name one, as it is written in thy Law, O GOD, Heare, Israel, GOD our GOD is one GOD: And these words in their next Prayer they repeat, resounding that last wordEchad. One, by the halfe or whole houre together, looking vp to Heauen: and when they come to the last letter thereof, Daleth, d. they all turne their heads to the foure corners and windes of the World, signifying that GOD is King of the whole world: hauing in the word, Echad, many superstitious subtilties; that the letter Daleth in regard of his place in the Alphabet, signifieth foure; and the word Echad contayneth in numerall letters two hundred fortie and fiue, whereunto adding three hael elohechem emes, God our Lord is true, they make vp the number of two hundred fortie and eight, and so many members there are in  mans bodie: for euerie member, a prayer secures them all. And this verse thrice recited, secureth against the ill spirit. TheyThey may not say it within foure cubits of a graue, nor in sight of an vnclean place, where dung or vrine is, except they be hardned and dryed vp, or else couered. They must not stirre their eyes, or fingers. It is a preseruation against diuels. Munster. esteeme it a holy prayer, by which miracles may bee wrought, and therefore vse it morning and euening. They haue another prayer called Schone esre, that is, eighteene, because it contayneth so many thankesgiuing, which they say twice a day, and the chiefe chanter of the Synagogue singeth it twice by himselfe. They thinke by this prayer to obtaine remission of their sinnes. They must pray it standing so, that one foot must not stand more on the ground then the other, like the Angels:Ezek. 1.7. And their foote was a right foote. When they come to those words in it, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts; they leape vp three times aloft. And hee (say their Chachamim) which speaketh a word during this prayer, shall haue burning coales giuen him to eate after his death. These eighteene  thanksgiuings, are for the eighteene bones in the chine or back-bone, which must in saying hereof be bended.

After this, followeth a prayer against the Iewes reuolted to Christianitie, and against all Christians, saying; These which are blotted out (that is reuolters) shall haue no more hope, and all vnbeleeuers shall perish in the twinkling of an eye, and all thine enemies which hate thee, O GOD, shall be destroyed, and the proud and presumptuous Kingdome shall quickly be rooted out, broken, layd euen with the ground, and at last shall vtterly perish, and thou shalt make them presently in our dayes obedient to vs. Blessed art thou God, which breakest and subduest them which are rebellious. They call the Turkish Empire the Kingdome of Ismael; the Roman, Edomiticall, proud, etc. They areTract. Sanhedrin. themselues indeed exceeding proud, impatient, and desirous of reuenge. The Talmud sayth, That the lying spirit in the mouth of  Achabs Prophets, which perswaded him to goe and fall at Ramoth Gilead, was none other but the spirit of1. Kin. 22.22. Naboth, whom hee had before flaine. AndVict. de Carben. lib. 1. cont. Iud. cap. 8. Victor Carbensis, a Christian Iew, testifieth, That there are not vnder heauen a more quarrelsome people, themselues acknowledging the Christians farre meeker then themselues: when they haue this Prouerb, that the modestie of the Christians, the wisedome and industrie of the Heathens, and faith of the Iewes, are the three pillers which sustaine the world.
But to returne to their deuotions: After those other before mentioned, followeth a prayer for the good sort, for Proselytes, reedifying of the Temple, for sending the Messias, and restauration of their Kingdome. In the end they pray GOD to keepe them in peace, and when they come to these words, Hee that makes peace aboue, shall make peace ouer all Israel, Amen:  they goe backe three paces, bow themselues downewards, bend their head on the right hand, then on the left (if some Christian bee there with an Image, they must not bow, but lift vp their heart.) This they doe for honours sake, not to turne their hinder parts on the Arke: and thus they goe (like Crabbes) out of the Synagogue, vsing certaine prayers; not running, but with a slow pace, lest they should seeme glad, that their Mattins were done.
Other their niceties in praying, as laying the right hand on the left ouer the heart;P. Ric. praec. affirmat. 19. not spetting nor breaking winde vp or downe; not (interrupted by a King) to cease prayer; to shake his bodie this way and that way; not to touch his naked bodie; and to say Amen, with all his heart: for they that say Amen, are worthie to say it in the world to come. And thereforePsal. 72.19. Dauid endeth a Psalme with Amen, Amen: signifying that one is to bee said  heere, and the other in the other world: also in a plaine eminent place, purged from all filth, freed from the sight of women, his face to the East, standing, his feet close together, fixing his eyes on the ground, eleuating the heart to heauen, etc. I hold it enough thus to mention.
Their praying to the East must be vnderstood from our Westerne parts, because Ierusalem standeth that way: for otherwise RambamMor. Neb. l. 3. cap. 64. sheweth that Abraham prayed in Mount Moriah toward the West; and the Sanctum Sanctorum was in the West, which place also Abraham set forth and determined. And because the Gentiles worshipped the Sunne toward the rising, therefore Abraham worshipped Westward, and appointed the Sanctuarie so to stand. The Talmud saith, Praying to the South bringeth wisdome; toward the North, riches.
I might heere also adde their Letanie and Commemoration of their Saints almost after  the Popish fashion. As thus for a taste. Wee haue sinned before thee, haue mercie on vs. O Lord, doe it for thy names sake, and spare Israel thy people. Lord, doe it for (Abraham) thy perfect one, and spare Israel thy people. Lord, doe it for him which was bound in thy porches, (to wit, in Mount Moriah, where the Temple was afterward builded) and spare Israel thy people. Lord, doe it for him which was heard in the ladder (Iacob) from thy high place, and spare Israel thy people. Lord, doe it for the merit of Ioseph thy holy one, etc. Lord doe it for him which was drawne out of the waters (Moses) and spare, etc. Lord, doe it for (Aaron) the Priest, with Vrim and Thummim. Lord, grant it for him that was zealous for thy name (Phineas.) Lord, doe it for the sweet Singer (Dauid.) Lord, doe it for him which built thine house. They name not any, but expresse him after this sort. And then proceed  in like manner, with the titles, attributes, and workes of GOD. Doe it for thy Name, Doe it for thy Goodnesse, for thy Couenant, thy Law, thy Glorie, etc. in seuerall versicles. And then to their Saints in a new passage. Doe it for Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Doe it for Moses and Aaron, for Dauid and Salomon (as if their combined forces should effect more then single.) Doe it for Ierusalem the holy Citie, for Sion, for the destruction of thy house, for the poore Israelites, for the bare Israelites, for the miserable Israelites, for the Widdowes and Orphans, for the sucking and wained; and if not for our sake, yet for thine owne sake. Then in another forme, Thou which hearest the poore, heare vs; thou which hearest the oppressed, heare vs: Thou which heardest Abraham, etc. With renuing a commemoration of their Saints larger then before: and (after some repeating the diuine titles) in another  tune they oppose their Saint and wicked ones together: as Remember not the lye of Achan, but remember Iosua, forgiuing him, and remember Heli and Samuel, and so on in a tedious length.




CHAP. XVI. Of their Ceremonies at home, after their returne, at their Meales and otherwise: and of their Euening Prayer.
Buxdorf c 6 7.THus haue wee seene the Iewish Mattens, which they chant, (saythRelati^n of Religion in the West. another) in a strange wilde hallowing tune, imitating sometimes Trumpets, and one ecchoing to the other, and winding vp by degrees from a soft and silent whispering, to the highest and loudest notes that their voyces will beare, with  much varietie of gesture: kneeling they vse none, no more then doe the Graecians: they burne Lampes: but for shew of Deuotion or Eleuation of Spirit, that yet in Iewes could I neuer discerne: for they are reuerend in their Synagogues, as Grammar boyes are at Schoole, when their Master is absent. In summe, their holinesse is the verie outward worke it selfe, being a brainlesse head, and a soulelesse bodie. Meanewhile, the good-wife at home, against her husbands returne, sweepeth the house, that nothing may disturbe his holy cogitations, and layeth him a booke on the Table, either the Pentateuch of Moses, or a booke of Manners, to reade therein the space of an houre, before he goeth out of the house about his businesse. This studie is required of euerie deuout Iew, eyther in his owne house, or else in their Schoole or Synagogue. And being thus come  home, they lay vp their Tephillim in a Chest, first that of the head, then that of the hand.
They account it healthfull also to eate somewhat in the morning, before they goe to worke: for whereas there are threescore and three diseases of the gall, a bit of Bread, or a draught of Wine can cure them all. About eleuen of clocke his wife hath prepared his dinner pure meates, purely dressed; but if she haue Pullen or Cattell, shee must first feed them. For it is said,Deut. 11.13. I will giue grasse in thy field for thy Cattell, and thou shalt eate and bee satisfied: you see, the Cattell are first mentioned. And to keepe such Domesticall cattell, is good in respect of the disasterous motions of the Planets, which must some way sort to effect. But if they bee studious of almes, and good works, then Saphyra Rabba the great Chancellor (some Angell) according to his office, registreth the same, and commendeth them vnto GOD,  saying; Turne away that planetarie misfortune from such a one, for hee hath done these, and these good workes. And then doth it befall some wicked man, or else some of the Cattell. Before they come to the Table, they must make tryall againe in the priuie what they can doe: for it is written,Leuit. 26.10. Thou shalt carry out the old, because of the new. Especially let there bee cleane water, wherein the houshold must first wash, then the wife, and lastly the good-man, who presently without touching or speaking ought else, might more purely giue thankes. Hee (sayth R. Iose in theTalmud. tract. Sotah. cap. 1. Talmud) that eateth with vnwashen hands, is as hee that lyeth with an Harlot, for it is written:Prou. 6.26. For the strange woman a man commeth to a morsell of bread. They must wash before meat and after, so strictly, that they may not keepe on a Ring on their finger, for feare of some vncleannesse remaining vnder it. I had rather (sayth R. Akiba) dye for thirst, then neglect this washing tradition of the Elders; when hee had onely so much  water brought him into prison, as might serue him but to one vse of washing or drinking, at his owne choyse.
On the Table cleanely spred, must bee set a whole loafe well baked, and the salt, and then the housholder or the chiefest Rabbi at Table, taketh the loafe into his hands, and in the cleanest and best baked part thereof, maketh a cut into it, and then setting it downe, and spreading his hands on it, saith, Blessed art thou Lord God, King of the world, who bringest Bread out of the earth: and then breaketh off that piece of bread which hee had cut before, and dipping it into the salt or broath, eateth it, without speaking a word; for if hee speake, he must say ouer his Grace againe: After this, hee taketh the loafe, and cutteth for the rest. Then hee taketh a cup of WineThey may not drinke any wine with the Gentiles, because it is doubtfull whether it hath beene offered to Idols or no: and though it be alleaged, that the Gentiles now doe not serue Idols, yet because it was determined by a certaine number of Rabbines, till by a Counsel of so many, that decree bee disanulled, it must stand, Elias Thys. rad. Nesech. (if they haue any) with both hands, and with the right  hand holdeth it vp a handfull higher then the Table, and looking stedfastly on the cup, saith, Blessed, etc. who hast made the fruit of the Vine. Ouer water they pronounce no blessing: and if there bee not three at least at the Table, each man must blesse for himselfe: If three or more, the rest say, Amen. Salt is religiously set on in remembrance of the Sacrifices. If when they cut, they should cut off the piece of bread, it would offend GOD. Both hands they spread ouer the loafe, in memorie of the ten Commandements, which GOD hath published concerning Wheat, of which bread is made. The bread must bee had in speciall honour, no vessell supported with it, or set vpon it: and a spiritRobin good-fellow, or the spirit of the buttery among the Iewes. Concerning Angels, it is thus writen in the booke Aboth, fol. 83. from the earth to the firmament all is ^ull of troupes and rulers, and below are many hurtfull and accusing creatures, which all haue their abode in the ayre, no place being free, of which some are for peace some for warre, some prouoke to good, some to euill, to life and death, etc. Drus. lib. 7. praet. They say the Angell Raeziel is Gods Secretarie, of which name are two Cabalisticall bookes. Elias Thys. Samael is the Diuell. Euerie one hath two Angels, one at his right hand, the other at his left. Rambam. M. N. lib. 3.23. called Nabal giueth attendance, as 
 deputed to obserue such as (through negligence) tread it vnder foote, and to bring them into pouertie: and another man (dogged by this spirit, which sought to bring him to pouertie) eating victuals one day on the grasse in the field, the spirit hoped to effect his purpose: but this deuout Iew, after he had eaten, pared away the grasse, and threw it with the crummes scattered into it, into the Sea for the fishes, and presently heard a voyce, saying; Woe is me foole, who haue attended to punish this man, and cannot haue occasion. They dreame that Elias and euerie mans proper Angell attendeth at Table, to heare what is said, if they talke of the Law; otherwise an ill Angell commeth, and causeth brawles and diseases; and in respect of these spirituall attendants, they cast not their bones beside or behind  them. They are curious not to eate flesh and fish together: but first flesh, and then scoure their teeth from the flesh, and eate a bit of bread, and drinke a draught of drinke before they eate the fish. They must not vse the same knife to meats made of milke, which they vsed in eating flesh. Milke must not stand on the table with flesh, nor touch it.
Besides the 23. Psalme set before them in the meale time, they testifie their deuotion by multitudes of new graces or thankesgiuings, if any better wine or dainties bee set before them, yea, besides the particulers of their cates, euen for euery good sent, as of Oyle, Roses, Spices, etc. and are of opinion, that to vse any thing without thankesgiuing, is to vsurpe and steale it. Let this bee spoken to the shame of many prophane Esaus with vs, that will rather sell Gods blessings for their meat, then seeke them to their meat; although in them the payment of  these by tale, and not by weight, is no better then a bead-superstition. They make a religion of leauing some leauings of their bread on theHee that leaues nothing on the Table, shall not bee prosperous. Sanhed. C. helek. table; but to leaue a knife there were dangerous, euer since that a Iew once in the rehearsing that part of their grace after meat, which concerneth the re-edifying of Ierusalem, in a deepe agonie tooke his knife so left, and thrust into his heart. This their grace is long, containing a commemoration of the benefits vouchsafed their fore-fathers, and a prayer for regranting the same to send Elias and the Messias; and that they may not be brought to begge or borrow of the Christians: and for his blessing vpon all that house, etc. whereunto is answered with a loud voyce, Amen: and they say to themselues:Psal. 39.10, 11 Feare the Lord, yee his Saints, for they that feare him, haue no want: the Lions lacke and suffer hunger, but they which seeke the Lord, shall want nothing  that is good: and while this is said, there must not a crumme bee left in their mouthes. The prayers must bee in that place where they haue eaten: or else they shall lose the benefit of buriall: and a certaine deuout Iew in the field, remembring that he had forgotten his grace, returned backe to the house, and there performing his dutie, had miraculously sent vnto him a doue of gold.
In Cities where are Synagogues, about fiue in the afternoone, theirScholae pulsator, among the Iewes, is as our Sexten. They will not admit of bels, because it is an inuention of the Christians, and because (sayth Carbensis) they are baptised: they vse this prouerbe thero^, Hee which ringeth a bell, let him fall in the dunghill, and hee which hangs on the Bel-rope, may he hang in hell. Vict. Carb. lib. 1. cap. 11. Clerke (or some such officer) goeth about, and with knocking at their doores, giues them notice of Euening prayer: thither being come, they sit downe; and say this prayer (of the first word, called Aschre.)Psal. 84 4. and 144.15. and 145.5. Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, praising thee continually, Selah. Blessed are the people that are thus, blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. I will magnifie thee, O God my  King, etc. all that 145. Psalme throughout: hee which saith this Psalme thrice a day, shall haue his portion in eternall life. Then the chiefe Chorister or Chanter singeth halfe their prayer, called Kaddesch: and then all say those eighteene prayses mentioned in Morning Prayer. Then goeth their Chorister out of his Pulpit, and kneeleth downe vpon the steps before the Arke, and falleth downe with his face on his left hand (all the people doing likewise) saying, O mercifull and gracious God, I haue sinned in thy sight, but thou art full of mercy: be mercifull vnto me, and receiue my prayer proceeding from an humble heart. Reproue mee not, O Lord, in thy wrath, nor correct mee in thine anger, and so proceedeth through that whole sixt Psalme, his countenance couered and inclined to the ground. This is done in imitationIosh 7.6. of Ioshua. Then the Praecentor or chiefe Chorister againe rising vp, saith: And we  know not what to doe, but that wee direct our eyes vnto thee. And then they say vp the other halfe of their Kaddesch, and so endeth their Euensong.
Now should they goe home, and after supper returne to performe their Night-deuotions: but because a full belly would rather be at rest, and might easily forget his dutie, after some pawse and stay, they proceed before they goe to their other taske: and in that time of pawsing betweene their vespers and nocturnes, if there bee any strife betweene any, and reconciliation cannot be made, then hee which cannot reconcile his neighbour, goeth to the common prayer-booke, and shutting it, knocketh thereon with his hand, saying, anikelao, I conclude the businesse; as if he should say, I conclude praying, till mine aduersarie be reconciled to me: vntill which thing be effected, they may not pray further: and so sometimes their  prayers are intermitted then and diuers dayes together, if one partie will be stubborne. These prayers are for substance much like the former: as against the Christians, and for their owne restitution by their Messias. They depart out of the Synagogue with repetition of those sentences mentioned in the former Chapter.

At Supper they behaue themselues as at Dinner. Going to bed, they put off the left shooe before the right; their shirt they put off, when they are couered in their beds, for feare of the walls beholding their nakednesse. Hee that maketh water naked in his chamber, shall be a poore man: and the prayer,Deut. 6.4. Heare Israel, must be his last words on his bed, and sleeping on the same, as in Psal. 4.5. Speake in your heart on your bed, and bee silent. Selah. If hee cannot by and by sleepe, he must repeat it till hee can; and so his sleepe shall prooue good ^o him. The bed must be pure: for how else should they thinke on the name of GOD? And it must be so placed, that they must lye with their heads to the South, their feet toward the North; for by this meanes they shall bee fruitfull in Male children. They haue also their Chamber Morals, instructing of duties betwixt the Man and Wife, vnmeet for sober and  chaste eares. Tis time for our Pen to sleepe with them, and end this Chapter.


CHAP. XVII. Their weekely obseruation of Times, viz. Their Mundayes and Thursdayes, and Sabbath.

@. I. Of their Mundayes and Thursdayes.  
HItherto haue wee heard of their prayers euery day obserued. They haue also their times designed to the reading of the Law. In theTract. Rabba Kama. c. 7. Talmud is reported, that Ezra in the Babylonian Captiuitie was Author vnto the Iewes of ten Commandements. First, that on the Sabbath: secondly, on Munday and Thursday, with singular solemnitie, some part of the Law should bee read: thirdly, that Thursday should be Court or Law-day for deciding controuersies: fourthly, that it should bee a day of washing, sweeping, and cleansing in honour  of the Sabbath: fiftly, that men should then eate Leekes: the sixt, that women should arise and bake their Bread so earely, that at Sunne rising they might giue a poore man a piece of bread: the seuenth, that they should for modesties sake gird their Linnen to them: the eighth, that in the Bathes they should combe and part their haires verie carefully: the ninth, about selling their commodities to Marchants, and buying womanly ornaments for the honour of their feasts, and pleasing their husbands: the last is, of cleansing after vncleane issues. Their learned men confirme this institution of Ezra, by authoritie of Scripture,Exod. 15.22. They went three dayes in the desart, and found no waters. By waters they vnderstand the Law: For so it is said, Esay 55.1. Come yee to the waters: that is, to the Law: and therefore they ought not to let three dayes passe without some solemne reading of the Law. Munday, and Thursday, are chosen to bee the dayes, because onLi. Musar. c. 4 Thursday Moses went the second time into the  Mount, and returned with the two Tables on the Munday, on which dayPrincip. sap. ap. Drus. also the Temple was destroyed, and the Law burnt.
This their deuotion is as ancient, as that Pharisee, Luke 18. I fast twice in the weeke; that whichThe deuouter Iewes fast euery Munday and Thursday. Vid. Buxdor. syn. cap. 9. and Drus. praet. in Luc. 1.8. and 18.2. the most deuout amongst them doe to this day obserue. Yea, it seemeth the deuouter sort fast foure dayes, saithLi. Musar. 26. another, on Munday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; the first for Mariners and trauellers by Sea, the next for such as passe thorow desart places, the third for Children which are troubled with the Squinancie: (of thisIn Thisb. rad. sacar. Elias Leuita testifieth, that after the beginning of the World it first assayled children, and after that, men; so that sometimes when they neezed, their spirit fled away and they dyed, whence  came that custome of saluting and praying well to menIn their Synagogues they might do this, but not in their Schooles. See c. 12. Sup. @. 3. in neezing. The strangling of Achitophel, they also interpret of this neezing farewell.) The fourth dayes fast is for Women which are with childe or giue sucke: but the Tuesday and Wednesday in likelyhood were not ordinarie, as the other. Sunday might not bee thus honoured being the Christian Sabbath; and Friday was the preparatiue to their owne. Those two dayes are generally halfe holy-dayes. Assembling earely in their Synagogues, besides their ordinarie prayers they annexe many other. Among others they vse one Prayer called Vchurachum, of miraculous effect, as appeared in Vespatians time, who committing three Ships full of Iewes, without Oare or Mariner to the wide Seas, which arriued in three seuerall regions, Louanda, Arlado, Burdeli (worke for Geographers:) Those which arriued in this last port, by tyrannicall  Edict of the King, were to be tryed whether they were true Iewes, as Hananias, Misael, and Azarias made proofe of their Religion. Whereupon three dayes being required (as
 they said Nebuchadnezzar had granted them) wherein to betake themselues to fasting and prayer: in this time of respite three deuout Iewes, Ioseph, Beniamin and Samuel, inuened each of them a prayer, which they ioyned into one, and continued in praying, the same three dayes, at the end whereof they cast themselues into the fire, and there continued till it was consumed. Hence arose this ordinance euery Munday and Thursday to vse the same prayer, which is this; And hee is mercifull, and pardoning sinne doth not destroy the sinner. Hee often turneth his anger from vs, and doth not kindle all his wrath. Thou, O my God, suffer me not to want thy mercie: let thy gentlenesse and truth keepe mee alwayes. Helpe vs, O God, our God, and gather vs from the Gentiles, etc. for their restitution, as in other their prayers and destruction of their  enemies, the Christians. After this they prostrate themselues on their faces (as before) with many other orisons to the like effect.


@. II. Of their Law-Lectures.
THeir solemne ceremonie of the Law-lecture followeth; In allThe manner of the Law-Lectures. their Synagogues they haue the fiue bookes of Moses, written in great letters on Parchments of  Calues-skins, sowed together in length, which at both ends are fastened to pieces of wood, by which the booke may be lifted and carried. This booke is kept in an Arke or Chest set in some wall of the Synagogue. Before the doores of the Arke is a hanging of Tapestrie, more or lesse precious, according to the qualitie of their Feasts, and for the most part wrought with Bird-worke. The booke is wrapped in a linnen-cloath, wrought with Hebrew words: without that, is hanged about some other cloath of Linnen, Silke, Veluet, or Gold, to which is fastened a plate of Siluer by a chayne of Gold, vpon the which is written, The crowne of the Law, or holinesse of the Lord. Then goeth one about, crying, Who will buyThe folding of the wood of Life. Gelilah etzchaijm. This is an office whereby they are authorized to handle those pieces of wood, and to open the booke of the Law. Hee which giueth most for  it, hath it: the money is reserued for the poore. The pieces of wood are called etzchaijm, tree of life, according toProu. 3.18. Salomon: Wisedome is a tree of life to them that lay holde thereon. When thePraecentor. chiefe Chanter hath taken out the booke, and goeth with it into the Pulpit, they all sing out of Num. 10.35. Arise, O Lord, and let thine enemies bee scattered, and let them that hate thee, flye before thee: And out of Esay 2.3. Many people shall goe and say, Come let vs ascend to the mount of the Lord, to the house of the God of IACOB, and hee shall teach vs his wayes, and wee will walke in his pathes; for the Law shall goe out of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Ierusalem. When this Praecentor layeth the booke on his arme, hee saith,Psal. 34.4. Magnifie the Lord with mee, and let vs exalt his name together: to which all the people answer,Psalm. 99.9. Legem legebant, primu^m Sacerdos, deinde Leuita, postrem^ Israel: nam tres erant qui eam legebant. Drus ex li. Musar. Exalt yee the Lord our God, and bow before his foot-stoole, for it is holy: exalt yee the Lord our God, and  bow to the mountaine of his holinesse, for Iehouah our God is holy. There, vpon a Table couered with silke, hee layeth downe the booke; and he which hath bought the Office, taketh from it the cloathes wherein it is wrapped. Then these two call some one of the Congregation by his owne and his Fathers name, who commeth foorth and kisseth the booke, not on the bare Parchment (for that were a sinne) but on the cloathes which couer it; and taking it by those pieces of wood, saith aloud, Praise the Lord, etc. Blessed bee thou, O Lord, who hast chosen vs before any other people, and giuen vs thy Law. Blessed bee thou, O God, the Law-giuer. Then the Praecentor readeth a Chapter out of the booke; and then hee which was called foorth, with like kissing and blessing returneth. Then another is called foorth, and doth likewise. After him another, who had need bee of strong armes: for hee lifteth vp and carrieth  this booke that all may see it, all crying, This is the Law which Moses gaue to the Israelites. This Office is called Hagbahah, and is sold as the former.Women haue a Synagogue apart from the men. The women meane-while contend amongst themselues in this Synagogue by some Lattice, to haue a sight of the Law: for the women haue a Synagogue apart seuered with Lattices, so (besides their pretence of modestie) to fulfill the saying of Zacharie,Zach. 12.2. The family of Dauid shall mourne apart, and their wiues apart, etc. If he which carrieth the booke, should stumble or fall, it were ominous, and should portend much euill. These two Officers fold vp the booke as before; and then come all and kisse the same, and then it is carried to his place with singing. After this they end their Prayers as at other times, saying, Lord, leade mee in thy righteousnesse, because of mine enemies, direct thy way before me: And, The Lord keepe my going out and comming in from henceforth  for euer. Which they also say when they goe foorth on a iourney or to worke.



@. III. Of the Iewish Sabbath.
THey prepareThis preparation or Parasceue they obserue before the Sabbath, and other feasts. Tertullian calls them caenae purae. themselues to the obseruation of their Sabbath, by diligent prouision on the Friday before night of the best meates well dressed; especially the women prouide them good Cakes. They honour the Sabbath with three bankets: first, on the Friday night when their Sabbath beginneth, another on the Sabbath day at noone: the third before sunne-set.Exod. 16.25. Eate yee it to day, to day is the Sabbath of  the Lord, to day yee shall not find it (Manna) in the field: do you not see To day thrice mentioned, and therefore by Moses owne ordaining, that Manna must so often bee eaten on the Sabbath? The richest Iewes and most learned Rabbins disdaine not some or other office, at chopping of hearbs, kindling the fire, or somewhat toward this preparation. The Table remaineth couered all that night and day. They wash, and if need bee, shaue their heads on the Friday, and very religiously cut their nayles, beginning with the fourth finger of the left hand, and next with the second, then with the fifth, thence to the third, and last to the thumbe, still leaping ouer one: in the right hand they begin with the second finger, and after proceed to the fourth, and so forth. These parings if they treade vnderfoot, it is a great sinne; but hee which burieth them, is a iust man, or which burneth them. Now must they  also whet their kniues, and put on their Sabbath-holy-day-rayment, to salute Malchah the Queene, so they terme the Sabbath. The Clarke goeth about and giueth warning of the Sabbath; and when the Sunne is now ready to set, the women light their Sabbath-Lampes in their dining roomes, and stretching out their hands toward it, say ouer a blessing. If they cannot see the Sunne, they take warning by the Hennes flying to roost. The cause why the women now and at other feasts light the Lampes, is Magistrally determined by theOrach. chaijm. cap. 2. Rabbins, because Eue caused her husband to sinne, yea, with a cudgell belaboured him, and compelled him to eate, which they gather out of his words,Gen. 3.12. The Woman gaue mee of the tree (to wit, a sound rib-rosting) and I did eate. Now after they had eaten, the sunne which before shined, as it shall doe in the other life, diminished his light, and for dimming that  light, shee lightens this. And for three causes (you shall beleeue theirDe Sab. c. 21. Talmud) women dye in trauell; for forgetting their dough wherewith to make Cakes with Oyle, Exod. 25. for neglecting their termes; and not lighting the Sabbath-Lampes which their Cabalists gather out of three letters of the name of Eue or Chauah. These lights are two or more, according to condition of the roome.
They begin their Sabbath thus soone, and end it also later then the iust time, in commiseration of the Purgatory-soules, which begin and end with them this Sabbaths-rest, being the whole weeke besides tormented in that fire. Iudas himselfe, in honour of the Christian Sabbath, from Saturday Eeuen-song obtained like priuiledge: witnesse Saint Brandon in the Legend (can you refuse him?) who found him cooling himselfe in the Sea, sitting vpon a stone which hee had sometime remoued out of a place, where it was needlesse, into  the high-way. (So meritorious euen in Iudas is any the least good worke.)Like to this is the storie of Turnus and R. Akiba in the Talmud. Tract. Sanhed. cap. 7. There did Iudas acquaint Brandon with this Sunday-refreshing of the hellish prisoners, and desired his holy company to scarre away the diuels, when they should after Sunday Eeuen-song come to fetch him ag^ine, which for that time Brandon granted and performed.
The Iewes will ^ot quite emptie any place of water, that on the Sabbath these fierie soules may finde where to coole them. Two Angels attend them home from the Synagogue, one good, and the other euill, which if they finde all things well, that is, Iewishly prepared for the Sabbaths honor, the good Angell saith, It shall be so the next Sabbath, and the euill Angell (will he, nill he) answereth, Amen. If otherwise, the good Angell is forced to say Amen  to the euill Angels denunciation of the contrary. They feast it with much ceremonie, pronouncing their blessing on the wine: with looking on the Lampe, to repaire that fiftieth part of their eye-sight, which they say in the weeke time ordinarily is wasted: they couer the bread meane-while, that it should not see the shame thereof, in that the Wine is blessed, for the Sabbaths vse before it. This good cheare on the Sabbath is of such consequence, that for this cause in theirDe Sab. c. 16. Talmud is reported, that a Butcher in Cyprus, which still reserued his best meates for the Sabbath, grew by Diuine reward so rich, that his Table and all his Table-furniture were of gold. You may receiue with like credite the Legend of Ioseph following, who buying continually the best Fish, to honour the Sabbath with it, found in the belly of one of these Sabbath-fishes, a Hat-band of Pearles, worth no lesse then a  Kingdome. The Table remaineth spred till the next night. The Lampes must not bee put out, nor the light thereof applyed to the killing of fleas, to reading or writing, etc. The good
 man must honour that night with more kindnesse to his wife, then on other nights: therefore eate they Leekes before: Therefore also they marry on the Sabbath: and the children, then conceiued, must needes beDicunt cabalistae. quod qui vxorem suam cognoscit in media nocte noctis Veneris adueniente Sabbato, and non aliter, prospera erit ei generatio: tales n, nunquam caerebunt haerede, and bonos procreabunt filios: and tales dicuntur Eunuchi, quibus Deus etiam dat bona temporalia: quia sicut tunc Tipheret copulatur vxori Malcut, ratione Sobbati sic vir tunc de influxis Tipheret participabit. Archang. in Cabal, quem consule de Tiphereth and Malch. pag. 769. wise and fortunate. If a Iew trauell, and on Friday Eeuening be further from his home, then a Sabbaths-dayes-iourney, he must there abide, be it in the midst of a Wood or Wildernes till the Sabbath be past. They sleepe longer on the Sabbath morning; so with their greater pleasure to honour it. They then vse more prayers in their Synagogues; and reade seuen Lectures of the Law. They now also reade the Prophets. They stay here till noone, and no longer, lest by longer fasting and praying they should breake the Propheticall commandement,Esa. 58.13. Thou shalt call my Sabbath a delight. After dinner also they reade in their Law: forMinhagam. Pag. 13. on a time, the Sabbath and the Law put vp their complaints to God for want of a companion and learner, and the Israelites were giuen as a companion to the Sabbath, and on the Sabbath a learner of the Law. But for all this they talke not more busily all the weeke through of Vsurie, buying and selling, then on the Sabbath, and haue their trickes to deceiue God Almighty. Their Eeuen-song they haue soone done, that they might returne, and while the day yet lasteth, make an end of their third banquet, by which they are secured against Hell, and against Gog and Magog: They conclude it with blessings and singings, till it bee late, to prolong the returne of the soules into Hell: for presently after they haue ended, there is proclamation through hell, to recall them to their dungeons. In these Songs they call vpon Elias to come; so iustly are they deluded, who scoffingly imputed vntoMath. 27.47. Christ the calling of Elias. But their Elias being busie (as he sometime said of Ahabs Baal) and not comming, then they request him to come the next Sabbath. But he (it seemeth) is loth to leaue his place vnder the Tree of life in Paradise: where he standeth (say they) enrolling their good workes in the keeping of the Sabbath. When this their deuotion is done, the women in haste run to draw water, because the Fountaine of Mirriam, Num. 20. flowing into the Sea of Tiberias, doth from thence emptie it selfe in the end of the Sabbath into all Fountaines, and is very medicinable. After this doe the Iewes make a diuision betweene the Sabbath and the new weeke. The Householder lighteth a great Candle, called, The Candle of Distinction: at whose light he vieweth his walls,This holy wine they sprinkle about their houses and themselues, as effectuall against diseases and diuels. blesseth a cup of Wine, and a little siluer boxe full of sweet spices; powreth a  little of the Wine on the ground, and applieth the boxe to euery ones nose to smell to, thus to remedie the stinke, which is caused at the new opening of hell for the returne of the soules: or else to keepe them from swowning at the departure of one of their soules. For they are of opinion, that themselues haue a superfluous Sabbatharie soule, which on that day is plentifully sent into them, to in large their heart, and to expell care and sorrow. Antonius Margarita affirmeth, that they dreame of three soules in each man, besides the Sabbatharie soule, two of which leaue him in his sleepe; one mounting to Heauen, where it learneth things to come; the other called brutish, contemplating sinne and vanitie. The viewing of their nailes at the candle, is in remembrance of Adams nakednesse, all sauing where the nailes couered his fingers and toes ends. The wine they powre  on the ground, to refresh Corah and his complices vnder the ground.
For their Sabbath-workes they are determined Rabbinically: a horse may haue a halter, or a bridle to leade, but not a saddle to lade him: and he that leadeth him, must not let it hang so loose, that it may seeme he rather carrieth it, then leadeth the horse: A Henne may not weare her hose sewed about her legge, but this marke must on friday be taken off. And if any cattell fall into a pit, yet may they not helpe it out on the Sabbath: so spitefully haue their Talmudicall Rabbins, endeuoured to make (where they could not finde) a falshood in theMa^h. 12 11. wordes of Christ, testifying the contrary: But from the beginning it was not thus. The Iew may not milke his cattell, nor eate of the milke when he hath procured a Christian to milke them, except he first buy it but at his owne price. A Taylor may not  weare a needle sticking on his garment. The lame may vse a staffe: the blind may not. Clogges or Pattens to keepe them out of the durt they may not burthen themselues with. It is lawfull to carrie a plaister on their sores, but if it fallIob. 9 they accused Christ for anointing the eyes of the blinde, etc. yet they except the danger of life. Thanchuma 8.1. and. Imeden. fol. 41. Aquiba saith, one may raise the dead by Necromancie except on the Sabbath, and Misuoth. 100. he determineth a Sabbath iourney out of towne (for wi^hin though as wide as Niniue it had none) at 2000. cubites, which there is a measured mile. off, they may not lay it on againe; nor may they binde vp a wound a new; nor carry money in their purses or garments; nor rubbe their durtie shooes against the ground, though they may wipe it off against a wall; nor wipe their hands, fouled with durt on a Towell, but with a Cowes or Horse-taile they may doe it. If a Flea bite, hee may remoue it, but not kill it; a Lowse hee may. But their Doctors disagree in this lowsie question: for R. Eluzer saith, One may as well kill a Camell. If a FileV ct. Caro^ns. l. 1. light on meate, or a Spider runne thereon, it may not bee remoued: they will let men take their money vpon  pawnes, but not deliuer it themselues; as the Franciscan hath his boy to take your almes, which his vow will not suffer his holy fingers to touch. He must take heede of leauing more corne to fowles that day then they shall eate, if it be in an open place, lest it may
 there grow, and hee be said to sowe corne on the Sabbath. To whistle a tune with his mouth, or play it on a instrument, is vnlawfull; as also to knocke with the ring or hammer of a doore, and therefore the Clarke knocks with his hand when he calleth them to the Synagogue. To knocke on a Table to still a childe; to draw a Letter in dust or ashes, or a moystned Table, is vnlawfull; in the ayre not so. Of these Sabbath-labours they haue nine and thirtie chiefe Articles: whereto the smaller (as these) are referred, with much ridiculous nicetie, as the first Article is of tilling ground, wherein is reserued digging, filling vp ditches, etc. and to this, going ouer a fallow, rubbing his durtie shooe on the ground, etc. Tis time this ditch be now filled, and wee proceed further.  



CHAP. XVIII. The Jewish Passe-ouer, as they now obserue it, and other their Feasts and Fasts.

@. I. Of their Passe-ouer.
Buxdorf. Syn. Iud.OF the Iewish Feasts, as they were celebrated before the comming of Christ,  wee haue alreadie spoken. In these dayes they blindly and stubbornly persist in like Obseruation of times, though with some variation of ceremonie. Their Talmud reckoneth foure New-yeeres dayes; oneOf their Tekuphas see sup. c. 4. in March, and another in September, whereof wee haue spoken. The first of August beginneth their yeere of breeding Cattell, accounting from thence their time of Tything. In Ianuarie the first, or, as R. Hillel would haue it, the fifteenth began their new yeere for Trees, in reckoning the time of lawfulnesse to eate or tythe their fruit. Their moneths and moueable feasts are guided by the Moone: of which they tellScal. Em. Tem. l. 7. p. 592. this storie; The Moone, say they, expostulated with God, because the Sunne shined with her, whereas  no Kingdome could endure a partner: whereat God being angry, darkened her light, that from the fourth day wherein shee was created, till man was made on the sixth, she shined not. Hence it comes to passe, that at the change in two dayes space she is neuer seene. This is the Rabbinicall custome, if they cannot vntie the knot, they haue (not a cutting-sword, as Alexander for that Gordian) but some leaden Legend or fable Rabbinic-all-ly to determine it. Hieronimus a s. Fide (who about two hundred yeeres since was the Popes Physician, and turned from Iudaisme to Christianitie) thus relateth it: The Moone, before equall with the Sunne, expostulated with God for the reason aboue recited, and therefore was commanded to goe lessen her selfe. Shee (like some shrewish Iewesse) replyed, she had wrong, and had spoken but reason: hee to satisfie her, said, the Sunne should not shine by  night, and yet should she appeare in the day. What, saith she, is a candle before the Sunne? He then promised, that his people Israel should obserue their solemne festiuals, according to her designement. But when all this would not content her, as yeelding himselfe guiltie, hee enioyned a peculiar meate-offering euery New-Moone, for indulgence of that sinne. Thus doe they both dreame ridiculously, and blaspheme also beyond all names of impietie, in their Talmudicall Tract Holyn. And this they prooue out of Num. 18. as truely, as in another place out of Esa. 40. that God hauing polluted himselfe with burying of Moses, purged himselfe with fire; the water not being sufficient thereto.
TheTheir order of celebrating the Passe-ouer at this day. richer Iewes prepare thirtie dayes before for their Passe-ouer (dentem non mentem) good Wheate for their vnleauened Cakes. The Sabbath before the Passe-ouer is solemne  and sacred, wherein they haue a Sermon concerning the Paschall Lambe. Two or three dayes before the Passe-ouer, they scowre their houshold implements of Wood and Mettall, with much curiositie and varietie of Rites. For hee that in this Feast vseth an impure vessell, is as he that hath layne by an vncleane woman. The night before the Feast, the good-man of the house with a Waxe Candle, a Dish, and Wing, beginneth his search for vnleauened bread; and with other men or boyes to helpe him, after their Amen to his blessing, with Waxe Candles in their hands, they leaue not aThus curious were the Roman women in the tites of Bana Dea, not leauing a Mouse-hole vnsearched, lest some male Mouse might marre the solemnitie, Mouse-hole vnsearched, and hide that bread which they meane to eate that night, lest they should finde that, and bee forced to burne it. That which they finde, they curiously couer, lest some Mouse by carrying it, should make them haue new worke: and for this cause suppe also in a corner,  with great care that nothing fall to the ground. When hee hath ended his search, Whatsoeuer Leauen (saith hee) is vnder mine hands, which I haue not seene, let it bee tossed too
 and fro, like the dust of the earth. In the morning they make their vnleauened Cakes of meale, grownd three dayes at least. The kneading-trough must bee lined with Linnen, lest some of the leauened Meale should cleaue thereto, the goodman himselfe must draw the liquor that it is kneaded with, and that at Sunne-setting. The Cakes are made with as much scruple, round, and pricked full of holes in a cold place, etc. to keepe them from leauening. They eate little, and the first-borne nothing, till night, that then they may haue the better Paschall-stomacke. At the Eeuen-song they obserue much-what the same ceremonies, as at the Sabbath. They make at home the fairest shew of their plate, and riches, and seate themselues on Chaires (as it were) of State, and account now of themselues as great Lords, triumphing ouer  their late Aegyptian seruitude; at their returne from the Synagogue, they haue a Dish with three Cakes set before them, representing the high Priest, the Tribe of Leui, and the people of Israel: another Dish hath in it a loine of Lambe or Kidde, with a hard Egge: another containeth a Gallimawfrey of Apples, Nuts, Figges, Almonds, etc. dressed with Wine in Bricke-fashion (with Cinamon strewed on it, in remembrance of the Aegyptian Fornace.) They haue also a Sallet of hearbs, and a Sawcer of Vineger set on the Table. Then sit they downe, and euery one (to the child in the Cradle) hath his cup filled with wine. And here with a carowse after a blessing begins the feast, with a scrupulous vse of these things mentioned: then followeth the supper it selfe, with much riot till midnight, with such cheere as they haue, with diuers ceremonies, cursing their enemies, calling for Elias, praying for the reedifying  of the Temple; vsing many Diuine Attributes, as, Mercifull God, Great God, Bountifull God, High God, Faire God, Sweet God, Mightie God, and God of the Iewes, now build thy Temple shortly, very soone, very soone, in our dayes, very soone, very soone. Now build, now build, now build, now build, now build thy Temple quickly: Strong God, liuing God, etc. ouer and ouer with such bartologies. This night they thinke themselus secure against men and Diuels; they leaue their doores open all night to entertaine Elias; and one to their solace playeth Elias in a white linnen garment. Each man drinketh foure cups full of the blessedHac nocte pas. legunt historiam de exitu Aeg. and bibunt 4 Cyathos vini, and post coenam frangunt panem, and dant partem suam vnicuique in mensacum tantasanctitate ac si ipsum Pascha mactassent Phil. Ferdinand. praec. 19. wine, in regard of foure deliuerances, which the Rabbins finde in Exod. 6. ver. 6, 7. The ceremonies of Moses they are not yet tyed to (forsooth) because they are not in Canaan.
 In the morning they visit the Synagogue with their Sabbath-rites. They bring two Bookes out of the Arke, and call forth fiue men (and if this feast be on the Sabbath, seuen) to reade out of the same. Nice are their determinations what workes they may doe on this day, and what not: they may dresse no more meat then is this day eaten. If they beate spice, the morter must lie side-wise, for distinctions sake of the day, etc. fasting and weeping must be auoided; if any farse a Hen, the needle must be threeded the day before, and the threed must be burned, not bitten or broken asunder. In such trifles the Schoole of Schammai licenseth to eate the same day an Egge laide on a festiuall day. Hillel denies it, and betwixt them they haue set the Rabbins by the eares, in this and such profane questions. Their Eeuensong hath a short dispatch: and then the next day theyAbundans cautela non nocet. reiterate the same ceremonies, and  that for certaintie, because they doubt of the first day of the moneth, and therefore obserue two. The foure daies following are halfe-holy daies. Some workes may be done in them, and not some, and what they do (to make a difference) must be done otherwise, as writing crooked, etc. and that which cannot without losse be deferred, may now be done. The seuenth day they obserue in more complete holinesse, and the eight too, for the reason before alledged, to be more secure of the true day. After the feast ended, they satisfie with fasting their feasting-riots, and that on two Mundaies and one Thursday: vnto the three and thirtieth day after, they are sad and heauy in remembrance of R. Akiba, of whose Disciples foure and twenty thousand died in that space, and were buried by women in the night, and therefore after Sunne-set, all this while the women lay aside their worke; on the three and thirtie day the men  bath them and shaue their beards, and are merrie, because then his Disciples ceased dying.


@. II. Of Pentecost.
FRom the second night of their Pisach, they number to their PentecostPentecost. fifty dayes inclusiuely, and say, Blessed be thou, etc. which hast sanctified vs by thy precepts, and commanded vs to number the dayes before haruest, of which this is the first or second, etc. they number the same standing,So the Primitiue Church neither fasted nor kneeled all the dayes betweene Easter and Pentecost, in token of ioyfull hope of the resurrection, Iust. Mart. quaest. 115. Amb. ser. 61. Hier. Aug. etc. perhaps in imitation of this Iewish rite, applyed to that mystery. praying withall for the restitution of Ierusalem.  They let not bloud on the Eeuen of the Pentecost, because of a supposed winde Tabbach,
 which should haue slaine all the Israelites, if they had refused next day to accept of the Law. They keepe it two dayes, for the former doubt. They take the Booke twice out of the Arke, and reade there-out the precepts concerning this Feasts sacrifices, now that they cannot performe the things. In remembrance of receiuing the Law, they strew the pauement of their houses, streets and Synagogues with grasse. They eate meates made of milke and cakes. One Cake they make seuen times folded in thicknesse, in remembrance of the seuen Heauens, by which GOD descended to Mount Sinai. Now they must haue good cheere, because at this time the King married his daughter, that is, the Law vnto them.


@. III.  Of the Feast of Tabernacles.
THeTabernacles. Feast of Tabernacles is obserued eight dayes: the two first, and twoThe last day they may kindle fire from another, not strike fire with stone or mettal, nor quench it, although to saue their good: nor blow it with bellowes, but with a reede they may: with many trifling obseruations else, mentioned by Munst. Praecept Mos. cum expos. Rab. last more solemnely: the middle foure are halfe holy. They mutter ouer their prayers with such haste, that hee is the perfectest who speakes most with a breath. They make them Tabernacles with boughes of foure kindsPalme and Willow, and Pome-citron, and Myrtle: the cause hereof Rambam deliuers, Moreb. Neb. p. 3. c. 44. of Trees (more scrupulous then the Law) in which they sup, but doe not lodge. The Praecentor in the Synagogue taketh a bundle of boughes, and blesseth and shaketh them: for it is written,Psal. 96.12. The trees shall clap their hands, and mooueth them three times to the East, and as often to the West,  and to the North and South, and then vp and downe like a Fencer, and then shaketh them againe, as hauing now put the Diuell to flight. Then one taketh out the booke, and layeth it on the Pulpit, which they all with their boughes compasse seuen times a day during the Feast; in hope of like destruction to the Christians, as befell Iericho, and then renew the shaking of their boughes. The seuenth day is most solemne, called by them Hoschana rabba, the great Hosanna; as if one should say,Bux. de abbreuiat. beb. the great feast of saluation or helpe, because then they pray for the saluation of all the people, and for a prosperous new-yeere; and all the prayers of this Feast haue in them the words of sauing, as, O God, saue vs, and O God of our saluation, and as thou hast saued the Israelites, and such like; the prayers are therefore called  Hosannoth. Then they produce seuen bookes, and in euery of their seuen compassings lay vp one againe. This night they know their fortunes by the Moone: for stretching out their armes, if they see not the shadow of their head by Moone-light, they must dye that yeere; if a finger wanteth, hee loseth a friend; if the shadow yeeld him not a hand, hee loseth a sonne; the want of the left hand portendeth losse of a daughter; if no shadow, no life shall abide with him, for it is written,Num. 14.9. They say also that on that day God fore-sheweth how much it shall rayne all the yeere following: of plenty also and dearth, etc. and direct their prayers accordingly. Their shadow is departed from them. Some Iewes goe yeerely into Spaine to prouide Pome-citrons, and other necessaries, for the furnishing this feast; which they sell in Germany, and other places to the Iewes at excessiue prices. They keepe their Tabernacles in all weathers, except a very vehement storme driue them with a heauie countenance into their houses. Their wiues and seruants are not so strictly tyed hereto.  


@. IIII. Of their New Moones; and New-yeeres day.
THeNew-Moon day. New-Moones are at this day but halfe festiuall to the Iewes, accounting themselues free to worke, or not in them; but the women keepe it intirely festiuall, because they denyed their Eare-rings to the molten Calfe, which after they bestowed  willingly on their Tabernacle. The deuouter Iewes fast the day before. Their Mattins is with more prayers, their dinner with more cheere then on other dayes; and a great part of the day after, they sit at Cardes, or telling of Tales. That day when the Moone is eclipsed, they fast. When they may first see the New-Moone, they assemble, and the chiefe Rabbi pronounceth a long Prayer, the rest saying after him.
The Iewes beleeuing that GOD created the world in September or Tisri, conceit also, that at the reuolution of the same time yeerely, hee sitteth in iugdement, and out of the bookes taketh reckoning of euery mans life, and pronounceth sentence accordingly. That dayNew-yeeres day. Vict. de Carben. l. 1. c. 16. Where hee rehearseth these ceremonies, sayth some R R. beleeue the world began in March. which their great Sanhedrin ordayned the New-yeeres festiuall, God receiuing thereof intelligence by his Angels, sent thither to know the same, causeth the same day a Senate  of Angels to bee assembled, as it is written, Daniel 12. All things prouided in the solemnest manner, the three bookes are opened, one of the most Wicked, who are presently
 registred into the Booke of Death: the second, of the Iust, who are inrolled into the Booke of Life: and the third, of the meane sort, whose Iudgement is demurred vntill the day of Reconciliation (the tenth of Tisri) that if in the meane time they seriously repent them so, that their good may exceed their euill, then are they entred into the Booke of Life; if otherwise, they are recorded into the Blacke Bill of Death. Their Scripture is produced by R. Aben: LetPsal. 69.28. them bee blotted out of the Booke of the liuing, and not bee written with the Iust. Blotting points you to the Booke of Death: Liuing; that of Life; and not writing with the Iust, is the third Booke of Indifferents. All the workes which a man hath done through the yeere, are this day examined: The good workes are put in one ballance, the bad in the other (what  helpe a siluer Chalice or such heauie metall could affoord in this case, you may finde by experience in Saint Francis Legend, who, when the bad deeds of a great man lately dead, out-weighed the good, at a dead lift cast in a siluer Chalice, which the dead partie had sometime bestowed on Franciscan deuotion, and weighed vp the other side, and so the Diuels lost their prey:) GOD (say they) pronounceth sentence of punishment or reward, sometime in this life to bee executed, sometime in the other. In respect hereof, their Rabbines ordaine the mo^eth before to be spent in penance, and morning and Eeuening to sound a Trumpet of a Rams-horne, as Aue Marie Bell, to warne them of this Iudgement, that they may thinke of their sinnes; and besides, to befoole the Diuell; that with this often sounding being perplexed, hee may not know when this New-yeeres day shall bee, to come into the  Court to giue euidence against them. The day before they rise sooner in the morning, to mutter ouer their prayers for remission: and when they haue done in the Synagogue, they goe to the graues in the Church-yard, testifying, that if GOD doe not pardon them, they are like to the dead, and praying, that for the good workes of the Saints (the iust Iewes there buried) hee will pitty them, and there they giue large almes. After noone, they shaue, adorne, and bathe themselues, that they may be pure the next day; (for some Angels, soyled with impuritie heere below, are f^ine to purge themselues in the fierie brooke Dinor, before they can prayse GOD; how much more they?) and in the water they make confession of their sins; the confession containeth two and twentie words;P. Ric. de Coelest. Agricult. l. 3. Reuchlin. l. 1 c. 1 de verbo Mirifico. the number of their Alphabet; and at the pronouncing of euery word, giue a knocke on their brest; and then diue  wholly vnder water. The Feast it selfe they begin with a cup of Wine, and New-yeere Salutations: and on their Table haue a Rammes head, in remembrance ofGen. 22.18. That Ramme which was offered in Isaacks stead: and for this cause are their Trumpets of Rams-horne: Fish they eate, to signifie the multiplication of their good workes: they eate sweet fruits of all sorts, and make themselues merry, as assured of forgiuenesse of their sinnes: and after meat, all of all sorts, resort to some bridge to hurle their sinnes into the water: as it is written,Mich. 7.19. Hee shall cast all our sinnes into the bottome of the Sea. And if they there espie any fish, they leape for ioy, these seruing to them as the scape-goate, to carrie away their sinnes. At night they renew their cheere, and end this feast.


 @. V. Of their Lent, Penance, and Reconciliation Fast.
FRom this day to the tenthReconciliation. day, is a time of Penance or Lent, wherein they fast and pray for the cause aforesaid; and that if they haue beene written in the Booke of Death, yet God seeing their good works, may repent, and write them in the Life-Booke.Hospinian. ex Lombardo. Thrice a day very earely they confesse three houres before day, and surcease suits at Law, etc. And on the ninth day very earelyBuxdorf. c. 20 Vict. Carben. l. 1. c. 17. addeth, that the men and women that morning curse the first Christian they meete: and therefore will waite two or three houres for some to whome they owe some speciall grudge, to bestow their curse vpon him in these words, God make thee my Cocke this yeere. they resort to the  Synagogue; and at their returne, euery male taketh a Cocke, and euery female a Henne; if she be with childe, both: and the housholder, saying out of the hundred and fift Psalme, verses 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. and out of Iob, chapter 23. verse 23, 24. 25. swingeth the Cocke three times about his head, euery time saying, This Cocke shall make an exchange for me: he shall dye for mee: and I shall goe into life with all the people of Israel, Amen. He doth it three times for himselfe, for his children, for the strangers that are with him. Then hee killeth him, and cutteth his throat, and hurleth him with all his force to the ground, and roasteth him: signifying, that he himselfe deserueth death, the sword, stoning, and fire: the inwards they hurle on the top of the house, that the Crowes may, with it, carrie away their sinnes. A white Cocke for this purpose is principall; a red Cocke they vse not, for they are full of sinne themselues  by Esaias authoritie,Esa. 1.18. If your sinnes were red as scarlet, etc.Ant. Margar. Antonius Margarita saith,
 That this propitiatory creature should bee an Ape, as most like to man; but they vse a Cocke for the names sake: a man in Hebrew is Gebher, which is the Talmudicall or Babylonish name of a Cocke. Thus those that with a Rams horne beguile the Deuill, and with a Cocke beguile GOD, iustly beguile themselues, who refuse that sacrifice of Christ, in whose stripes they might be healed. They haue another fable of a Cocke mentioned byVict. Carben. l. 1. co^t. Iud. c. 11. Victor Carbensis, thinking that as often as a Cocke stands on one leg, and his combe lookes pale, that GOD is angry: which hapneth, they say, euery day, and onely in the day time, and that but the twinckling of an eye. And therefore they praise GOD which hath giuen such vnderstanding to a Cocke.
After the performance of this Cocke-sacrifice, they goe to the buriall place, vsing like  Ceremonies there, as on New-yeers eeuen: and after noone, bathe them likewise. After Eeuensong, he which hath offended others, askes them forgiuenesse, which if he obtaine not at first, then the offender taketh with him three other, and asketh the second and third time: if all this bee in vaine, he taketh ten others and renueth his suite; if he obtaine, it is well; if not, GOD will hold him excused, and the other partie shall be guiltie.Shall bee called a sinner. li. Musar. fol. 18. If the partie offended be dead, the offender with ten other, goeth to the graue, and there confessethSaying, I haue sinned against God, and this my brother, and done thus and thus: if hee oweth him money, he payeth it to his heires: i^ he knoweth none, hee confesseth it, and leaues it in the Court. Ibid. his faults. They confesse one to another also, and that in a secret place of their Synagogue, where each receiueth mutually at his fellowes hand with a leather belt nine and thirty blowes: at each blow the partie beaten beateth himselfe on the brest, and saith one word of his Confession, taken out of the seuentie and eight Psalme, and eight and thirtiethYet he being mercifull, etc. Verse, being in the  Hebrew thirteene words, which he thrice repeateth: then the striker lyeth downe, and receiueth like penance at the hands of the former, you may iudge with what rigour. This done, they runne home, and make merry with the Cockes and Hens before mentioned, supping largely, because of the next dayes fast, Their Supper must be ended before Sunne-set: for then begineth their fast. They put on their cleanest rayment, and ouer the same, a great and large shirt downe to the shooes, to testifie their puritie. They resort to their Synagogues with waxe candles (in Germanie they haue for euery man one) and then light them. The women also light Candles at home, as on the Sabbath. It is ominous if the Candles burne not cleerely. They spread the floore with Carpets, for soyling their purest cloathes.  
Their fiue humiliations at the feast of Reconciliation.Their humiliations at this feast are fiue: first, foure and twentie, or seuen and twentie houres fast, whereunto children are subiect: the Males after twelue yeeres, the Females after eleuen. Secondly, they weare no shooes. Thirdly, they must not annoint them. Fourthly, nor bathe them, no, not put a finger into the water. Fiftly, nor companie with, no not tou^h their wiues. Before they begin prayers, thirteene of the principall Rabbies, walking in the Temple, giue licence to all, both good and bad, to pray. And the Praecentor or Reader fetcheth the booke out of the Arke, and openeth it, singing a long Prayer, beginning all compacts, vowes, and oa^hes, etc. insinuating, that all the vowes, promises, oathes, and couenants, which euerie Iew had that yeere broken, bee disanulled and pardoned: and that, because now all haue power to pray and prayse GOD. They continue singing till late in the  night. Some remaine all nightManent. 24. horas in Synagoga, and putant Deum illis remittere omnia peccata praeteri ta superioris ann^. Ben. Kat. praet. 313. in the Synagogue: yea, the deuouter some stand vpright singing and praying withou^ intermission all that feast, the space of seuen and twentie houres in the same place. Those that departed the Synagogue, returne in the morning before day, and there stay all that day. Often they prostrate themselues with their face couered, at euery word of their Confessions knocking their ^^rest. When it beginneth to bee night, the Priest draweth his Tallies (a large cloath made of haires) before his eyes, and pronounceth the blessing, Numb. 6. holding his hand towards the people, who meane-while couer their faces with their hands; for they may not looke on the Priests hand, because the spirit of GOD resteth thereon. Then hee singeth a Prayer seuen times together, sometimes higher, sometimes lower with his voyce: because that GOD now ascendeth from them into the  seuenth Heauen: and they with their sweet melodie bring him on the way. Then they make a long and shrill sound with their Rams-horne-trumpet: and there followeth presently a voyce from Heauen, Goe eate thy bread with ioy and gladnesse, etc. After this they returne home, some carrying home their lights, to distinguish the holy Times (as you haue heard) from the prophane: some leaue them in the Synagogue all the yeere, at certaine times lighting them. Some Saint-Iewes prouide to haue a waxe-light continually burning all the yeere long in the Synagogue. In their returne they wish to each other a good yeere. For the bookes before mentioned, are now closed; nor may they expect any alteration. They sup largely, and betimes the next morning returne to the Synagogue, lest Sathan should compl^ine at so soone a cooling of their zeale. But the Deuill may bee quiet; for when the Law  was giuen,Pirke c. 46. Samael the euill spirit complained, that hee had power ouer all people, but the Israelites: GOD answered; That he should haue power ouer them, if on the Reconciliation-day
 hee found any sinne in them: But he finding them pure, sayd, That this his people were like the Angels liuing in vnitie, without eating or drinking. The Iewes haue a ceremonie to giue the Deuill gifts on this day, either not to hinder them; or elseExod. 23.8. because Gifts blinde the wise.


@. VI. Of their other Feasts.
 THe Iewes diuide the Law into two and fiftie parts, and reading euery Sabbath one, the last falleth on the next day after the Feast of Tabernacles, about the three and twentieth day of September. In thisThe feast of the Law finished. day they leape, dance, and make much ioy. They assemble in their Synagogue, and take all the bookes of the Law out of the Arke (leauing in it meane-while, that it bee not left emptie, a burning light) they reade the first Lecture and the last thereof, and leape about the Arke with the Bookes; and they hurle Pearles, Nuts, and such fruits among the youth, which in their scrambling sometimes fall together by the eares, and marre the sport. On this day they sell their Synagogue-offices, the Clarke making proclamation: who will giue most at the third time, obtayneth first  the office of lighting the Lights all the yeere, then that of prouiding the Wine, which they vse to begin the Feasts with, in respect of the poore, which haue no wine to hallow at home. Thirdly, is set to sale the office Gelilah, of folding vp, and vnfolding the Law. Fourthly, Hagbohah, of lifting vp the Law, and carrying it in Procession. Fiftly, the office Etzchaijm, of touching those turned pieces of wood, whereto the Law is fastened; which the young-men are forward to buy, in hope of holinesse and longer life. Sixtly, Acheron, to bee called foorth last on the festiuall dayes, to reade somewhat of the Law. Seuenthly, Schetria, to be deputed or substituted in place of the negligent officer, etc. The money hence arising, is for the vse of the poore, and reparations of their Synagogue; but in these sale-offices, wealth hath more honour then worthinesse.
 Their feast of Dedication, wee cannot say much more of, then that which alreadie hath beene said: much nicenesse herein is obserued, about the Lights wherewith they solemnize this darkenesse, which I willingly omit: these lights thy vse in their houses all the space of these eight dayes burning.
TheirHospinian. ^x M. Lombard. feast of Lots they keepe with all riot two dayes, as with some at Shroue-tide: the men disguising themselues in womens habite; the women in mens: they holde, that hee shall be fortunate which then laboureth: women especially then make merry in remembrance of Queene Esther, and they with their infants are present in the night, at the reading of the booke of Esther, which is all written in a large sheet of Parchment, and reade from the beginning to the end. In times past they had two stones, in one of which was written  Hamans name, which they beat together, till the name was blotted out, to fulfill that Scripture, The name of the wicked shall rot. Cursed bee HAMAN, blessed bee MORDECAI, cursed bee ZERES (Hamans wife) blessed be ESTHER, cursed bee all Idolaters, blessed be ISRAEL. When they come to the place where Hamans ten sonnes are named, they reade it all in one breath, for in a twinkling of an eye they were all slaine. They make great cheere, for so did Esther in feasting Assuerus. In these two dayes they doe nothing, but eate, drinke, dance, pipe, sing, play, etc. The rich are bound to send to the poore Iewes double presents, which must not be spent but on this solemnitie: they quaffe, (it is, saith Rabbi Isaac, Tirna, a good worke) till they finde no difference betweene Arur Haman, and Baruch Mordecai; Cursed bee HAMAN, blessed bee MORDECAI; vociferations that day obserued, and  hold it lawfull to drinke till they cannot tell their fiue fingers on the hand.
TheyHospinian. obserue festiuall the Equinoctials and Solstices; and a certaine Rogation day: they vse the Fasts before mentioned out of Zach. 7. with other superstitions. Some ofSyn. Iud. Buxdorf. them fast also, as is said, on Mundayes and Thursdayes; and some on the tenth of March for the death of Miriam: at whose departure a certaine Fountaine dryed vp, and the people were left without water: but in this moneth the Rabbins will not allow fasting, because of their deliuerance therein out of Egypt. Some fast for the death of Samuel, Aprill 28. and for the taking of the Arke, April 10. and at other times for other Prophets. Some fast on the New-Moones Eeuen: some, when they haue had an infortunate dreame; and all that day in which their Father dyed, through their whole life. Their fasting is an abstinence from all eating  and drinking till night. But of these fasts and other their solemnities, is said before in the abstract of their Kalender, taken out of Ioseph Scaliger. Their fast on the 17. of the fourth Moneth for the destruction of their Citie, is rigourously kept, and from thence to the ninth
 day of the moneth following, are holden vnluckie dayes, in which Schoolmasters may not beate their Schollers, nor any man will sew at the Law. And for the burning of the Temple in the ninth day of the fifth moneth, they goe bare-foot, reade heauie stories, and Ieremiahs Lamentations, and mourne among the graues of the dead, and are sad all that moueth: from the first to the tenth day they eate no flesh, nor drinke wine, nor bathe, nor marrie, nor cut their hayre;Hos. 2.7. they sew not at the Law; for Hosea saith, The moneth shall deuoure their portion: and they shall bee taken, saith Ieremie, in their moneth. On the eight day they eate onely Lentils; for they may not eate Pease or Beanes, because they haue blacke spots like mouthes, which Lentils want, and therefore more fitly represent a heauie man, which wanteth his mouth for sorrow: egges they may eate in the night for their roundnesse: for sorrow,  as if it were round, rolleth from one to another. They haue their fasts also on speciall occasions, as they tell of one Chone Hammagal, which in a great drought, put himselfe into a pye made fit for his body, and prayed, saying, Lord of the World, the eyes of thy children are vpon mee, as one whom they thinke familiar with thee: I sweare by thy holy name, that I will not come hence till thou shew mercy. And then it rayned presently: for how could it choose? They tell the same pye-tale of Moses likewise, and of Habbacuc, expounding that Hab. 2.1. I will stand on my watch, I will stand in my Pye. Their manner is, saith Victor Carbensis, to curse Titus, and say, he was of the generation of Agag the Amalechite, and such a blasphemer as neuer was any, and that for his blasphemies he was stricken with madnesse.  



CHAP. XIX. Of their Cookerie, Butcherie, Marriages, Punishments, Funerals.
Buxdorf. Syn. Iud. c. 26. and d.BVt why doe wee entertaine you so long in Feasts and Fasts? both almost violent to humane nature, howsoeuer the Glutton is neuer glutted with the one, and the superstitious rather kill the flesh, then the vices of the flesh  with the other? Medio tutissimus ibis. We will soberly recreate your spirits with a walke into the Cooke-roome, and thence to the Butcherie, and then to the Bride-chamber, to take view of their Espousals, Marriages, Diuorces, and thence diuorce your eyes from these spectacles, and thence diuert them to their Beggers, Penances, and to that fatall diuorce, ending your walke where the walkes of all flesh end, at Death, and the Graue.

@. I. Of their Cookerie.  
THey haueThey ground these absurdities on Moses his words. Exo. 23.19. Kitchin vessels of two sorts, one for flesh, another for white-meates. Their milke vessels of wood are marked with three cuts, because that sentence, Thou shalt not seethe a Kid in his mothers milke, is three times in the Law repeated. Euery Iew carrieth two kniues with him, one for Flesh; the other for Cheese and Fish, and these also are marked with three cuts. And if these vessels should beeThe knife may not after be vsed except heated red hot in the fire three houres, and three dayes hidden in the earth, and three times put into water. Vict. Carb. l. 1. c. 12. intermingled, our Iew might not eate that which is dressed therein: yea, the innocent vessels are broken, if of earth, most accurately washed, if of wood, and purged in the fire, if they bee of yron. They seethe not milke and flesh at one time, and ouer one fire, ouer against each other: nor set them together on the Table, but seperate them with somewhat set betweene.  One cloath is layde for flesh, and another for white-meate. Hee which eateth flesh, or broth thereof, may not eate white-meates an houre after, yea the most religious willNine houres saith Carbens. This they gather out of Num. 31.23. abstaine sixe houres after. Yet may they eate a Henne together with Almond-milke. If any haue not the gift of such abstinence, very carefully must hee clense his teeth, and wash his mouth, and with a piece of drie bread take away the taste of the flesh. If any suet fall into their white-meates, they may not be eaten, except there bee sixtie times as much of the meat, as of the suet. An Egge may not be poched in a flesh vessell: they breake it also, and diligently obserue, that none of that bloudie resemblance in the top of the egge remaine. If in cutting vp of a Henne they finde egges, they may not eate them till they bee washed, and softned  in water and salt. Flesh and fish may not be dressed, or set on the Table, or eaten together: for this (they write) would bring the leprosie. In their dyet-difficulties they consult with
 their Rabbines. Glasses, Kniues, and all their Kitchin vessels new bought, must bee curiously washed, and if they will beare it, purged with the fire.


@. II. Of their Butcherie.
BVtcherie is with the Iew exalted aboue the liberall Sciences, and must bee learned  by much bookishnesse and long experience. They haue a booke of shamble-constitutions, and in harder cases they aduise with some learned Rabbi. Neither may any practise this Art without licence from the Rabbi, whereby he signifieth, that hee had taken examination and proofe of the partie, and found him expert therein both in word and deed, and therefore hath permitted him to kill, and others to eate the meate by him killed: prouided that he diligently reade euery weeke for one yeere, and euery moneth the next yeere, and once a quarter during his life, the Constitutions abouesaid. They haue their especiall kniues for this businesse, great ones for greater Cattell, and small for the smaller: the greater haue blunter and broader points: if they haue any rifts in them, they may not vse them. The greater beasts feete must be bound, in remembrance of Abrahams binding  Isaac, and then with one cut or thrust hee cutteth the Wesand a sunder; which done, he lookes on his knife if there bee any rift in it, for that would terrifie the beast, and cause the bloud to recoile backe to the heart, whereby the beast would not be fit for vse as retaining some of the bloud. After this, he hangs vp the beast, takes out the inwards, and cutting a hole on both sides of the heart, thrusteth his hand through the same into the body of the beast, to search if there be any bloud: and if there be any fault in the beast, it is not for their dyet, applying that which the Law saith of a Carcasse found torne in the fields.Exod. 22.31. Leuit. 22. They cut the throat of a bird in like manner, if it bee a Fowle which hath quills in the wings, in remembrance of an office performed by the fowles sometimes, as a they say, to Rebecca, when she descended from her Camell at the sight of Isaac:Tunc temporis (aiunt) infirmitas muliebris eam inuasit: and cum surrexisset de terra, volucres aduolarunt. sanguinemque virginitatis eius in terram occuluerunt; ideoque deus mandauit, sanguinem auium mactatarum tegere. and therefore they let the fowle bleed into  a heape of ashes, and therein couer the bloud. They couer the bloud also of other creatures in the ground, because the Earth opened her mouth to drinke in the bloud of ABEL: and because Sathan should not accuse men of iniustice for slaying the innocent beasts, seeing so much bloud shed by them. When they haue killed a great beast, they cut out all the veynes and sinewes (of which subiect they haue written speciall Treatises) and likewise all the Suet: which done, they diue them in water to mollifie them, and wash them throughly, to rinse away all the bloud; and then lay them on a boord, that all the water may passe from them: after which they salt them in a vessell full of holes, that the salt may draine out all whatsoeuer bloudinesse yet remaining. They eate not the hinder parts in remembrance of IacobsGen. 32. thigh.
 But in Italy they haue inuented a new anatomizing tricke, by taking away the veynes and sinewes to make them lawfull. Pittie they cannot doe the like for Swine and other forbidden meates: but you see they haue some trickes to coozen GOD, as before to coozen the Diuell: but the most coozenage (saue that in the former they coozen themselues) is to Christians which buy those hinder parts of them, in polluting those meates, before they sell them, with filth, and with vrine of their Children, adding curses and imprecations to the eaters. Thus you see the Iew-butcher had need be no botcher, but halfe a Physitian in anatomizing, and halfe a Rabbine in cases of conscience. And who knoweth whether so many Iewish Physicians come not from (and perhaps also carrie to) the Shambles?


 @. III. Of their Espousals and Marriages.
BVt wearie of this bloudie spectacle, let vs take a more pleasant view, of their Virgins and Espousals. These were made, saithLib. Praecep. 124. vid. Drus. praet. pag. 2. Moses de Kotsi, either with money, or with an instrument, or with copulation. It seemeth this last is vnderstood of such as had lyen with a mayde, and therefore must by theExod. 22.17. and Deut. 22.29. Law marrie her (if the father denyed him not his daughter) whereas otherwise they might not haue carnall company  before the marriage were solemnized, this being forbidden noLib. Musar. cap. 6. lesse then to lye with a woman in her disease. Their Prayer-bookeFol. 364. saith thus, He which shall espouse a woman, bringeth witnesses, and before them doth betroth her with mony, or somwhat mony-worth,
 which he giueth her, saying, Be thou espoused to me according to the law of Moses and Israel. If there be no witnesses, it is nothing, notwithstanding they both confesse it. If one shall affiance a woman to another, he saith, Be thou espoused to N. with this Ring, according to the Law of Moses and Israel. i Buxdorfius (to whom I am most beholding in many of these reports) writeth,Syn. Iud. c. 28. that when promise hath passed betweene two, many Iewes are called together into a great chamber: where euerie of the youthes holdeth a pot in his hand. Then comes one, and reades the letters of contract, that N. sonne of N. and N. daughter of N. haue promised marriage to each other, each giuing so much in dowrie, which marriage is to be solemnized on such a day: and the partie which faileth in the promises, shall giue the other fifty Florens. This done, they wish ioy to each other: and the Iewlings presently breake  their earthen pots, whereby they signifie to the parties prosperitie and abundance. At parting, euery one hath a cup of wine giuen them. Eight dayes after neither partie goeth out of the house: and many youthes come and make merry with the Bridegrome, imitating (they thinke) Sampson herein. Some say,Drus. vbi sup. that the man taketh the espoused Bride home to his house, to be both witnesse and keeper of her virginity till the marriage solemnitie. The day before the marriage, the Bride must wash her in that absolute mannerCap. 14. before described, certaine women ringing with somewhat when shee goeth in and out of the water, some of them also leaping and dancing. The Bridegrome sends the Bride a wedding girdle embossed withIdqne (^^ebat Iudaeaster) quia semen viri album, mulieris rubrum. gold, and shee him another with siluer studs. On the wedding day the Bride adornes her selfe in the best Iewish dresse, with her marriage attire, and by women  singing their sweetest Epithalamia is conueyed into a chamber, and their placing her on a faire seate, braid her haire into goodle curles, and put a vaile ouer her eyes (in imitation of Rebeccas modestie) singing meane-while, dancing, and expressing the greatest signes of ioy, thinking they therein please God, as being taught by their Rabbines, that God vsed the like curling, singing and dancing, when he presented Eue to Adam;Pirke siue cap. R. Eliezer. c. 11. Brandspigel. c. 34 yea, refused not to serue that new couple, and with his owne hands made the canopie vnder which they were to receiue their marriage blessing, the Angels with pipes and trumpets making musike to leade the dance. That which Moses saithGen. 2.22., God built a woman, The Talmud interpreteth, Hee made curles, and hee brought her to Adam, to wit, with leaping and dancing. When the marriage benediction is to bee solemnized, foure boyes beare aVid. ^li. Thil. vad. Chapha. canopie on  foure poles into the place appointed, which is some street or gardenIn token that they shall multiply like the Starres in number^ abroad in the open aire, the people sounding their acclamations, Blessed be he which commeth. The Bride (being led by others) goeth three time about the Bridegrome, as a cocke goeth about a hen, and that forsooth to fulfill that Prophecie,Ierem. 31.22. A woman shall compasse a man: hee also must fetch one compasse about her. The people also besprinkle the Bride with wheat, crying out, Increase and multiply, according to that of the Psalmist,Psal. 147.14. He filleth thee with the fat of wheat. In some places they mingle money with the wheat, which the poore Iewes gather vp. The Bride stands on the right hand: for it is written,Psal. 45.10 Thy wife standeth on thy right hand: with her face also to the South, for then she shall be fruitfull. The Rabbi which marrieth them, taketh the end of the Vestment about the Bridegromes necke, (they call it Talles) and puts it  on the Brides head, after the example ofRuth. 3 9. and Ezek. 16.8. Boaz and Ruth: and then takes a glasse filled with wine, ouer which hee vttereth the marriage blessing, praysing God, by whose instinct these persons were espoused: and so reacheth the glasse to them, and bids them drinke. This glasse, if she bee a Virgin, hath but a narrow mouth, at Wormes they vse an earthen pot. Now the Rabbi receiuing a Ring of pure gold, without anySome superstitiously engraue therein, Good fortune commeth, or the Planet Iupiter, which they would borrow from Leahs words. Gen. 30.11. vid. Munster ibid. The R. saith Victar Carbens. marketh diligently whether she put forth her fore-finger: for the Virgin Mary, say they, ware the Ring on her middle finger, and therefore all Iewesses refuse that, and vse the fore finger. Iewell in it, sheweth it to some witnesses, asking them if it bee good, and worth the money it cost, and then puts it on the Brides finger, and with a loud voice pronounceth the spousall letters. After this he takes another glasse of wine, and blesseth God that the Bridegrome and Bride haue accepted of each other, and giues it them to taste. This done, the Bridegrome breaketh the former glasse against the wall or ground, in remembrance of the destruction of Ierusalem: in which  respect, in some places they put ashes on the Bridegromes head. He weareth for this cause a black-hood on his head like a mourner: and the bride likewise weareth a black cloth, fit to terrifie children with the deformitie. Thus do they mixe mirth and mourning, as Dauid warneth, Reioyce vnto him in trembling. This ended, they sit downe at table, and then must the Bridegrome make trial of his brest in singing a long prayer: others in the meane time call to make ready the hens. Then is there a hen and an egge set before the Bride: of that the Bridegrome carueth her a piece, and then presently all the company, men and women, teare the hen amongst them like hungrie hounds, snatching out of each others hands and mouthes, all to glad the new married couple. The egge is not sodde, but in another scene of mirth, one casteth it in the face of another, of some Christian especially, if any bee present at the  nuptials. In the same is a mysterie included for the Bride, that she shall haue as easie trauell in child-birth, as the hen layeth her egges. After this they fall to their cheere, and dances;
 one they call the Mitzuah or commandment-dance, as if GOD had enioyned it. The chiefe ghest takes the Bridegroome by the hand, another him, and so on through the companie: likewise the chiefe woman takes the Bride, another her, and so one another: then doe they dance in a long row with a tumultuous noyse, and so end the nuptiall sports. Among all their other blessings, the Bridegrome is to say one, Vbi perspexerit sanguinem virgineum, to vse the words of Genebrard, who expresseth it, being borrowed from some words of the Canticles, fleshly abused by such application.
The Marriage commonly lasteth eight dayes: and on the Sabbath they dance the Iustiest of all, doing the Sabbath herein a singular honour, because that also is called a Bride. It is  prohibited to bid any vncircumcised ghest to this banquet: forProu. 14.10. Salomon saith, The stranger doth not intermeddle with his ioy. Yea, the good Angels seeing such there, will depart; and the euill will come and raise strifes and contentions. For they thinke noCom. sup. Aboth. fol. 83. ap. Drus. place emptie from the earth to the skie, but all full of good or bad Angels flying or standing in the same. The marriageRambam. M. N. lib. 3. cap. 50. is in publike, lest whoredome should be couered vnder that pretext, pretending themselues married when they were not.


@. IIII.  Of Coniugall Duties.
LEt it not grieue you to heare somewhat of the Duties betwixt man and wife. The Husband oweth ten things to the Wife:Vid. Drus. praet lib. 6. in 1. Cor. 7.2. Idem vid. ap. R. Ab. ben Kattan. pr. 150. P. Ric. in praec. neg. 81. horam non minuet, id est, debitum coniugale, idque secundum vetustam Talmud. traditionem otio vacantes quotidie; mecanicus operarius his in hebdomade; Afinarius, qui sarcinulas nectat, semel: qui portat per camelos semel in mense: nauta semel in dimidio anni. Com sup. Aboth. 10. Drus. praet. pag. 285. three according to the Law; her nourishment, her cloathing, and her time; namely, of due beneuolence to bee performed: and seuen things according to the words of the Scribes: The first whereof is the foundation of dowrie, viz. two hundred denarij, if she bee a virgin, otherwise an hundred. The other concerne the condition of the dowrie. The woman which rendereth not her husband his due, is rebellious and refractarie; and hee is bidden to expell her  without a dowrie. The conditions of the dowrie were: first, to cure her in sickenesse: secondly, to redeeme her being captiue: thirdly, to burie her being dead: fourthly, to nourish her out of his owne goods, and that she dwell in his house in her widdow-hood: fifthly, to keepe her daughters till marriage: sixtly, that her sonnes inherit. They appoint not onely loue, but honour to the wife (as Peter also enioyneth to this weaker vessell) which honour, they say, is in meate and drinke, and goodly garments, for which hee shall (this was a womans friend) haue fauour with God. The Author of Arbaa Turim, addeth, That a man should loue his wife as his owne bodie, and honour her aboue his bodie, and keepe her as one of his members. For the wife is the other halfe of man, and a man without a wife, is but halfe a man. And let him take heed of striking his wife, saidMusar. cap. 6. another, or to bee virulent  in termes against her. For, for her teares (how pittifully easie are they to some?) his punishment is neere. And howsoeuer since the destruction of the Temple, the doore of Prayers hath beene shut, yet the doore of teares hath not beene shut, as saith Dauid, Bee not thou silent at my teares. And should not a man honour his wife? Yes, saithVid. Drus. pag. 376. R. Hauina, for a man hath no blessing but for his wife, as it is written, Hee blessed Abraham for her. Let a man cloath himselfe (I would not haue women heare it) beneath his abilitie, his children according to his abilitie, and his wife aboue his abilitie. Let the wife honour her husband as her father, and feare to displease him, and let him spare her in his anger, remembring that shee was taken out of his ribbes. But for the wiues choyse, A man ought, saithMusar. 74. one, to sell all that hee hath and buy a wife, the daughter of a wise Disciple: if he finde not such an one, let  him take a daughter of the Great men of his time: if not such, the daughter of a Synagogue-Ruler; in that defect, let him take the daughter of one which gathereth Almes: if not, then of a Schoole-master, and not the daughter of the people of the Land, of whom the Scripture saith.Vid. sup. c. 8. Cursed bee he that lyeth with a Beast.
They say that a man oughtDrus. praet. l. 7^ not to lodge in the same chamber, no not with his Sister, Daughter, or daughter in Law: yea, there Wise men forbid conference with a woman altogether.




@. V. Of Diuorce, and other Marriage obseruations.
THe bill of diuorce is still practised among the Iewes: it must bee written in twelue lines (it is therefore calledVid. Eli. Thisrad. get. and Drus. praet. pag. 13. and Bux. Syn. c. 28. Get) neither more nor lesse, and deliuered to the woman before three credible witnesses, vnder their hands and seales. Then doth the husband deliuer it to her, saying, Loe, woman, the bill of thy Diuorce, take it of mee, by it being diuorced from mee, bee thou free to another husband. The tenor of this bill is this: The second day of the weeke, the eight and twentieth of the moneth, N.  in the yeere of the world, 5363. as we heere at Mentz vpon Rhene vse to reckon, I Isaac, sirnamed Eckendorf, sonne of R. Abr. now dwelling at Mentz: of my free will, without constraint, thee Sara, sir-named Turmmerle, daughter of R. Leui, which hitherto hath beene my wife, haue determined to free, forsake and diuorce: And now to forsake, free, and put thee from me, that thou mayest bee thine owne, and at thine owne free will and pleasure mayest depart whither thou wilt, and none from hence-forth for euer shall prohibite thee: And thou art so freed, that thou mayest marrie to any other man.
This diuorce may not bee done in euery place, but they haue some speciall place appointed, noted, and knowne, situate on some knowne Riuer: whereto certaine chiefe Rabbines are called by writing, if there bee none there dwelling, which consummate the businesse.  By the oldDrus. praet. pag. 221. Law, a woman might be reconciled to her husband before the Bill of diuorce giuen, not after.
The obseruation of the brother, to marrie the wife of his brother deceased without issue, or else to lose the inheritance,Buxd. Syn. ca. 30. which was testified by pulling off his shooe, and spetting in his face; is now thus ruled by the Rabbins, that none shall marrie such a widdow, but rather suffer the premised ignominie; which is performed in this sort. She comes before the chiefe Rabbi with fiue witnesses, where the Rabbi demands, if she haue been three months a widdow, if her husband had a brother vnmarried, if the partie conuented bee he, etc. and lastly, if shee be fasting (for otherwise she might not spet in her brothers face.) Of him also the Rabbi asketh like questions, and receiuing a denyall of marriage, there is brought a shooe  of singular fashion for that purpose, which hee putteth on his right foot bare, and then setteth himselfe against a wall. The woman comes, and disclaiming his affinitie, stoopeth, and with her right hand (for if she want a right hand, it putteth the Rabbines out of their right wits to skan, whether with her teeth, or how else it may be done) vnlooseth the shooe, and taking it off, spets in his face, so that the fiue witnesses may see it, saying, Thus it shall be done with him which will not build the house of his brother.
For this they alleage, Leuit. 12.4.In the time of her vncleannesse, a woman may not enter into the Synagogue, nor pray, nor name the Name of GOD, nor handle any holy booke; which if they obserue, the Rabbines promise them longer life. As soone as she knoweth of her vncleannesse, she presently seperateth her selfe from her husband the space of seuen dayes, not touching him, nor sitting on the same seate, nor eating in the same dish, or on the same cloath, nor may drinke out of  the same cup, nor stand against him, nor speake in his face. If one will giue any thing to the other, one layeth it on a bench or table, and goeth away, and the other commeth and taketh it. They say it procureth the Leprosie in the Children which are then gotten, which they obiect to Christians.
When shee hath numbred seuenAdhuc bebdomadae cursu ad eam accedere, imo iuxta iuniorum Talmudeorum decreta, tangere non permittitur. P. Ric. ad praec. neg. 111 dayes of her vncleannesse, shee proceedeth to number as many of her purification: after which time finding her selfe pure, shee cloatheth her selfe in white, and taking a woman with her, washeth her selfe in cold water, (some in winter put in warme water to it, which others in the coldest season refuse) and leaues not a hayre of her head vnwashed, as before is described. SomeSup. cap. 14. fast till they haue done it, lest the  flesh in the teeth should hinder the water from comming to them: for mouth and eyes must bee open, and they must stoope, that the pappe keepe not away the water from the brest: and if they haue a playster on a sore, it must off, and their nayles must bee pared.
TheyPhil. Ferdinandus pr. 1. write, that if any shall exceed twentie yeeres and not marrie, or if hee shall marrie a wife which is barren, he sinneth as much as if hee had slaine a man, and deserueth the punishment of Onan, whom GOD slew. Prouided, if hee addict himselfe to the studie of the Law, and findeth no need of a wife: but if he finde concupiscence preuaile, hee ought to marrie notwithstanding. And this necessitie remainethP. Ricius ad pr. affir. 49. till he hath begotten a sonne and a daughter.  



@. VI. Of the Iewish Beggers, Diseases and Penances.
THe poorer Iewes on the Friday night, and euery Festiuall,Buxdorf c. 33. Iewish beggers entering into the houses of the richer, beg prouision for the Feast. And if any be exceeding poore, the Rabbines make him a licence to beg, therein testifying of his honestie and Iewish saith; wherewith hee wandereth through the Countrey, visiting all the Iewes he can finde. And if hee come to a place where are many Iewes, hee sheweth his licence  to the chiefe Rabbi; or to the Clarke which calls men to the Synagogue, or to the Elders, or Ruler of the Synagogue, which is as their Consull, or to the Ouer-seers of the poore, and craueth their fauour: which granted, hee standeth with two others at the doore of the Synagogue, and beggeth; or else those two goe from house to house and beg for him. The like is done when a poore Iew hath a daughter marriageable, to beg for her dowrie. When poore Iewes trauell, they may turne into another Iewes house, where (their prouerbe is) the first day hee is a ghest, the second a burthen, the third a fugitiue.
The falling sicknesse is vsuall among the Iewes,Cap. 34. Diseases of the Iewes. and they vse to imprecate it to each other in their anger, as they also doe the plague. In a generall pestilence they write in their Chamber strange characters and wonderfull names, which (they say) are the names of the  Pest-Angels. And I once saw (sayth our Author) Adiridon, Bediridon, and so on, the word Diridon riding on quite through the Alphabet, written with great letters in their houses, as a present remedie for the Plague. The Leprie they haue seldome, which may bee attributed to their dyet.
Now the Sword and Scepter is taken from them, in stead of other penalties,Cap. 35. Iewish penances. they inflict sharpe penances according to the nature of the crime. Thus the Adulterer satisfieth for his hot lust in cold water, wherein hee is inioyned to sit some winter dayes, and if the water be frozen, the Ice is cut, and hee set therein vp to his chinne, as long as an Egge is roasting. In Summer time hee is set naked in an Ant-hill, his nose and eares stopped, and after washeth himselfe in cold water. If the season bee neither cold not hot, hee is inioyned a certaine  kinde of fasting, in which he may not eate any thing till night, and then onely a little bread and water is allowed him, and yet hee must after endure the Ant or water-penance. In Medrasch is written, that Adam sate vp to the nose in water an hundred and thirtie yeeres, till he begate Seth, for eating the forbidden fruit. If the penance seeme lighter, they enioyne him further to runne thorow a swarme of Bees, and when the swelling of his bodie through their stinging is abated, he must doe it againe and againe, according to the measure of his offence. If hee hath often that way offended, hee is bound to endure that penance many yeeres, yea sometimes a three yeeres fast together, eating bread and water at supper, otherwise nothing, except hee rather chuse to redeeme this, with fasting three whole dayes together in each yeere, without tasting any refection at all, as Queene Esther did. When any hath lyen  with a woman in her vncleannesse, hee incurreth the penance of fortie dayes fast, and twice or thrice euery of those dayes to receiue on his bare backe with a leather thong or girdle nine blowes: to eate no flesh or hot meate, nor drinke any wine, but on the Sabbath. If a man kisse or embrace his menstruous wife, the case is alike. A Robber is adiudged three yeeres banishment, to wander three yeeres thorow the Cities where Iewes dwell, crying aloud, I am a Robber, and suffer himselfe to bee beaten in manner aforesaid. He may not eate flesh, nor drinke wine; nor cut the hayre off his head or beard: hee must put on his change of garments, and shirts vnwashed. He may not wash himselfe: euery moneth once he must couer his head: hee must weare his arme, wherewith he committed murther, fastened to his necke with a chayne. Some are enioyned that where they sleepe one night, they may not  sleepe the next, that they may wander ouer the world like Cain. Some are constrained to weare an yron brest-plate next their skinne: and some to throw themselues downe before the doore of the Synagogue, that they which goe in may treade on him. That Iew which accuseth another before a Christian Magistrate, is accounted a Traytor and neuer made reckoning of after.
But why doe I tyre the Reader, to whom I feare I haue beene ouer-tedious? But in this matter of Religion, of whom is it fitter to protract discourse, then of them, whom the old world yeelded the only example of Truth, and the present age, a principall example of falsehood and superstition? Let it not grieue the Reader, to performe the last office of humanitie to our Iew, and as hee hath seene his birth, his Synagogue-Rites, and home superstitions,  so to visit him on his Death-bed, and helpe lay him in his graue: and examine his hope of the Resurrection, and of their Messias, and wee will end our Pilgrimage in this Holy Land.



@. VII. Of their visitation of the sicke, And funerall rites.
WHenCeremonies about the sicke. a man lieth sicke, the Rabbines visit him; and if he be rich, order is taken for his Will, and then they exhort him to perseuere constantly in their Faith; They aske him if hee beleeue that the Messias is yet to come. Hee maketh his confession on his bed, saying; I confesse before thee, my God and Lord, God of  my parents, Lord of all Creatures, that my health and death is in thy hand, I pray thee grant me recouery of my former health, and heare my praier, as thou didest Hezekiah in his sicknes. And if the time of my death be come, then grant that death may bee a remission of all my sinne, which of ignorance or knowledge I haue committed, euer since I was a man: grant that I may haue my part in Paradise, and the world to come, which is reserued for the iust; grant that I may know the Way of euerlasting life, fill mee with the ioy of thy excellent countenance by thy right hand for euer and euer. Blessed bee thou, O GOD, which hearest my prayer.
Thus they which refuse the merits of Christs death, ascribe remission of sinnes to their owne. When he giueth vp the ghost,And about the dead in the house. all the standers by rend their garments, but in a certaine  place of the same, where they doe no great harme, about a hand-breadth. They lament the dead seuen dayes. They presently after his death powre out all the water in the house into the streete: they couer his face that it may no more bee seene: they bow his thumb in his hand, framing a resemblance of the Hebrew name Schaddai: his other fingers are stretched out, to testifie a forsaking of the world: they wash him with hot water, and hauing anointed his head with wine and the yolke of an Egge mixed together, they put on him a white vestment, which he vsed to weare on the Feast of Reconciliation. When they carry him out of the house, they hurle after him a broken sherd, signifying, that with him all heauinesse should bee expelled and broken. When they are come to the placeAt the graue. They may not bury the corps in silke or needle worke, (Iuch. f. 54.) no not a Prince: for this were waste, and a worke of the Gentiles. Officium Lugentium ex lib. precationum heb. Mahzor. vid. Genebrard. of buriall, they say, Blessed be GOD which hath formed you with iudgement and iustice, hath created, fed, sustained,  and at last hath depriued you of life, (speaking to the dead.) Hee knoweth the number of you all, and will quicken you againe in his time. Blessed be God, which doth to die, and maketh aliue. Let the dead liue, with my carkasse let them rise againe. Awake and reioyce yee that lie in dust, because thy dew is the dew of light, and the earth shall cast foorth her dead. This the Minister sayth alone: then he goeth on with a long prayer of three and twenty sentences, which the people say after him, going about the sepulchre. They call this prayer Tzidduck haddin, the subiect whereof is the iustice of GOD; calling for pardon in the name of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, acknowledging that by three things the foundations of the world are founded, the Law, worship, and piety to the dead: calling for deliuerance for the bloud of his seruants shed in the 856. yeere for the confession of his holy Name, and for the merit of the onely-begotten, which was seuen and thirty yeeres old, in whose place a Ramme was taken; concluding with  mention of their Captaines slaine in the 136. yeere. Heere they take downe the corps: and then the Minister singeth, the people following: This is the way of the world, let him sleepe in peace, etc. Yee Fathers of the world which sleepe in Hebron, open vnto him the gates of the garden of Eden, and say, His comming be in peace. Yee euerlasting hills of the double caue, open vnto him the gates of the garden of Eden, and bid him welcome, Yee Angels of peace, go forth to meete him, vnlocke to him the gates of Paradise. Yee keepers of the treasures of the garden of Eden, open the gates, and let N. enter, and enioy the fruites of Paradise; good things bee at his right hand, pleasant things at his left. Heare this, O Lord, and let his comming be in peace. Then lay they him into the ground, and his neerest kinsmen cast in the first earth: after which they turne to the East with diuers other blessings. WhenAfter the buriall. they returne, they blow themselues backwards three  times, and throw grasse ouer their heads, signifying their hope of the resurrection, according to that Es. 66.14. and your bones shall bud as the grasse; saying also, Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shalt returne. Then doth euery one mutter a Prayer to himselfe, as he goeth out of the buriall place. In the porch of the Synagogue, GodEsay. 25.8. shall destroy death for euer (say they) and wipe away all teares from their eyes, and will take away their reproach from all the earth, for the Lord hath spoken it. Then enter they into the Synagogue, and leape vp and downe, and change their Seates seuen times, and there say ouer their Purgatorie-prayer Kaddisch. The Mourners goe bare-foote seuen dayes, and eate not Flesh, nor drinke Wine, except on the Sabbaths and Festiuals. They bathe not in three and thirty  dayes after, cut not their nayles, worke not, make a pittifull howling, etc. The first night the Mourner eateth nothing of his owne, but meate sent him from his friendes.
 The childe mourneth for his Father a yeere. The sonne eleuen moneths saith ouer his Kaddisch; for meane sinners are freed sooner: but the wicked stay the whole twelue moneths: and therefore to persist the twelfth moueth in his prayer, should be to acknowledge his father a wicked man. And for the effect hereof, Rabbi Akibha met once in the way a man, with an Asse-like burthen of stickes, which vpon examination confessed, That hee was a Purgatorie-ghost, carrying to burne himselfe, such bundles euery day. Rabbi Akibha enquired if hee had a Sonne or Wife, and where; and finding out his sonne, taught him this prayer, which was so effectuall, that in a dreame this Ghost returned to the Rabbi with thankes for his deliuerance, and sayd, hee was now in Gan Eden, or Paradise. Rabbi Akibha signified this to the Iewish Synagogues, with iniunction to teach their Children  this prayer.
But to returne to our Funerals: when they are come backe to the mourning house, they wash their hands, but obserue not the Mosaicall Rites, because the Temple is not standing. Then doe they powre out a long blessing ouer a cup of Wine, and another ouer their Meate, exceeding much longer. Their Purgatorie-Prayer, or (as Genebrard calleth it, their) Requiem, vel libera, is this: It is better to go into the house of mourning, then into the house of feasting, in which is the end of all men: which let the liuing remember. Let vs heare the end: Feare GOD, and keepe his Commandements; this is the dutie of euery man. A sure rest in the high habitation vnder the wings of GOD, in the degree of the Saints, shining as the brightnesse  of the skie. The change of bonds, pardon of sinnes, grant of saluation, indulgence and mercie from the sight of him which dwels in Heauen, and a portion in the life to come: there let the portion be, and the dwelling of the soule of the wise Master N. The Spirit of the Lord make him to rest in Gan Eden, and giue him peace, as it is written in Esay, Let peace come, and let him rest in beds, walking before it, he and all the deceased of Israel, through his mercie, Amen. They write also on the Tombe, Let his soule bee in the Garden of Eden, Amen. Or, Let his soule bee bound in the bundle of life. And sometimes, Thou art the Tombe of N. which departed into Eden, such a day of such a moneth and yeere. Thus poore Purgatorie with Iewes and Romists is preached by walking Ghosts. They haue a light burning for the dead seuen dayes. They powre the water out of the doores, because the Angell of Death  washed his sword (lately vsed) in water, and enuenometh it. This his sword he holdeth in his hand at the beds head, hauing on the end thereof three drops of gall. The sicke man spying this Deadly Angell, openeth his mouth with feare, and then those drops fall in, of which one killeth him, the second maketh him pale, the third rotteth and putrifieth. EliasIn rad. Chibut Hakebac. Leuita addeth, that after a man is dead, the Angell of Death commeth and sitteth on his Graue, and presently the soule entreth into his body, and hee maketh him stand on his feet, hauing to that purpose, in his hand a chayne, halfe of yron, and halfe of fire, wherewith hee striketh him. At the first blow his members are dissolued, at the second his bones are scattered; then come the Angels, and gather them: at the third hee is brought to dust and ashes, and returneth into his Graue. And this, sayth R. Meir, is more grieuous then the iudgement  of Hell: for the iust, and the sonnes of the Princes, and abortiues are iudged therewith, except they which dye on the Eeuen of the Sabbath, and in the land of Israel: of which you haue heard their rolling opinion before;Sup. cap. 13. neither will wee roll this stone to our Reader againe.



CHAP. XX. The Jewes faith and hope touching their Messias.

@. I. Of the Signes of the comming of their Messias.
THe Iewes generally beleeue, hope, and pray for a Messias; but such a one, whose Kingdome shall bee of this world, and who shall (to vse the ApostlesAct. 1.6. phrase, who were also, euen after Christs death and resurrection, partakers of this dreame) Restore the Kingdome to Israel. And because the Scripture speaketh sometimes of the poore, contemptible, and deiected  state of the promised Messias, sometimes of the puissance, renowne, and glory of his Kingdome: they therefore frame to their conceits, two Messiahs, one poore and simple, but a mightie warriour, whom they call Messias Ben-Ioseph, the other Messias Ben-Dauid;
 after the other in time, but before him in glory, and the true Messias: howsoeuer euen this also bee in their opinions but a meere man, and one which shall marry and leaue behind him a remayning and raigning posterity. The Cabalists (according to their transcendent mysteries) out of the name Adam, which the Hebrewes write without points, Adm, gather, that the soule of Adam, by a Metempsychosis passed into Dauid, and that of Dauid into Messias, which yet lyes hid for the sinnes of the Iewes.
The ancient Iewes looked for this Messias to bee sent them about that time, when Iesus came in the Flesh: as that Prophesie which is fathered on Elias testifyeth, to wit, that the world should bee two thousand yeeres Tohu, empty and without law, two thousand vnder the Law, two thousand vnder the Messias: and accordingly Christ Iesus came into the world  about the yeere after the Creation, 3963. The Iewes reckon 202. yeeres fewer in all their computations, then the Christians. Vpon this occasion, and in regard of the generall expectation of the Messias, about that time rose so many Sects, and especially that rebellion of Ben-Cochab, before spoken of, to whom R. Akibha (famous for his foure and twenty thousand Disciples) gaue testimony, and called him Messias the King. But this Ben-Cochab, the sonne of the Starre, Numb. 23. was by Adrian (as you haue seene) besieged, taken, and executed, and was called afterBen-Cobas, and Cozabh, or Cuzibha. Ben-Cozobh, the sonne of lying. They therefore, when as they found no Messias, said, that the time was deferred, because of their sinnes: and after denounced Anathema to him, that should set downe the time of his comming: And being conuinced in their consciences, that theGen 49.10. Hag. 2. Dan. 9.23. Prophesies of this time were already past and accomplished,  they affirmed in their writings, that hee was then borne, but did not yet reueale himselfe, because of their sinnes. R. Salomon Iarchi writeteh, that the ancient Iewes thought he was borne on that day, in which Ierusalem was last destroyed; but vncertaine where he hath lyen hid. Some say that he abideth in Paradise, tyed by the haire of a womans head: so interpreting that of the Canticles, TheCantic. 7.5. hayre of thy head is as purple, The King is tyed in the rafters; by rafters meaning Paradise. The TalmudistsSanhed. c. 11. write, that hee lay at the gates of Rome among the Lazars and Leapers, according to Esay 53.
 Before he commeth, they write, that ten notable miracles shall happen to warne them thereof. First, GOD shall raise vp three Kings, which shall make profession of the true Faith, but shall indeed betray it, and seduce men, and cause them to deny GOD. The louers  of the Truth shall flee and hide themselues in caues and holes of the earth, and these Tyrants shall pursue and slay them. Then shall there be no King in Israel (as itHosh. 3.4. is written) no Pastor, no holy men. The heauens shall bee shut vp, the people shall be made few; for these Tyrants (which yet by diuine dispensation shall raigne but three months) shall impose ten times as much, as was before exacted, and they which haue not to pay, shall lose their heads. And from the ends of the earth shall come men, blacke and loathsome; the dread of whose countenance shall kill men: for they haue two heads, and seuen eyes, sparkling like fire.
 The second Miracle shall bee a great heate of the Sunne, causing Feauers, Pestilences, and other diseases, so that the Gentles shall digge themselues graues, and there lye and wish  for death. But the Israelites shall haue this heat to be as wholesome medicine to them: so interpreting theMalac. 4.2. Prophet.
 GOD shall make a bloudy dew fall on the earth, of which the people, and the wicked of the Israelites shall drinke, thinking it to be good water, and shall die: it shall not hurtDan. 12.3. the iust, who shall shine, etc.
 Fourthly, GOD shall make a wholsome dew to fall, whereof the indifferent meaner sinners, sicke of the former dew, shall drinke and liue, Hos. 14.6.
 Fifthly, TheIoel. 2.31. Sunne shall be darkened thirty dayes, and then receiue againe his light, whereby many shall embrace Iudaisme.
 Sixthly, GOD shall permit the Edomites (or Romans) to rule ouer all the world: but  one especially, at Rome, shall raigne nine moneths ouer all the world, wasting large countries, laying heauy tributes vpon the Israelites. Then shall the Israelites haue no helper (as sayth Esai 49.16.) But after nine moneths GOD shall send Messias Ben-Ioseph of the children of Ioseph, whose name shall be Nehemias, the sonne of Husiel. Hee shall come with the race of Ephraim, Manasse, Beniamin, and Gad, and the Israelites hearing of it, shall flocke to him, as Ieremie sheweth,Ierem. 5.14. Conuert yee to the Lord, yee rebellious children, I will take yee, one of a City, and two of a Tribe, etc. This Messias shall ouerthrow the Edomites, and slay their King, and destroying the Empire, shall carrie to Ierusalem, holy vessels, reserued in the house of Aelian for a treasure. The King of Egypt also shall make peace with the Israelite, and shall kill the men about Ierusalem, Damascus and Ascalon; the fame whereof shall affright  all the inhabitants of the earth.
 Seuenthly, There is at Rome a marble Image of a Virgin not made by mans hand, to
 which shall resort all the wicked of the world, and shall incestuously conuerse therewith: Hence shall GOD frame an Infant in the same, which shall with breach of the marble come foorth. This shall bee named Armillus the wicked, the same which the Christians call Antichrist, of ten elles quantitie of bredth and length; a spanne bredth betweene his eyes, which shall bee red and deepe in his head; his hayre yellow, the soles of his feet-greene, deformed with two heads. Hee shall professe himselfe the Romane Messias and GOD, and shall bee accepted of them. He shall bid them bring him the Law which hee hath giuen them, which they shall bring with their Prayer-booke: hee shall cause them to beleeue in him, and shall send Ambassadours to Nehemias the sonne of Husiel, and to the people of Israel, commanding them also to bring him their Law, and to acknowledge him for GOD. Then shall Nehemias goe vnto Armillus with three hundred thousand Ephraimites, carrying with him the booke of the Law; and when he comes at him, hee shall reade out of the same this sentence, I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt haue none other Gods in my sight. Armillus shall reply, that there is no such sentence in their Law, and therefore they should acknowledge him for God, as well as the Gentiles. Then shall Nehemias ouerthrow two hundred thousand of Armillus his Armie: whereat Armillus shall bee so wrathfull, that hee shall assemble all his forces into a deepe valley, and there shall destroy (with many other Israelites) this Nehemias. But the Angels shall take and hide him, that Armillus may not know of his death, lest hee should not leaue one of Israel liuing. All Nations shall then expell the Israelites, and such affliction shall befall them, as neuer since the beginning of the world. At this time shall the Angell Michael come foorth, and seperate the wicked from Israel, as writethCap. 12. ver. 1. Daniel. They which remaine, shall flye into the desart, and for fiue and fortie dayes space, liue with grasse, and leaues, and hearbes; but all the wicked Israelites shall dye. Armillus shall after subdue Aegypt, and shall turne thence against Ierusalem, and seeke againe to waste it. These things after their manner, they fable out of the eleuenth and twelfth of Daniel.
The eighth Miracle is the arising of Michael, who three times shall winde his great horne, Es. 27.23. and Zach. 9.14. At the first sound, the true Messias Ben Dauid, and Elias the Prophet, shall shew themselues to those deuout Israelites in the desarts of Iuda, who shall then gather courage: and all the Iewes in the world shall heare this sound, and shall confesse GODS deliuerance, and all that haue beene led captiue into Assyria shall assemble together. The same horne shall strike feare and diseases into the Christians and other people. Now shall the Iewes make great iourneyes towards Ierusalem, and together with Elias and Messias shall come thither with ioy. Armillus hearing this, in his proud furie shall re-assemble his Christians against the Messias and Ierusalem. But GOD not suffering his people to fall out of one trouble into another, shall say to the Messias, Come place thy selfe at my right hand; and to the Israelites, Bee still and wait for the great succour of the Lord this day. And then shall GOD rayne fire and brimstone from Heauen, as EzekielEzek. 38.22. reporteth, wherewith Armillus and his Armie shall dye, andObad. 18. The house of Iacob shall bee as fire, and the house of Ioseph as a flame, and the house of Esau (the Idumaean Atheists which destroyed GODS house) as stubble.
At the second sound or blast of this horne of Michael, the graues at Ierusalem shall open,  and the dead arise, and Messias Ben Dauid with Elias shall reuoke into life, that Messias Ben Ioseph, and the Israelites shall send Messias Ben Dauid into all Countries of the Iewes dispersion, to cause them to come to Ierusalem; and the Nations with whom they are, shall bring them in their Chariots, and on their shoulders.
The last Miracle, is the third time of Michaels winding his horne, when GOD shall  bring foorth all the Iewes, which are by the Riuers Gosan, Lachbach, Chabor, and in the Cities of Iuda, and they without number or measure, shall with their Infants enter into the Paradise of Moses; and the ground before them and behind them shall be meere fire, which shall leaue no sustenance to the Christians. And when the ten Tribes shall depart out of the Nations, then the piller of the cloud of Diuine glory shall compasse them, and GOD shall goe before them, and shall open to them the fountaines flowing from the tree of Life, Esa. 49.10. I might adde to these miracles that of theVict Carb. l. 8. cap. 15. Asse, which Abraham rode on when hee went to sacrifice his sonne; which Moses also vsed when he returned into Aegypt (and some say, Balaams Asse was the same) this shall the Messias ride on, according to Zacharies Prophesie, Zach. 9.5.
Against these ten miraculous signes, fore-shewing Messias his comming, the most being full of troubles, they haue ten consolations: first, The certaintie of Messias comming:  secondly, That hee shall gather them from all places of the dispersion, Ierem. 31.8. but the Lame there mentioned shall bee so cured, thatEsa. 35.6. They shall leape as Harts, etc. thirdly, GOD will raise vp the dead: fourthly, GOD will erect a third Temple, according to the figure
 of that in Ezekiel 41. fiftly, That the Israelites shall then raigne ouer all the earth, Esa. 60.12. yea, all the world shall bee subiect to the Law, Soph. 3.9. sixtly, GOD will destroy all their enemies, Ezek. 25.14. seuenthly, GOD will take from them all diseases, Esa. 33.24. eightly, GOD will prolong their liues, that they shall liue as long as an Oake, Esa. 65.22. and as in the times from Adam to Noe: ninthly, They shall see God face to face, Esa. 40.5. and They all shall Prophesie, Ioel. 2.28. tenthly, GOD shall take away from them all euill concupiscence, and inclination to euill, Ezek. 36.26. Thus farre out of the booke Abhkas Rochel.


@. II.  Iewish tales of monstrous Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Men.
THeir cheere in these dayes shall bee the greatest Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, which GOD ouer created; and no other wine then that which grew in Paradise, and was kept in Adams Celler till that time: the great Oxe Behemoth mentioned in IobIob. 40.10. Of these huge creatures, see the ^ame huge reports and hideous vanities. 4. Esdras 6.49., and Psal. 50.10. All the Beasts of the wood are mine, and the beasts feeding on a thousand hills, that is Behemoth, which euery day feedeth on a thousand hills. But lest this deuouring beast should consume all the hills in the world, they tell you that hee is a stalled Oxe, still abiding in the same place, and what hee eateth in the day, groweth againe in the  night. The huge Whale Leuiathan, or, as they pronounce it, Lipiasan, must honour also this Feast: of this they write in theBaua Basia, cap 5. Talmud; that to preuent filling the world with these huge monsters, GOD gelded the male Leuiathan, and the female is slaine, and preserued in pickle, for the iust, to be eaten in the times of the Messias, Esay, 27. The male Behemoth was gelded also, and the female was stored vp for this feast. Elias LeuitaRad. Iuctma. reporteth of a huge huge Bird, also called Bariuch^e, to bee rosted at this feast; of which theBech^ros cap. vlt. Talmud saith, that an egge sometime falling out of her nest, did ouerthrow and breake downe three hundred tall Cedars; with which fall the egge being broken, ouerflowed and carryed away sixtie Villages. Wee will haue the Whetstone before we part. R. Barchannah saw a Frogge as big as Akra, a village of sixtie housholds: then came a huger Serpent and swallowed  that huge Frogge. Lastly, the hugest, hugest Crow that euer the Rabbine saw, flew and deuoured these both; and flying away, sate on a tree, which tree sure could not be lesse then the three hundred Cedars before mentioned, if this Crow were but as bigge as that egge. R. Papa answereth,Vid. Hieron. a sancto fide contra fudaeos l. 2. that he would neuer haue beleeued it, but that hee saw it. (I hope they will pardon vs if wee be of the same minde.) But would you not faine heare of a man, holding like proportion? then let R. Saul tell you of his aduentures in the burying of a dead corps, where hee encountred with a bone of a man, into which there flew a Rauen, and the Rabbi would needs follow after to see what became of her: and so, he went, and he went, three leagues in the hollow of the same bone, and could find no end therof, and therfore returned: so he perceiued it was one of the bones of Og the Giant, whom Moses had slaine. Perhaps  you will maruell how Moses could atchieue such an exploit. Forsooth, you must vnderstand, that Moses was ten cubits high, and had an Axe ten cubits long, and leaped other ten cubits in the ayre, and so gaue the deadly blow to Og, who (it seemes) was layde along in some deepe Trench, or else you will thinke the Rabbine lyed. Tush, your incredulitie makes you vnworthy to heare their storie of R. Osua, who beguiled the Angell of Death, of whom (when hee came to smite him) hee would in kindnesse needs learne his future place in Paradise;Homers Poliphemus, ^nd Guids iourney of Phaeton were pettie matters: the Iewes scorne such pedling. wherewith the deadly Angell was content, and went with him; yea, for his securitie, at his request resigned his deadly weapon into his hands. Thus at last they came at Paradise, where hee shewed him his place, which he desirous to take better view of, required his helpe to lift him higher, and then with a quicke deliuerie leapt into Paradise.  Thus did the poore coozened Angell misse his prey, and was glad with much a-doe to recouer his sword from the Rabbine. And that you might see their skill, no lesse in Cosmographie then Theologie: Another was carryed to the place where Heauen and Earth meete, and kisse each other; where, whiles hee might take the more diligent view in obseruing those parts (which the Frier of Oxford neuer saw, nor Faustus with his Mephostophilos) hee hanged his Cloake on a window in Heauen; and suddenly it was conueyed out of sight. Hereat amazed that there should bee theeues in Heauen, a voyce told him it was the heauens motion, and at such an houre the next day he might attend, and againe obtaine his Cloake; which hee did accordingly. But to take view of other strange creatures, make roome I pray, for another Rabbi with his Bird; and a great deale of roome you will say is  requisite: Rabbi Kimchi on the 50. Psalme auerreth out of Rabbi Iehudah, that Ziz is a bird so great, that with spreading abroad his wings, hee hideth the Sunne, and darkneth all the
 world. And (to leape backe into the Talmud) a certaine Rabbi sayling on the Sea, saw a bird in theLike the fish in the Legend of Saint Brandon. middle of the sea, so high, that the water reached but to her knees; whereupon he wished his companions there to wash because it was shallow; Doe it not (saith a voyce from heauen) for it is seuen yeeres space since a Hatchet, by chance falling out of a mans hand in this place, and alwaies descending, is not yet come at the bottome. I perceiue by your incredulous smiles, you will scarce beleeueCholm. cap. 3 that a Lyon in the wood Ela, roared suddenly, that all the women in Rome (foure hundred miles from thence) for very horror proued abortiue; and when he came an hundred miles neerer, his terrible noyse shooke the teeth out of all the Romans heads; and the Emperour himselfe, that caused the Rabbi to  obtaine of GOD by his prayer, to make this triall of the Lion, fell downe from his Throne halfe dead: and with much importunity requested his helpe, to cause him retire to his denne. But this roaring hath al most marred our Feast.


@. III. Their Messias his Feast.
OVr Wine you haue heard of, fetched out of Adams Celler, Esay 27.2.3. and Psal.  75.9. Before the Feast, Messias will cause these prety creatures, Behemoth and LeuiathanIob. 40.15. Psal. 104.26. to play together and make them sport: but when they haue wearied themselues in the fight, Messias with his sword shall kill them both, Esa. 27.1. Then followeth the Feast, and afterwards his Marriage;Psal. 45.10. Kings Daughters shall bee among thine honourable women: at thy right hand standeth the Queene in the golde of Ophir. Amongst the Messias his excellent women (Rabbi Kimchi expoundeth) shall bee Kings Daughters, for euery King shall repute it to his owne glory to bestow a daughter on the Messias: But the true Queene shall bee one of the fairest Israelites daughters, and shall continually conuerse with him, whereas the others must come onely at call. He shall thus beget children, which shall raigne after him, Esay 53.10. when he is dead.
 Now the state of the Iewes in his time shall be such, that the Christians shall freely build them houses and Cities, and till their grounds, and bestow on them their goods; yea, Princes shall serue them, and they shall walke in faire garments, Esa. 60.10, 11, 12. and Esa. 61.5, 6. The ayre also shall be new and wholesome, Esa. 65.17. by the benefit whereof, they shall abide sound, and liue long, and in their age bee as fresh as if they were yong, Psal. 92.14.15. The Wheat once sowne shall alway grow vp of it selfe, no otherwise then the Vines, Hosea 14.8. And if any shall desire any raine for his field, or garden, or one hearb by it selfe, he shall haue it, Zach. 10.11. Then shall be peace among men and beasts, Hos. 2.19. Esa. 11.7. If there arise any warre among the Gentiles, the Messias shall accord them, Esa. 2.4. They shall liue in great felicitie, full of the knowledge and praise of GO^.Tract. Sanhed. c. Hesek. and tract. de Idolot. and de Sabbato. The earth shall be full  hereof, etc. The Talmud also speaketh of a thousand yeeres, wherein the world shall be renewed (somewhat like the opinion of some Ancients in the Primitiue Church) in which time the iust shall haue wings giuen them like Eagles, whereby they may flie ouer the face of the waters. But the bodies of the iust which shall rise againe, shall neuer returne to dust. Ricius in this and many other of their absurdities, seekes to giue an allegoricall interpretation: but which of the Heathen haue not so patronized their superstitions and Idolatries? as appeareth in the Poets, Philosophers, Chaldaean and Egyptian Priests, whose mysticall learning cannot free their religions from being mysteries of iniquitie. Sixe thousand yeeres the world endureth, saith R. Katina, and a thousand yeere shall be a desolation, and GOD onely shall be exalted in that day (for one thousand yeeres is one day of the Lord) as it is written,  A thousand yeeres in thy sight are as yesterday; and this is a Sabbath wherein shall be the feastings aboue mentioned. And thus didThis was not Elias the Prophet, mentioned in the Scripture, but a Talmudicall Rab. and therfore no sure ground to Scheltco his positions in his Treatise of the end of the World, Englished by T. R. Vid Genebrard. Chron. in iaitio. Elias affirme, as is said two thousand yeeres the world was emptie, two thousand the Law, and two thousand Messias; but for the sins of men that is wanting, which we see wanting. (This last clause, Ricius saith, is added by the Talmudists; which still expect their Messias) eighty fiue Iubilees shall the world indure, and in the last, faith this Elias, shall come the Sonne of Dauid.
Thus haue wee heard the infancie of the Church in the time of her nonage, and of those Hebrew Patriarchs: wee haue seene also their present Infancie in these Iewish Fables, the iust reward ofIoh. 3.13. Louing darknesse rather then light. And so with our prayers to GOD, at last to take that Veile of MOSES from their hearts, that there may be One proper Shepheard, and one  sheepefold, and that meane-while, we may learne preciously to esteeme, and reueren^ly to make vse of that light we haue; warned by the spectacle of Diuine Iustice in them, through so many ages blinded in so palpable fooleries; we will now leaue them and this Holy Land,
 and seeke further what aduentures we shall light on the next neighbouring Nation; hoping and crauing for pardon of such prolixitie in this part of our Discourse, fittest, of all the other in this part of our worke to be considered.



CHAP. XXI. Of the hopes and hinderances of the Jewes Conuersion.
WHen I had now (as I thought) brought this Iewish Relation to an end, and euen  wearied the Reader with that which might much more wearie the writer: that Prophesie ofRom. 11.^5, 26. Paul, That all Israell shall bee saued, etc. which by most Interpreters is construed of the generall conuersion of that Nation, after the fulnesse of the Gentiles bee come in (as in the beginning of this Worke is said) caused my straying Pen (ready to wander from these, so farre wandering from their holy Progenitors) to vndertake this taske, also to declare, what future hopes, and what present feares and lets may be conceiued of their conuersion to Christianitie. The hope (though it be yet tossed vpon surges of almost-desperate Seas, yet) hath Anchoram sacram, a sure Anchor to relye on, and a kinde of obscure kenning of that wished-for Hauen, where it would bee.  ForP. Mart. in Rom. c. 11. Non ita perierunt ad vnum Iudaei, vt nulla supersit de illorum salute spes. The destruction of the Iewes (saith Peter Martyr) is not so desperate, but that their is some Hope left of their saluation. And a little after (alluding to the Apostles mysterie) Cum enim plenitudo fuerit iam ad Christum conuersa ex gentibus, tunc and Israelita accedent: For when there shall haue beene a full conuersion of the Gentiles vnto Christ, then shall the Iewes also come in. So Chrysostome: QuiaTom. 2. Hom. 12. in Marc. de verbis Dom. circa ficum. subintrauit plenitudo Gentium, in nouissimo saluabitur omnis Israel; because the fulnesse of the Gentiles hath come in, at last all Israel shall bee saued. The same hope is generally cherished by the rest of the Fathers. And D. Willet in a bookeDe generali and nouiss. Iudae^r. vocatione. written of this argument, brings to this purpose many authorities of Scriptures and Fathers, Gen. 9.27. and 49.10. Deut. 33.7. Psal. 125.1. Ezek. 37.1. and 47.4. Zach. 2.12. and 12.10. Mal. 3.5. Luk.  15.31. Ioh. 10.16. 2. Cor. 3.16. Apoc. 3.9. etc. and especially that in the eleuenth to the Romans, wherein many arguments are compiled together: confirmed also by the interpretations and testimonies of Origen, Athanasius, Chrysostome, Hierome, Augustine, Beda, Hugo Cardinalis, Aquinas, Gorrham, Caluin, Beza, Bullinger, Martyr, to whom wee may adde diuers others. These indeed further our hopes, which yet depend more vpon Diuine goodnesse then on humane probabilitie; the stabilitie of his Truth, which hath promised (as Paul also Rom. 11. expoundeth the former Prophets) The vnchangeablenesse of Gods Election, the bottomelesse Sea of his Mercies, the vnsearchablenesse of his Iudgements, minister hope beyond hope. Hereunto also may bee added, the common grounds, both of Reason, which they hold with vs in Nature; and of the Scripture, the ancienter parts whereof, and especially the Law of Moses, they maintayne with equall acknowledgement, (and for  the most part) with more forward industrie and zeale, then doe the commoner sort of Christins.
But theImpediments of the Iewes conuersion. impediment which haue hitherto, and doe yet with-hold them from Christianitie, doe exceed in number and power. For that fore-stalled preiudice of theirs, the glory of the Temple, the sacrifices and legall worships past, their hopes then and still of such a Monarch to their Messias, as you haue heard of, the splendour of their renowmed Ancestors, the keeping of the Diuine Oracles, their peculiar tytle of being Gods people, haue bred in them such a swelling pride, that they naturally enuie and abhorre the very thought thereof, that the Gentiles should in these things either equal or succeed them.  
Sooner (saith MartinLuth. in Mich. 4.1, 2. See also a whole booke of his Cont. Iudaeos, vbi haec fusius. Luther) then they would endure that the Gentiles (which in their daily prayers they curse and reuile) should haue any part with them in their Messias, and bee accounted co-heyres thereof, they would crucifie ten Messiahs: yea (if it were possible) would doe to death GOD himselfe, with all the Angels and creatures else, although they should therefore vndergoe a thousand hels.
Hence, in a great part, proceedeth their naturall and long continued obstinacie. And besides that preiudice, pride, and enuie, they are not a little scandalized from the Christians themselues, somewhat in regard of the mutuall differences and disagrements among Protestants; which, though in it selfe bad, is made much worse by the vnseasonable and vnreasonable exaggeration of their common Aduersarie, the Papist: but more, in respect of  those which call themselues Catholikes, and are not, but euen by these men are found to bee manifest Idolaters. ARelation of Religion of the West parts. scandall it is to see Gods Law neglected, and mans exacted
 with rigour: a greater matter, at some times to eat flesh, then the adulterours pollution of the flesh at any time: the blasphemies of some Nations; these being interiections to the vulgar, and phrases of gallantrie to the Princes: the forging and packing of miracles; wherin the Friers and Iewes concurre with equall diligence, the one in contriuing, the other in discouering them. A scandall are the alterations which they are forced by the Inquisitors, to make in their Authors and Monuments of Antiquitie: thinking, that these deuices are our best euidences. A scandall is the vowing and praying to Angels and Saints, yea, more to the Mother of Christ, then to Christ himselfe, or to GOD, to whom alone they repute this is a due sacrifice. But the greatest scandall of all others, is the worshipping of Images. Indeede it seemed strange to me, and doth to the rest of my Brethren according to the flesh, (Nathaniel, a Iew  borne, baptized in London, before the Congregation at All-hallowesApr. 1577. made this confession) euen vnto this day, in whom this blindnesse and hardnesse of heart is in part continued, through occasion giuen by them that professe the name of Iesus: and not onely in vs, which are of the house of Israel, but in others, as the Turkes and Mahumetanes, which are the race of Ishmael. Wee and our Fathers and Elders say, and in our bookes call them by no other name, but Baale abodazara, Idolatrous Masters: a thing so detestable vnto vs, as nothing more, etc. They say vnto vs oftentimes, that they doe not worship him as gods, but GOD in them. Neither are the Heathen, we say, that are round about vs, so blinded, that they thinke the stocks and stones to be GOD, but they are perswaded that God may be worshipped in them. And yet they goe farther: for the Christians in Spaine and Portugall haue it written in their  Bookes, That the Virgin Mary is the Lords Treasurer, and that she bestowes gifts and graces vpon her seruants: That her Mercie pardoneth them, whom the Iustice of her Sonne might condemne, and that our saluation lieth in her hands. But our Law teacheth, That GOD is All-sufficient, hee giueth to whom he listeth, He will not giue his glory to another, etc. The Reader may (if hee please) from that Iew himselfe, in his printed Confession, be further informed of that Partition wall, which separateth the Iew and Catholike.
They are so much the more scandalized, when they see the Catechismes recite the Decalogue, with omission of that second Commandement, which they thinke (as one of their greatest Rabbins contested with ourRel. West. Author) was the Ordinance of Christ himselfe. Yea, the Priests and Friers let passe in their Conferences with them for currant, their Iewish vpbraidings,  that Christ, a Carpenters Sonne, was an Image-maker, or at least an Author of their worshipping. As for those speculatiue plaisters of (...) and (...), of intention instrumentall and finall in worship of Images of the true, and Idols of the false gods, they are (as euen now you heard) the vnsauourest dregs to the Iew in the world.
The poore Idiot, among the Christians, can as little distinguish as the Pagan, and both amongst the Christians is like honour done to Gods Image, and to that of Saints, and to them both, in like forme of worship, as amongst the Pagans. They are forced to be at some Sermons, and there are well edified by their hearing, when they see the Preacher direct his prayer to a Crucifixe, calling it his Lord and Sauiour. Their Transubstantiation is a monster, as hideous as the former.
 The meanesIbid. vsed to their conuersion are weake; especially in some places, where they haue not the New Testament in such Language as they can vnderstand: and the Inquisitors haue inhibited and taken from them all bookes written on that Theame, in defence of Christian Religion, or against it, alledging, they will haue no disputing in matters of Religion either way, like the Iesuits Edict at Dola, forbidding all talke of GOD, either in good sort or in bad.
But of all other, this is a good furtherance, that when in their Baptisme they deny the Deuill and all his workes, they must renounce their right and propertie in all their goods and possessions; the shamefull couetousnesse of hypocriticall Christians, hauing brought these irritamenta malorum within the compasse of the Deuils workes, presupposing (forsooth) that either  the conuerted Iew, or his corrupt ancestors, haue scraped together such heapes of wealth by vsurie, or oppression, or some vnlawfull meanes or other. Therefore for the good of his soule, his body shall be left to beg or starue; while, with the leauing of his Iewish superstition, hee must likewise leaue all that he hath: and his new-receiued Religion must be a meanes to strip him of his riches, and to weane him from his wel-beloued Mammon, which that Nation is naturally so farre in loue with. This alone, to the world-bewitched Iew, is such a Partition-wall to keepe him from Christianitie, that he will venture soule and all, rather then thus betray himselfe, his wife and children, to extreme beggerie and want. And so much the worse, saithVict. de Ca^ben. cont. Iug. l. 1. c. 4, 5. Victor Carbensis, one of these Conuerts, because in their Iewish estate they had not learned any Art which now might minister vnto them sustenance. Thus are they driuen to  beg from doore to doore for their food, exposed not onely to this extremitie of want, but to the opprobries also of vnchristians Christians, who Iewishly hate the name of a Iew; nor
 can the Iew be washed from it with the sacred tincture of Baptisme; whiles the scumme of the irreligious-religious vulgar scoffe and point at them, saying, There goes a baptized Iew (a name best fitting themselues) and on the other side their owne Countreymen hate and abhorre them as Apostataes, Renegadoes, and Fugitiues. And if any shew them kinder entertainment, yet (as a nine-dayes wonder) it lasteth but a little while, whereof the Iewes haue this prouerbe, A now Conuert is as a new or cleane cloth, which at first is pleasant, but after a little wearing groweth foule and loathsome: Especially, since the fairest of his preferment (to welcome him to our Religion) is to turne Frier:Rel. West. then which profession, nothing can be more hatefull to him, who accounteth it a course against Nature; and a breach of that Ordinance ofGen. 1.28. GOD (Crescite and multiplicamini) of multiplying the world by a holy  propagation in thatHeb. 13.4. Honourable estate of Mariage, which that1. Tim. 4.1, 4. doctrine of Deuils hath made the Frier vncapable of. As for the example of Elias, and some other holy Men (whom our Popish Votaries would make Patrones of their disorderly Orders;) the Iew (herein more truely-Christian then the Papist) holdeth it a course extraordinary, and ordinarily preferreth holy Marriage farre before that seeming-holy Vow of Virginitie. Thus we see what outward scandals, besides their generall preiudice against Christianitie, doe hinder them from it: which offences, in behalfe of the Christians, together with that preiudice, Pride, and Enuie, and aboue all, that Veile which Diuine Iustice hath left vpon their hearts, GOD in his good time remoue, and grant, according to that Prophecie, That all Israel may be saued.  


CHAP. XXII. The later Inhabitants of Palestina, and the parts adioyning, since the dispersion of the Iewes till this day.

@. I.  Of the Christian times before the Saracens.
ANd thus haue we ended our Iewish Relations; our next iourney is into Arabia: a way dreadfull sometimes to the Israelites passing this way to Canaan, where yet their expected inheritance, their pillar of a cloud by day, and fire by night, their Manna, and many other miraculous effects of Diuine presence, might arme them against heates, droughts, desarts, serpents, enemies, and all oppositions. Not so your Pilgrime: now leauing Palaestina and the Holy Land, to visite these Arabian desarts full of emptinesse, stored with wants, and yet most fruitfull of that which is worse then barrennesse, the very Seminary of Mahumetane impious pietie. The very conceit whereof makes him (like the Riuer Iordan, which loseth himselfe  in this wildernesse, and therefore lingers as long as he may, diffusing himselfe in lakes by the way, as loth to mixe his Fresh-waters with the Dead Sea) to stay and stray so long in Palaestina: as he which knowes a Heathenish and Morish Mare mortuum, will swallow him (if he could sinke) as soone as he is passed hence. Let vs therefore stay here a little longer to refresh our eyes wearied with Iewish spectacles, and take view of those which haue since succeeded them in habitation, in sinne, in iudgement. And where might wee better stay, or what part of the world can yeeld such varietie and multiplicitie of obiects to both the eyes of the minde, Curiositie and Deuotion? No where such manifold alterations and diuisions of state, so diuersified a Map of Nature, so multiplied rites of Religion in such differing sects  of Heathens, Hebrewes, Mahumetans, Christians: No where Antiquitie shewing a grauer countenance: no where the Monuments of such mercies, the spectacles of such iudgements, such consolations, such desolations, such ambition of Potentates, and forraine sutors from the East, the West, the North, the South; such Miracles, such Oracles, such confluence of Pilgrims looking as farre opposite as Sampsons Foxes, with as fierie diuisions, whether in differing heresies of one, or differing names of diuers Deuotions; both Catholike and Hereticall Iewes, Saracens and Christians, concurring in visiting, adorning, adoring, these places with Titles and Rites of Holinesse. How often hath this country emtied our Westerne world with Armes and Armies to recouer it, and the Easterne in like manner to retaine it? How often hath it brought Armies of Angelicall spirits out of the highest Heauens, to couer these Hilles  with Chariots and Horses of fire, round about the holy men of GOD? How oft? But what speake I of Men or Angels? GOD himselfe loued the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of
 the world: and IESVS CHRIST, the Angell of the Couenant, true GOD, and perfect MAM, here was borne, here liued, practised, died, ascended, and hence he sent his Apostles to bee Fathers of men, that the sonnes of men might bee made the heires of GOD, co-heires with himselfe.
After, the Iewes for reiecting him, were reiected out of both the heauenly and earthly Canaan; this countrey was inhabited partly by Roman Colonies, there planted for securitie of the countrey by the Roman Emperours, partly by such Syrians as submitted themselues peaceably to the Roman Empire, both that Ethnike before Constantine, and after in farre more flourishing estate vnder the Christian Emperours, till the daies of vn-christian Phocas.An. Dom. 595. alij 604. Plat. Bonifac. 3. a Phoco Imp. magna tamen contentione obtinuit vt sedes B. Petri, etc.  This was the murtherer of Mauritius his Lord, the vsurper of the Empire, the exalter of the Roman See vnto the Ecclesiasticall Supremacie (with as good right as himselfe had to the state) a monster of mankinde, vnder whom the Empire was neere an vtter ouerthrow, as by the Hunnes, Auares, and other Nations in the West; so especially by the Persians in the East; whose Emperour Chosroes ouerthrew that Armie which had conspired against Mauricius, andP. Bizar. Hist. Pers. l. 6. Mar. Sanut. Torsel. Geor. Cedreni Hist. compend. in the fourth yeere of Phocas ouer-ranne Mesopotamia and Syria: in the next yeere after carried much prey and many captiues out of all Syria, Palestina and Phoenicia; in the seuenth yeere of his raigne possessed Armenia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, and spoiled all as farre as Chalcedon. Yet saith Cedrenus, Phocas did more harme at home,  then the enemy in the field. At the same time the Iewes made a commotion at Antioch, and slew (besides many other Citizens) Anastasius the Patriarch, in despight also putting his priuitiues in his mouth. But the Iewes paid much bloud for this butcherie; and Phocas also himselfe the chiefe Butcher, was most mercilesly butchered presently after by Heraclius his successour. They tell of a Reuelation to a certaine Holy man, that GOD had made Phocas Emperour, because hee could not finde a worse man by whom to punish that people: which I mention, that the world might see what a good Mid-wife Rome (then in trauel) had to helpe her babe Antichrist into the world. But to returne to the Storie, Heraclius could not withstand the Persian insolence, but lost in his first yeere Apamea, and Edessa, and in the next Caesarea, from whence they carried many thousands into  captiuitie: in the fourth Damascus was taken, and in the fifth Ierusalem, where (by reason of the Iewish crueltie, who bought all the Christians they could to slaughter them) there were slaineG. Tyrens. l. 1. saith 36000. ninetie thousand. Zacharias the Patriarch, together with the holy Crosse, and exceeding store of captiues and spoile, were carried into captiuitie. The next yeere they ouercame Egypt, Africa and Ethiopia. Chosroes neglects all ouertures of peace made to him by Heraclius, except they would deny their crucified God, and worship the Sunne. He also caused the Christians in his dominion to become Nestorians, the cause perhaps why almost all the farre Easterne Christians to this day are, or at least are called, Nestorians. Against him Heraclius continued a six yeeres expedition, in which hee ouerranne his countries, ouerthrew his Armies, sacked his Cities, Castles, and Palaces, and at last assisted his eldest sonne Siroes (whom Chosroes sought to dis-herit) against him, who tooke him, and  hauing before exposed him to all contumelious insultations, and almost starued him in a darke prison, and slaine all his other children in his sight; with abominable tyrannie shot his tyrannicall father to death. So died Chosroes; a successour of Sennacherib, in the dominion of many the same countries, subiection to the like blasphemous impietie, and reward by like parricide. Heraclius in the ninteenth yeere of his raigne visiteth Ierusalem, restoring the captiued crosse and Patriarch by restitution of Siroes. He banished thence all the Iewes, prohibiting by Edict that none should come neere it by three miles.


 @. II. Of the Saracens and Turkes in Palestina.
THe Saracens had done good seruice in rhese wars against the Persians, which in the time of Heraclius began a new Religion and Empire, vnder Mahomet the founder of both: the second, after whom Omar ouerthrew Theodorus the brother of Heraclius in battell, and after him another Theodorus and Boanes his Generals, and forced the Emperour to abandon Syria, carrying the holy crosse from Ierusalem to Constantinople.
In the 26. of Heraclius hee entred Ierusalem hypocritically and pseudoprophetically clothed in a homely garment of Camels haire, and sought out the place of Salomons Temple, there to erect another; subduing soone after the whole Persian State, and a great part  of the Roman. Anno Dom. 641.G. Tyren. l. 1. c. 2. did Homar build his Temple at Ierusalem with incredible costs in matter and workmanship, enriching the same with many and large possessions and reuenues; in the Musaike worke of the inner and outward part thereof expressing in Arabike
 letters, the Author, time, and charges of the building. The forme whereof is thus described by William Archbishop of Tyrus.Lib. 8. c. 3. The Church-yard was square, about a bow-shot in length and bredth, compassed with a high wall, hauing on the West square two gates, one on the North, and another on the East: on the South was the Palace. On euery of these gates, and on the corners were high steeples, on which at certaine houres the Priests after the Saracenicall manner called them to prayers.
In this compasse none were suffered to dwell, nor to enter but with bare and washed feet, Porters being assigned to that purpose.
In the midst of this square, was another somewhat higher, whereto they ascended by staires in two places on the West side, as many on the South, and one on the East: in euery  of the corners were Oratories or Chappels erected. In the middle hereof was the Temple raised of eight-square forme, crusted within and without with Marble and Musaike worke, hauing a sphericall roofe, artificially couered with Lead. Both the inner and outward square was paued with white stone, whereby the raine water descended into many cisternes for that cause prouided.
In the midst of this Temple within the inner row of pillars, there was a Rocke of prettie height, with a Caue vnder it of the same stone, vpon which, they say, Dauid saw the Angell standing which smote the people with pestilence; after he had numbred them; where also he then built an Altar. This remained open to the view, till the Westerne Christians, winning the place, couered it with Marble, and erected thereon an Altar and Quire. Baumgarten (who  was at Ierusalem a hundred and nine yeeres since) and was thrust downe the staires by the Saracens, saith, this Temple is not now very large, and that it is twelue-cornered, with a round steeple in the midst; thereon, (as on their steeple vsually) a halfe Moone: within were reported to burne continually two thousand Lampes. The floore of the Church-yard being white Marble, occupying a bow-shot about the Temple, maketh such a reflexion of the Sun-beames, that a man is not able to endure it.
This Temple the Saracens haue in such reuerence, that the Soldan did then entitle himselfe the high Priest and defender of it. They call it the Holy Rocke. If any Iew or Christian enter therein, they compell him to deny his Religion, and turne Turke, or else they cut him asunder in the middle:Tantum reuerebantur Saraceni Templum domini quantu^ Christiani sepulch. Ies. Christi. Sanutus Tor l. 3. p. 11. c. 12. which hapned to a Christian Maronite, about sixe moneths before,  who in a Turkish habite had entred: but being knowne, for feare denied his Faith, but with reluctation of his conscience reuoked this act soone after, and liued after such a dismembring three houres. Neere this Temple is another, sometimes called Salomons porch, by the Christians dedicate to our Ladie, larger then is now that of Salomons, in which eight hundred Lampes were said to burne continually. Vnder both these wee are told, that there is a large Vault with admirable rowes of pillars, able to receiue many thousands. Breidenbachiu^ Chancellor and Deane of Mentz,B^r. Breid. 1483. who visited those places aboue twentie yeeres before him, writes almost the same things; saue that hee placeth but seuen hundred Lampes in this Temple of Salomon, or (as the Saracens called it) the Holy Rocke. The Soldan then liuing had built another neere it with eightie eight Lampes continually burning. Hee with  his companions had like to haue beene slaine by the Saracens, for offering to enter another Temple in Mount Sion, wherein was said to bee the sepulchers of the Kings of Iuda. The Saracens come farre in pilgrimage to the Holy Rocke (so they call it of the Rocke aforesaid, which is grated about with iron) which they dare not touch, for the reputed sanctitie and reported rarities thereof; Melchisedechs offering, Iacobs dreame of the Ladder (which yet some haue ascribed to the stone now at Westminster) Ieremies enclosing the Arke, by some supposed to be still therein;L. Suthenens. Adrichomius, etc. and a world of wonders told thereof. Ludolphus Suthenensis relateth of that bloudie dissection of such as entred therein. But it is high time for vs to bee gone out of it, lest some wish vs cut asunder in the midst, and this prolixe Historie made shorter by the halfe.  
Thus Palestina continued wholly subiect to the Saracens; who after being diuided into sects, the Egyptian called Siha, preuailed against the Persian or Easterne called Sunn^, and obtained all as farre as Antioch, and the Christians of those parts were in some tolerable condition, till the dayes of Hequen the Calipha, who rased to the ground the Temple of the Resurrection built in the time of Constantine, and repaired by Heraclius: hee forbade them the keeping of holy solemnities, and afflicted them with manifold other oppressions, forcing many to Apostacie. In the time of Daher sonne of Hequen the Church was re-builded. Ann. Dom. 1048. But the greedie gouernours cruelly exacted on the Christians, still threatning if their purposes were not effected, to demolish their Temple. Yet these full flies were farre more gentle then those their meagre and hungry successours, the  Turkes, which hauing conquered these parts, tyrannized most cruelly both here and in the p^rts of the lesser Asia, BelphethThus Tyr. but others ascribe it to Axan, and tell of very honourable vsage of the captiue Emperour. Kn. T. H. the Turke hauing ouerthrowne and taken Diogenes the Christian
 Emperour in battell, whom hee vsed at a Settle, ascending or descending his Throne. Thus Tyrius. Raimond de Agiles testifieth, that the Surians or Christians of those parts, of whom remained about Libanus sixtie thousand, at that time of the Franks inuasion, (so called as hee supposeth of Sur, the name of Tyrus till this day) endured such miserie both in this Turkish and that former Saracenicall slauerie, that many were compelled to forsake their Religion, and be circumcised? some others for feare deliuered their young children to Circumcision, and some were violently taken to this purpose out of their mothers bosomes, the father being slaine, and the mother violated. Churches were subuerted, Altars ouerthrowne, and superstitious Images by a contrary superstition were done away: and if any  mans deuotion desired them in priuate, they were forced by a monethly or yeerely price to redeeme them. They prostituted in Stewes their sonnes and daughters, and yet the mother durst not weepe at the sight.


@. III. Of the exploits of the Frankes and other Westerne Christians in Palestina.
 THirtie eight yeeres they groaned vnder this Turkish yoke, from which they were freed by the Franks and other Westerne Nations, vnder the conduct of Godfrey of Buillon, Robert of Normandie sonne to the Conquerour, and other, who by the instigation of Peter the Eremite first, (whomGuibert. Abbas hist. Ierosol. they so admired, that his words and deeds were acounted diuine, and the very hayre plucked off his Mule for Reliques) and after of Pope Vrban (calling a Councell at Claremont to this purpose) crossed themseluesIlle in tempore spiritu peregrini dei Occidentales populi af flati, etc. Ot. praef. Fris. ad Frid. 1. to warre in and for the Holy land against the Infidels. GOD blessed their designes, and gaue into their hands all the three Palestina's: for so they were diuided according to the three chiefe Cities, Ierusalem the first, the second vnder Caesarea, the third adiacent  to Scythopolis, and subiected by the Christians to Nazareth. From Antiochia to Aegypt, and as farre as Edessa, was subdued to the Christian Faith and Scepter, farre more then Dauid or Salomon possessed. They had (saith Vitriaco) foure principalities, that of Edessa, chiefe Citie (after his account) of Media, the second of Antiochia, the third of Tripoli, the fourth of Ierusalem. But of their happie atchieuements another place is fitter. They which list to be acquainted with these warres; besides Tyrensis, Vitriacus, Sanutus and others of later times, may out of the writings of diuers eye-witnesses which were in that first expedition, satisfie themselues, as Robertus Monachus, Raimundus de Agiles, Fulcherius Carnotensis, and diuersSee Gesta Dei per Francos in two large Tomes. Rob. Mon. hist. Ierosol. Guibert. ab. hist. Ieros. Baldricus Arch. hist. Ieros. Ita etiam Gesta Francos. Raimund de Agiles hist. Ier. Fulch Carnat Gesta. Peregr. Albert. Aq hist. Ieroso^. others.
Ierusalem was entred on the twelfth of Iuly 1099. being Friday; and after much bloud and slaughter in the Citie, they set vpon those which had betaken themselues to Salomons  Temple (so was that called which Homar built) where, saith Robertus Monachus, was so much bloud shed, that the slaine bodies were rolled by the force thereof, and armes or dismembred hands swamme vpon the bloud, and were ioyned to strange bodies: the killing souldiers were scarce able to endure the hot vapours of the bloud of the slaine. Guibertus Abbas saith, the bloud reached to the ancles; Baldricus, to the calfe of the legge; Raimond de Agiles, that they rode in bloud vp to the knees, and to the brydles of the Horses, and Fulcherius, that there were slaine in this Temple about ten thousand, and many of them were ripped vp by the Frankes to finde gold which they had swallowed, and the bodies after burned in heaps to finde the mettall in the ashes. Albertus Aquensis addeth, that the third day after the victorie, for feare of the remained captiued Saracens, (lest they might ioyne with  the enemie against them) and in furious zeale, they made a fresh massacre, slaying those which for pittie, or couetousnesse of ransome, they had in hotter bloud spared: not the honour of Noble Matrons, not the delicacie of tender Maydens, not the children yet in the wombes of their pregnant mothers, not the Infants now sucking at the brest, not the hopes of innocent yonglings, playing or crying by the mothers hands; not sighes, teares, promises, prayers, lamentable cryes, twyning embraces of the legges, bodyes, hands of the bloudie Souldier, could stay the hand euen then giuing the fatall blow, but Ierusalem was now againe filled with slaine carkasses. Generally it is agreed, that they found much wealth in the Citie to pay them for their paines. Soone after they encountred an Armie of three  hundred thousand Saracens, which they ouerthrew, being but twentie thousand Christians: where Robert Duke or Earle (for I finde both Titles often giuen him, but in ancient Stories of those times, both hee and King William his father are oftenest called Earles) of Normandie
 tooke with his owne hand, the chiefe standerd of the Enemie (being a long speare couered with siluer, with a golden Globe or Apple on the top, hauing slaine the bearer, and thereby terrifying the enemie and putting them to rout) which was long after reserued as a monument in the Temple of the Sepulchre.
Many other victories being obtained, the Saracens were either expelled Palestina, or subiected to the Franks, and the Christians which were poorer and few, recouered freedom. Yet as few as they were in the Cities, Raimond tells of threescore thousand Surians or Christians of that Countrey, which in this long Saracenicall night continued their habitations in the Mountaines of Libanus. But of this is no maruell: for euen till these dayes, notwithstanding the manifold changes and chances of those Regions and peoples, there haue in the Mountaines  and Desarts of Palestina and Syria liued some Nations, neither acknowledging the Saracenicall Law nor Empire.


@. IIII. Of the Azopart and Assysine.
SVch were the AzopartAzopart. which liued in Caues in the Desarts of Ascalon, which King Baldwin the successour of Godfrey sought to smoake and fire out of their dens, and  by cunning Stratagems destroyed as many as hee could: and iustly. For these being blacke in hue, blacker in conditions, vsed to rob and slay such as they could lay hold on.Assysines. Tyr. l. 20 c. 31. Such were the Assysines, which liued in the Prouince of Tyre, as Tyrius reports of them: not farre from Antaradus, which had ten strong holds with the Countrey adiacent, and were thought to bee in number sixtie thousand. Their gouernment went not by inheritance, but by Election: the chiefe or Grand Master of them being called The Old Man, who was obeyed in whatsoeuer hee commanded, were the attempt neuer so dangerous. If he gaue to one or more of them a weapon, and enioyned the killing of such an Enemie, Prince or priuate man, they gladly vndertooke it, with the death of that partie, or themselues in attempt. Both Saracens and Christians called them (the reason of the name vnknowne)  Assysines. For the space of foure hundred yeeres they were zealous followers in a preciser course of the Mahumetan Sect. But about the time when our Author the Archbishop of Tyre wrote this, their OLD MAN grew into distaste of his Religion; and by reading the Scriptures, became desirous of Christianitie. Hee perswaded his Subiects also to forsake Mahumetisme, prohibiting their Fasts, demolishing their Moschees, allowing Swines fl^sh. He sent also to Almaricus King of Ierusalem, offering to turne Christian, if hee might hue peaceably, and bee released of two thousand Byzantines, which he yeerely payd for quietnesse to the Knights Templers, who had certaine Castles bordering on him. The King was content to pay this money himselfe; but by the treacherie of the Templers, the Legat was slaine, and foule scandall inflicted on the Christian name, the Assysines neuer after returning  to their old Mahometrie,Mat. Par. in Steph. and P. Aemil. Lud. Iunior, etc. or turning anew to Christianitie. Mathew Paris relateth, that these Assysines thus closely and treacherously murthered Raimund Earle of Tripolis Anno Dom. 1150. Paulus Aemylius affirmeth, that these Assysines came out of Persia, that they were taught from their child-hood diuers Languages, and to conceiue it meritorious of heauenly reward to kill the enemies of their Faith, that their OLD MAN was called also Arsacida. Two of them (saith hee) slew Raimund, two of them after slew Conrad FerratensisVid. G. Nubrig l. 4. 24. and seq and l. 5. 16. King Richard was taken by the Duke of Austria vnder this colour. walking in the Market-place of Tyre, which Citie hee had defended against the enemies, who being executed therefore, seemed very cheerefull. And Saint Lewis himselfe hardly escaped the like treacherie.
Marcus Paulus reporteth of one in the North-East parts of Persia, called The Old Man  of the Mountaine, by proper name Aloadin,See l. 4. c. 8. of this Hist. M. P^^o. l. 1. c. 21 Odoricus. which had built a strong Castle, and therein an imaginarie Paradise, who vsed that Assasine mysterie, promising to reward these murtherers with the pleasures of Paradise, a taste of which in all fleshly delights he had before giuen them. In the Tartarian conquest (s^yth Odoricus) he had so slaine diuers Tartars, which therefore besieged his Castle, and after three yeeres siege forced it for want of victuall. So Paulus;Haith. c. 24. but Haithonus hath seuen and twentie yeeres, and that then it was yeelded for want of cloathes, and not of meates: hee calls this Castle Tigado, and the inhabitants by the former names of Assasines. This was done by Haalon the Tartar Anno 1262. About a hundred yeeres since theyCartwright. tell of the ike Paradise of Aladeules in those parts destroyed by Selym the Turke: but I thinke it was rather the memorie of Aloadin, then any truth of  Aladeules. It is most remarkeable, that Marcus Paulus testifieth of two Deputies or Lieutenants vnder him, the one inSee l. 4. c. 1. Curdistan, where the like generation of irreligious
 and robbing Curdi do yet remaine: the other neere to Damasco, of whom we haue spoken.See. l. 4. c. 1. The place where this OLD MAN liued, was called Mulchet, that is, a place of Heretikes: for so the Saracens deemed them. Beniamin Tudelensis, aboue foure and fortie yeeres agoe,Ben. Tudelensi^ hath written that these Hhasissin neere Baalgad vnder Libanus, followed not the doctrine of the Ismaelites, but of one whom they esteemed a Prophet, whose word they obeyed, whether to liue or die. Him they call Hheich all Hhassissin: he is their Senator, at whose command all the Mountaines goe out and in. His seate is in the Citie called Karmos, which was sometime the biginning of the Country of Sehon. And they haue a Religion amongst themselues, according to the doctrine of their Senator. They are a terrour to all men; for they kill euen Kings with the Sawe. Their Dominion continues eight dayes iourney. They hold warre  with the Christians called Frankes, and with the King of Tripolis, of the Region of Saam (Damascus) wherein hapned not long since an Earth-quake, whereby were slaine in that Region, many both Iewes and Gentises, and in the Land of IsraelGauteras in his Bella Antioch. mentions this or such another terrible Earthquake about this time. Iac. de. Vitr. l. 3. twenty thousand. Thus farre out of the Iew. Iacobus de Vitriaco Bishop of Acon, in his Easterne Storie, accounts it no small grace of GOD, that in the siege of Damiata (where himselfe was present An. 1219.) their chiefe men escaped these Assasines; they being (after that murther by the Templaries committed on their Legate) for the most part enemies vnto them. Yet one he mentioneth, the sonne of the Earle of TripolisAn. Do. 1172. Edward the first, his father then liuing, warred in these parts, and was by one of these Ass^sines almost slaine. l. 1. c. 14. being at his deuotions, in the Church of our Lady at Carchusa, slaine by them as he was kneeling before the Altar. Whereupon the Templers warred on them, and forced them to the Tribute of three thousand Byzantines. In his first Booke, he  telleth their customes at large. The place of their first originall, whence they came into Syria, he placeth neere Baldac or Bagdet, in the confines of Persia: they willingly and cheerefully obey all the commands of their Abbat, Master, or, OLD MAN of the Mountaines in all things absolutely, esteeming it meritoriousOmnem indifferenter obedientiam superiori suo exhibitam, sibi credunt esse vitae aeternae meritoriam. Vitriac. Vit. l. 1. c. 81.: who also bringeth vp children of purpose, in secret and pleasant places, and in diuers languages, where they neuer see any but their Masters, till their Lord send them thence for hatred of his enemies, or at request of his friends, or for reward and price, giuing them a sharpe knife or blade for such exploits. If they dye, they are accounted Martyrs, and reuerenced as Saints; their Parents rewarded with gifts: and if they were bond, with freedome. Hence it is, that they take vpon them so cheerefully this deadly Legacie, with no lesse warinesse and subtile in Protean insinuations  and fashion-imitations, then vehemencie of desire and resolution, studious to effect the same, sometimes in the habit of the Clergie men, or Monkes, sometimes like marchants, alwayes applying themseluer to others fashions, that it is impossible to preuent them: inferiour persons they disdaine to deale with, but mightier Potentates must either purchase their securitie, or alwayes be strongly garded. Vitriacus affirmeth, that they were imagined to bee descended from the ancient Esses; and that they still retained the Iewish writing, hauing letters mixed of the Hebrew and Chaldee, which perhaps may bee the Samaritan Letters.
Marinus Sanutus Torsellus, about three hundred yeeres since, wrote a large booke, entituled Secreta fidelium Crucis, touching the recouerie of the Holy Land,Mar. Sanut. l. 3. pars 10 c. 8. Haply this name Arsasidae was either taken or giuen them of Arsaces the first founder of the Parthian Empire in those parts whence these came. in which he mentions  these Assasines, or as he cals them Arsasidae; of whom besides other things hee relates this Storie. An. 1194. Boamund Prince of Antiochia sends for Leuuon Lord of Armenia his vassall (so great where then the Christian affaires) to come to him, which he at first refused, because he had in like manner sent for his brother Rupinus, and made him prisoner: but after, vpon condition he came with such an Ambuscado, that when Boamund would contrarie to Couenant haue taken him, himselfe was taken and carried prisoner into Armenia: from whence he was deliuered by meditation of Henry then Gouernour of the Holy-Land, vnder Q. Isabell, at whose hands the said Lord of Armenia desired, and receiued the Title and Crowne of a King. And this was the beginning of that Royall Title to those Kings of Armenia. But this Henry in his returne, visited (according to his request) the King of the Arsasidae  (so he calles him) who brought him to a Castle where was a very high Tower, and in each corner thereof stood two men clothed in white. Then said the King to his ghest, Your Subiects will not obey you in like manner as mine will me; and withall gaue a humaneEx^rcauit. or spetting token: and presently two of those white ones cast themselues downe, and with the fall died instantly. Then did hee offer the like experiment in the rest, but Henry refused, as hauing more proofe then he desired of this, more then Votarie obedience. He offred him also, that if he had any enemie, he would procure him to bee slaine by these his seruants.
I stay the longer on these cursed Assassines, that the Reader may make comparison, and obserue their resemblance with the latter Iesuiticall brood, in totall and simple obedience, the opinion that it is tolerable, nay lawfull, commendable, meritorious of heauen, to kill, and  treacherously to murther the Princes of the earth, and the glorious martyrdome of such as are therefore executed.



@. V. Of the Dogzijn and Drusians, and other Pagans there.
Dogzijn or Drusians.ANother like both People and Sect, Brethren in euill, were the Dogzijn, of whom Beniamin thus writeth. About ten miles from Sidon, there is a certaine people which holds warre with the Sidonians, called in their language Dogzijn, of others called Pagans, of no Religion or Sect: They dwell in the Mountaines, in Caues, and holes of Rocks, obeying no King or Gouernor, but liue at randome in the highest  Hills, and steepest Rockes, three dayes iourney vnto the Hill Hermon. They are infamously incestuous, the Fathers polluting their owne Daughters. And in a solemnitie which they yeerely celebrate, all both men and women come to a common Feast, where they change Wiues with each other. They hold that the soule, when it departeth out of the body of a good man, passeth into some Infant then begotten: but of a bad man, into a Dog or other Beast. Their knowledge is according to their life. There are no Iewes amongst them, but sometimes Artificers, and diuers come vnto them for Marchandize, and goe away againe, and the Iewes are gently entertained of them. This people is very swift in running vp and downe those hills, and not to bee vanquished of other men. Thus farre Tudelensis.
Martin a Baumgarten relateth, that the Venetian Consull told him of a Sect not farre  from Tripoli, which vse at certaine times promiscuous lusts, the Father with the Daughter, the Mother with the Sonne, and each with his next Mate: The issue thereof if Male, to be killed with needles, as sacrificing their bloud, the Females preserued. Hee names them not. But it is likely to be the posteritie of those Dogzijn, perhaps that of killing their Males being added by such as make bad things worse (and yet Epiphanius reporteth of the Gnostikes, as great or worse abhominations) for euen the Diuell himselfe may bee slandered. But long before his time,Epiph. haer. 26. Iac. de Vitr. l. 1. cap. 13. Iacobus de Vitriaco did write of a certaine miserable people liuing in the Mountaines, and not farre from Tripoli, which in great part obserued the Law of Mahomet, but had another hidden Law which they said they might reueale to no man, but to their owne Children, when they grew to be of ripe age. Their wiues and daughters, with an implicite  faith professe a beliefe in the same, but know it not. And if the Sonne should vpon any cause reueale it to his Mother, the Husband would slay his Wife, and the Father his Sonne. These eate Swines flesh, and drinke Wine, and of other Saracens are accounted Heretikes. These haue their workes of darknesse in secret, wherein they practise filthinesse, and such things as are contrarie to the Female sexe, and therefore feare lest their wiues would not endure their execrable rites, if they were therewith acquainted.
Howsoeuer the case standeth, a filthy Sect it was and is. For euen still it continues: and (if my coniecture deceiue not) these are those Drusians of which many Authors haue written, falsely surmising them to bee the Relikes of the Latine Armies, and of those Frankes which sometime possessed these parts of Syria. I deny not but that some of these might ioyne vnto them, in and for that fellowship of filthinesse; as heere in these parts, many debauched  beasts, with those beastly Gypsies: yea, I thinke that the Assassines and these, since the Tartars destroyed the chiefe of that Sect in Persia, and possessed the parts of Syria, haue growne into one people; receiued also into their societie whatsoeuer dregges of Nations, male-contents, exiles, and vnruely borderers, those Mountaines could secure, in, and thorow all the changes of State and Dominion, which those Countries haue suffered; which freedome they retayned not onely in the weaker, and more vnsetled gouernment of the Mamalukes and Aegyptian Soldans, but euen still continue (in some sort) notwithstanding the Ottoman greatnesse. Circumcision they embrace with the Turkes, vse the libertie of Christians in drinking Wine, and more then beastly licentiousnesse in incestuous copulations with their owne  Daughters.G. Bot. Ben. Thus Botero. Knolls in his Turkish Historie saith, they follow one Isman, a Prophet of their owne, and are not Circumcised. But I haue learned of a friend of mine, one Master Pountesse, who hath had acquaintance with them, that they are Circumcised. And that they are of those Dogzijn which Beniamin mentions, it is apparant by their place of abode, by their hereticall Sect and Customes so like, and by their name easily changed from Dogzijn to Dorzijn, and so to Drozijn or Druzijn, an easier change then so long a time, and forraine pronunciation vsually admit.
Biddulph. l et.Biddulph writes, that they retaine still Baptisme, and the names of Christians, but are called Rafties, that is, Infidels. Selym the second sought to bring them vnder the Turkish yoke, and his successors likewise till these dayes, yet both these and the Arabians were neuer made  fully subiect. Thus the ancient Scythians, the Reisbuti in the Mogols Countrey of Cambia, the Curdi,Cartwright, Barbaro, and others. other Mountaine inhabitants and borderers (as also a long time the Welshmen
 in Wales) vnder the greatest soueraignties haue enioyed a kinde of freedome, secured by the mountainous situation, their naturall hardinesse, and the greatest cause, their pouertie, as a bootlesse bootie, and worthlesse conquest, to buy barenesse and barrennesse with the price of bloud. These Drusians are a people warlike,Knolls Amur. 3. and religious obseruers of their owne superstition, yeelding due obedience vnto their naturall Lords: they weare long coats, reaching to the knees, but toned before, and no breeches: and vse the Arcubuse and Scima^ar. They are increased in numbers, (which might come to passe by the long warres, which the Westerne Christians with often inuasions made in those parts after they were dispossessed of the Kingdome of Ierusalem; the same seconded by the Tartars a long time: and after it was the confines  of the Turkish and Mamalukes Empires: so that it is no maruell if they bee of sundry Nations and Religions, being the confluence of so many people, and sinke of so many Sects, howsoeuer the Drusians name bee predominant. They inhabit from Ioppa, to Caesarea and Damasco. Some dissensions among their Princes gaue opportunitie to Ebrain Bassa, An. Dom. 1585. to spoyle their Countrey, and extort what hee could, one of them helping to cut the others throat, yet neuer could he force Man-Ogli to come in and submit himselfe, although herein he vsed the Turkish forces, and wiliest stratagems, then also inuesting Aly Ebre-Carfus in the soueraigntie, sweating him to the Turke, and carrying with him Ebne-Mansur, and Serafadin, two of the Drusian Princes which had submitted themselues in his Galleyes, as prisoners to Constantinople.
 They are still (it is the Relation of a Traueller) gouerned by a succession of Princes whom they call Emyrs. The present Emer of Sidon, is Faccardine, a man neuer seene to pray,M. G. Sandys l. 3. p. 210. nor in a Mosque; small of stature, couragious and tyrannicall. Hee neuer commenceth battell, nor executeth any notable designe, without the consent of his Mother a woman skilled in Magicke. To his Towne hee hath added a Kingly Signiorie, what by his sword, and what by his stratagems. He pickt a quarrell with Ioseph Emer of Tripoli, and dispossest him of Barut, and after sackt Tripoli it selfe, and forced the Emer to flie to Cyprus: and when with the forces of Damasco (for hee got to be made Seidar or Gouernour of the Souldierie there) he sought to repayre his losses in the field, the Damascens were foyled, and pursued to the gates of their Citie, the conquerours lodging in the Suburbs, whence they were remooued by the  force of fifteene hundred thousand Sultanies. This was Anno 1606. Thus vnder the tytle of a Subiect to the Turke, but yeelding obedience at large, he holdeth Gazir, Barut, Sidon, Tyrus, Acre, Saffet, or Tyberias, Diar, Camer, Elkiffe, the two heads of Iordan, the Lake Bemochonthis (now called Houle) and Sea of Tyberias with the hot Bath adioyning, Nazareth, Cana, and Mount Tabor. Saffet is his principall Citie, in which are many Iewes. The grand Signior often threats his subuersion, both for his incroaching, and intelligence with the Florentines, which hee diuerteth with gifts and fauour: but yet prouides for it by fortifying his holds, able to hold out a long warre, hauing also fortie thousand expert souldiers in continuall pay, besides the aduantage of the Mountaines, and in greatest extremitie, the Sea and the Florentine. Hee hath the fifth part of the increase of all things, and head-money for all  Cattell within his dominions, and two Dollers yeerely for the head of euery Iew and Christian. The Marchants are there so safe, that they may trauell with their purses in their hands, yet subiect to tyrannicall seizures, vpon the death of Factor or Owner. But more then enough of these Drusians, and other peoples mingled with them. Biddulph mentions Vseph Beg, or Lord Ioseph, which in the Mountaines holds out against the Turke: he tells also of one Asan Bashaw, which ruleth like a King in an ancient Citie called Achilles, paying duties to the Turke successiuely from his predecessours of the house, as it is sayd of Sanballat, and is called Eben Sumboloc, and his Kindred call one another Amiogli, for they account themselues Ammonites. This Bashaw is old, and referreth matters of gouernement to his kinsman Vseph Beg. It should seeme they are some relickes of the Cutheans or Samaritans, which  perhaps ioyne with the Drusians in many things. There are also in these parts of Palaestina many Arabians, which it seemes haue pestered those places euer since the inuasion of Homar, if not before; and these still vse to prey vpon the Pilgrims that trauell to Ierusalem, notwithstanding the conduct of Ianizaries. Of these Arabians, one Sect is calledIac. vit. l. 1. c. 12. Volater. l. 11. Beduines, which imagining the day of euery mans death fatally destined, neuer goe armed to battell, vsing onely Speares and Swords, disdaining Bowes and Arrowes, as tokens of cowardise. These are false alike to Christians and Saracens, easily betraying either, alway addicting themselues to the strongest: dwell in Tents, goe cloathed with skinnes, wander vp and downe in Tribes, still seeking fresh pastures, feed on Milke, and commit the care of all businesses to their wiues. Some of the Easterne people worship to the East, which they say,  they learned of their fathers that were Christians, themselues being Mahumetans, yet account other Saracens hereticall: and some esteeme the Sunne to bee the chiefe God. Thus Vitriacus.



@. VI. Of the vnchristian Christians.
SVch are and haue beene the vnholy Inhabitants of the Holy Land since the Iewes expulsion, neither can wee say much better of their conquerours the Persians, Arabians, Turkes, Tartars, Mamalukes, and after these the Turkes in the Ottoman Dynastie: no, nor can wee commend the Christians for much Christianitie, whether the natiue Surians, (some of which haue passed through all these changes without any  great change, either to the Saracenicall or Westerne Rites from their Greekish) or their inuaders and conquerours. For these soone degenerated into an vnchristian Christianitie, and were called Pulam, successors of the places, not the conditions of those which passed thither with Duke Godfrey.Sanut. l 3. They gaue themselues to effeminate delicacies, to excesse in dyet and apparell, full of intestine discords and ciuill contentions, coozners and false, addicted to Witch-crafts and Diuinations, contumeliously abusing Pilgrims, whom deuotion had brought from farre Countries thither, or which came to helpe them against the Saracens, calling them in scorne the sonnes of Hernaud. The Maronite Christians were in times past sixtie thousand, but now are few: neither is this a fit place for discourse of that and other Sects of Christians liuing in, or frequenting these holy places, Nestorians, Iacobites, Abassens,  Armenians, Georgians, Greekes and others. But the conditions of the Inhabitants at that time,Vitriaco. l. 1. c. 71.72. wee mention as the cause of the losse of that Countrey to the Saracens: the Clergie minding more (as a Clergie man of their owne expresseth) the Churches goods then her good; to fleece, then to feed their flockes; the Regulars enriched with possessions, religion brought foorth wealth, and the daughter ate vp the mother. The Natiue Laytie melted in lusts and pleasures, grew more fearefull then women, except they were assisted with the Frankes, English, or other Westerne people: strengthning themselues in the strength of their contentions, against their Christian brethren with Saracenicall assistance. Their wiues they mewed vp very close from the sight, almost of brethren and neerest kindred, scarce suffering them to visit the Church once in a yeere: some of the greater ones erecting Altars in their  wiues bed-chambers, whereon some sillie Priest might mumble his Parrot mumsimus. They the more enraged, vsed all meanes with womens wiles and deuillish wils by Sorceries, or any other meanes to effect their filthy purposes.Vit. l. 1. c. 8. It was also made a refuge and receptacle of the most disordered persons in these Westerne parts, Theeues, Robbers, Periured, Adulterers, Traytors, Murtherers, Parricides, Pyrats, Apostate Monks, and Nunnes, which became common harlots, and other monsters in shapes of men and women, passing the Sea to this Land entituled Holy; where Coelum non animum, changing soyle not soule; they practised the like villanies with lesse shame, being further from their friends. And easily might they escape after greatest mischiefes, either running as Rennegadoes to the Saracens, or escaping by ship to some neere Iland, or to such priuiledged Sanctuaries, as euery Religious house afforded, to the preiudice of iustice and Religion. Some also which in Europe had beene condemned for  some crimes, by mediation of friends obtained this exchange of punishment to bee sent hither, where they became harbourers of Whores, Gamers, Murtherers, and for further impunitie were at a yeerely fee with the great ones. Neither could the feare of humane Iustice, or diuine Iudgements reclaime them, many terrible Earthquakes happening amongst them, (by one of which Tyrus was almost vtterly together with the Inhabitants destroyed) shake their earthie hardned hearts, or mooue them to relent. No maruell if the Land could no longer brooke such Inhabitants, but exposed them to the sword of the Saracens, and then againe (for so the father when hee hath chastened his children, casts the rod into the fire) to the Tartars, and from one to another, till the Turke now Lords it amongst them in sort as you  haue heard. And euen still the wickednesse of the people in vnnaturall lusts, and namelesse filthinesse is such, that I abhorre further to write of it: so is this paradise of the world, both in bodily and spirituall pleasures and fruitfulnesse, now become a desolate wildernesse for the one, and disconsolate in the other, whiles one is loath to sow for another to reape. Iustus es Domine, and Iusta sunt iudicia tua.






 OF THE ARABIANS, SARACENS, TVRKES, AND OF THE ANCIENT INHABITANTS OF ASIA MINOR:  AND OF THEIR RELIGIONS. The Second Booke.

CHAP. I. Of Arabia, and of the ancient Religions, Rites, and Customes thereof.
ARABIA is a very large Region,Maginus. lying betweene two Bayes or Gulfes of the Sea, the Persian on the East, and that which hereof is called the Arabian, on the West: On the South is the Ocean; on the North is Syria and Euphrates.Plin. l. 6. c. 28. Orosius. l. 1. Plinie sets downe the Northerne Limits, the Hill Amanus, ouer against Cilicia and Commagena; many Colonies of them being there planted by Tigranes the  Great: it thence (sayth hee) declineth to our Sea and the Aegyptian shore, and to the heart of Syria to Mount Libanus. By a certaine workemanship of Nature, it much resembleth the forme and site of Italy.Solin. 36. Arabia signifieth Holy, as Solinus affirmeth. But in the Scripture (...) Harabi signifieth both a robber by the way, and an Arabian. So Ier. 3.2. InSo our English transl. and the Span. Ital. Pagnine, Vat. Tremel. etc. the wayes thou hast sate for them as the Arabian in the Wildernesse, in the vulgar Latine is translated, Expectans eos quasi latro insidians in solitudine. Saint Hierome interprets (...)Hier. in Es. 2^. in Ezec. 27. Arabia and vesper and coruus and planicies and occidens, and acknowledgeth the fitnesse of the former name in Ieremie, answering the condition of the people giuen to robbe  on the borders of Palestina, and all Trauellers from Ierusalem to Iericho. Thus hee comments on that place of Ieremie, which he translates, Quasi latro in solitudine, the Hebrew being Harabi. Hence Martin del Rio, Adeo autem latrocinijs infames, vt Hebraeis Arabs latronem denotet, sicut Chananaeus Mercatorem, Chaldaeus Mathematicum. From the practice of the people their proper names became appellatiues, an Arabian for a robber, (as Sarak also) a Chananite for a Marchant, a Chaldean for a Mathematician. The Nations of this wide Tract of Land are many. It is the next to bee spoken of in this our Discourse, according to Geographicall methode, as confining vpon Iudaea, whence wee last departed.
Draudius in Solin. Beros. l. 4.Some deriue the name from Arabus, the sonne of Apollo and Babylonia. And the forged Berosus of Annius telleth, That Ianus Pater sent one Sabus into Arabia Foelix, Arabus into  Arabia Deserta; and Petreius into Petraea, all Nephewes of Cham; all indeed the Sonnes of Annius his braine. True it is, that Arabia is commonly diuided into those three parts, Petraea, Deserta, and Foelix. Of the Nations in Arabia, Plinie writeth largely, amongst the rest
 naming the Saracens, whom S. Hierome often, Epiphanius also, and other of the ancient Fathers mention, of which wee are anon to speake at large. But long before Plinie, the Scripture speaketh of the people of this Region, not only those which are said to descend of Cush, the sonne of Cham, but of many others, which descended of Abraham, as Ishmael the sonne of Abraham, by Hagar; andGen. 25.2. Zimram, and Iokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah, with their posteritie, the issue of Abraham by Keturah: who, after that Seba, and Sabbetha, and Rama, and Sabtheca, had peopled some parts of Arabia, were sent away with their portions Eastward to the East Countrey, that is into Arabia; where it is likely they mingled their Seed and Generations with those former of the posteritie of Cham: for therefore it seemeth Moses wife, Zipporah, was called aNumb. 12.1. Cushite, or (as some reade) an Aethiopian, not that  shee was of the Countrey Ae^hiopia in Africa, but a Midianite of Arabia, of Abrahams race: which Countrey, because the posteritie of Cush had first inhabited, and happily had mingled themselues in marriages with them, shee is called a Cushite, which some wrongly expound, an Aethiopian, if they vnderstand it properly; although Cush were also the Father of the Aethiopians. But of this name Aethiopia, sometimes taken more largely, otherwhiles more straitned, you shall see more in our seuenth Booke, the first Chapter. This posteritie of Abraham are, in Scripture, often called the children of the East. Saint HieromeHier. in Es. 21. reckons also to Arabia the Idumaeans, Moabites and Ammonites: and certaine it is, that the places sometimes by them inhabited, are now accounted to Arabia. The many names of the Arabian Nations, they which will, may reade in Plinie and others. MohamedGabriel and Iohn Marenitae translators of the Nub^an Geographer, who hath the most exact description of Arabia. Ben-Iacob Sirazita, Author of the  Arabike Dictionary, affirmeth, that Iaarob (called Ierah, Gen. 10.25.) sonne of Cahhtan, or Iectan, was Author of the Arabike tongue, which was brought to perfection by Ishmael son of Abraham; who dwelt in a Region called Arab^ of that Iaarob, whence the whole land of Arabia tooke name.
The name Foelix, or Happie, is giuen to the Southerly parts of Arabia, for the fertilitie thereof:Arias Montan. Caleb. the name Petraea to a second part, of Petra the seat Royall, after called Arach, of Aretas an Arabian King.
The Desart Arabia hath a name answerable to the nature thereof; being, in great part, without Inhabitants, for the barrennesse of the soile: as is also a great part of that which is called Petraea. This Desart Arabia is alsoMa^inus, Ptolom. l. 5. called Aspera, Inferior, Caua, and of the Hebrewes  Cedar. It is bounded on the East with Babylonia, and part of the Persian Gulfe; on the North with Mesopotamia, neere to Euphrates; on the West, with Syria and Arabia Petraea; on the South, are the Mountaines of Arabia Foelix. Neere to them and to Euphrates it hath some Townes, and is frequented with Marchants, otherwhere partly vnpeopled, partly (Strabo therefore termeth itScenitae, vel Nomades, (...) i. Ten^^rijs. Scenitis) fed with such Roming Arabians, as haue no dwelling houses, but remoue to and fro, seeking where to finde pasture for their Beasts, and lodge in Tents.
Dauid accounteth himselfePsal. 120.5^ miserable for this dwelling in the Tents of Kedar, or (as Tremelius reades it)Tanqua^ Sceniae Kedareni. as the Scenites of Kedar. Thus did the Patriarkes of old, thus did the Scythians, and thus doe the Tartars, and the Arabians in Asia, Africa, and Europe, at this day, roming,  rouing, robbing: and therefore theElias This. rad. Kedar. Iewes call the Tartarians Kedarim, because of their like course of life.
TheyBoter. relat. part. 1. l. 2. which dwell in Townes and Cities, obseruing a more ciuill life, are called Moores, the other Arabians, in more proper appellation, or Beduines. The name Moores was giuen them of the Spaniards, because out of Mauritania they inuaded Spaine, and nowAdri hom. Theat. T. S. is taken vsually, not so much for the Inhabitants of the Arabian Cities, as for all of the Arabian and Mahumetan superstition. Bosra is the chiefe Citie.
Arabia Petraea adioyneth on the West and North to Syria; on the East to the Desart Arabia, on the South to the Happie. Plinie, Strabo, and Ptolemie, call it Nabathaea: Some thinke, of Nebaioth, sonne of Ishmael. Tyrius calls it Arabia Secunda. Now it is called by Ruscelli,  Baraab; or after Ziglerus, Barra; or Bathalatha, after Castaldus.Mel. l. 1. c. 10. and ad eum Caslig. Pintiani and spicileg. A. Schot. Mela ascribeth the Hill Casius hereto: which, saith hee, is so high, that from the fourth watch of the night, or the last quarter thereof, it sheweth the Sunne-rising. But Nonius Pintianus correcteth him, saying, there are two Casij, the one of Syria, the other of Arabia, and that this report is to be applied to the Syrian Casius: wherein Schottus is of another minde.
Nigh to Syria it is more plentifullDiod. sic. l. 3. c. 12., then in other parts. The scarcitie of wood and water, with the barrennesse of the soile in other places, shew how it is maligned of the Elements. Both in this part, and the former, they had need goe strong and well accompanied, for feare of robberie and spoile, which the Arabians attend.
This part is famous vnto all Generations, not so much for the Amalakites, Midianites, and  other their bordering Neighbours (of whom, and their Religion somewhat is spokenLib. 1. c. v^t. before) asR. Volaterran. for the miraculous passage of the Israelites through the same, and abode therein
 fortie yeeres, in which time they receiued the Law, were fed with Manna; their Meate, Drinke, Clothing, Iudgements, Mercies, continually yeelding miraculous euidence of Gods presence amongst them.
Bell^nius visited the Mount Sinai: heObser. l. 2. c. 10. and d. saith, it is a mile and a halfe from Horeb, and farre higher: from whose top, (which is hard stoneMoses Narbonens. writeth that he obserued in the stones of Sinai a bush or bramble figured, whereof some thinke Sinai is named of Seneb, which signifieth a bush. Drus. praet. pag. 269. of yron colour) may both shores of the Red Sea be seene. This Sea is not therefore called Red, because either the ground or the sand, or the water thereof is Red, as Bellonius hath obserued, for none of them areOf this see more. l. 7. c. 11. so. The people thereabouts take care for no other houses then the boughes of Palme-trees, to keepe them from the heat of the Sunne (for raine they haue but seldome:) the cattell are lesse there then  in Egypt. In the ascent of Mount Sinai are steps cut out in the Rocke: they beganne to ascend it at breake of day, and it was afternoone before they could get to the Monasterie of Maronite Christians, which is on the top thereof. There is also a Meschit there for the Arabians and Turkes, who resort thither on pilgrimage as well as the Christians. There is a Church also on the top of Mount Horeb, and another Monasterie at the foot of the Hill: besides other Monasteries, wherein liue religious people, called Caloieri, obseruing the Greeke Rites, who shew all (and more then all) the places renowmed in Scriptures, and Antiquities to Pilgrims. They eate neither flesh nor white meates. They allow food vnto strangers such as it is, rice, wheat, beanes, and such like, which they set on the floore without  a cloth, in a woodden dish, and the people compose themselues to eate the same, after the Arabian manner, (which is to sit vpon their heeles, touching the ground with their toes, whereas the Turkes sit crosse-legged like Taylors.) There is extant an Epistle of Eugenius Bishop of M. Sinai, written 1569. to Charles the Arch-duke, wherein hee complaineth, that the Great Turke had caused all the reuenues of the Churches and Monasteries to bee sold: whereby they were forced to pledge there Holy Vessels, and to borrow on Vsurie.
Arabia FoelixMaginus Dom. Niger. Com. Asiae. l. 6. trendeth from hence Southwards, hauing on all parts of the Sea: against which it doth abutt the space of three thousand fiue hundreth and foure miles. Virgil calls it Panchaea, nowAdrich saith, it is now called Mamo^ra. Ayaman, or Giamen. This seemeth to bee the Countrie wherein Saba stood, chiefe Citie of the Sabaeans, whose Queene visited Salomon: for so the Iewes reckon,  howsoeuer the Abassines challenge her to themselues. Aben Ezra on Dan. 11. calls this Saba Aliman or Alieman: and Salmanticensis, Ieman,Capt. Dounton (which traded a little while since in the Red Sea) calls it Yeoman. which is allVid. Drus. praet. p. 32. 33. Rhodoman. calles her (...). one (for all is but the Article) signifying the South: as the Scriptures also call her Queene of the South. For so it was situate, not to Iudaea alone, but to the Petraean and Desart Arabia. The name Seba or Saba agreeth also with the name of Sheba, Gen. 10.7. As for Sheba the Nephew of Abraham by Ketura, it is like he was founder of the other Seba or Saba in Arabia Deserta, the elder posteritie of Chush, hauing before seated themselues in the more fertile Southerne countrie: and because both peoples, these in Arabia, and those in Africa were comprehended vnder one generall name of Aethiopia, hence might those of Africa take occasion to vsurpe the Antiquities of the other. Yea, it is more likely that these Abassens in Africa a thousand yeeres after that the Queene was buried, were seated in Arabia, and thence passed in later ages into Africa,  subduing those Countries to them. For so hath Stephanus, (...) Step. de vrb.. The Abassens (so we now call those Aethiopians in the Empire of Presbyter Iohn) are Nation of Arabia, beyond the Sabaeans: and the Nubian Geographer diuers times mentions Salomons wife in Arabia, which I cannot interpret but of that Queene:Beniam. Itine^. so that out of Arabia they carried this Tradition with them, as it is likely, into Africa, where want of learning, and plentie of superstition, had so increased their Legend of this Queene, as we shall after heare. Beniamin Tudelensis writeth likewise, that the Region of Seba is now called the Land of Aliman, and that it extendeth sixteene dayes iourneys alongst the Hills: in all which Region there were of those Arabians, which had no certaine dwellings, but wandred vp and downe  in Tents, robbing the neighbour Nations (as is also reported of the Saracens neere Mecca, which gouernment of Mecca, both Beniamin and SalmanticensisIuchasin. pag. 2. Beniam. pag. 61. Mecca in terra Aeliman sita. adioyne to that of Aliman, or the Kingdome of Saba: for so, saith he, the Iewes in those parts still call the chiefe Citie of that Kingdome.) It hath store of Riuers, Lakes, Townes, Cities, Cattell, fruits of many sorts. The chiefe Cities are Medina, Mecca, Ziden, Zebit, Aden. Beniamin addeth Theima, or Theman, a Citie walled fifteene miles square, enclosing ground for tillage in the walls. Tilmaas also, Chibar and others. There is store of siluer, gold, and varietie of gemmes. There are also wilde beasts of diuers kindes. As for the Phoenix, because I (and not I alone) thinke it a fable, as neither agreeing to reason nor likelihood, and plainely disagreeing to the Historie of the Creation, and of Noahs Arke, in both which God made all Male and Female, and  co^manded them to increase and multiply, I thinke it not worthy recitall. One wonder of Nature done in Abis a Citie of this Region, will not, I thinke, bee distastfull: cited by Photius out of Diodorus Siculus, written in some part of his workes which is now wanting.Phot. Biblioth^. ca. 244. One Diophantus a Macedonian being married to an Arabian woman in that Citie Abis, had by her a
 daughter called Herais, which in ripe age was married to one Samiades, who hauing liued a yeere with her, did after trauell into farre Countries. In the meane time, his wife was troubled with an vncouth and strange disease: A swelling arose about the bottome of her belly, which on the seuenth day breaking, there proceeded thence those parts whereby Nature distinguisheth men from the other sexe: which secrets shee kept secret notwithstanding, continuing her womans habit till the returne of her husband. Who then demanding the companie and dutie of his wife, was repelled by her father, for which he sued him before the Iudges, where Herais was forced to shew that which before her modestie had forbidden her to tell: and afterwards naming himselfe Diophantus, serued the King in his warres, with the habite, and heart of a man, and leauing her feminine weaknesse, as it seemed, to her husband,  who in the impatience of his loue slue himselfe. Our Author addeth also, that by the helpe of the Physicians, such perfection was added to this worke of Nature, that nothing remained to testifie hee had beene a woman: he annexeth also like examples in some others.
Ludouicus Vertomannus, or Barthema (as Ramusius nameth him) tellsLud. Vertum. l 1. c. 7. at large his iourney through all this threefold Arabia: he trauelled from Damasco to Mecca Anno 1503. with the Carauan of Pilgrimes and Marchants, being often by the way set vpon by Armies of those Theeuish and Beggerly Arabians. This iourney is of fortie dayes trauell, trauelling two and twentie houres, and resting two for their repast. After many dayes they came to a Mountaine inhabited with Iewes,Beniamin tels of many Iewes in the Arabian Mountaines, subiect to no Potentate, as it seemeth of these. ten or twelue miles in circuit, which went naked, and  were of small stature about fiue or sixe spannes high, black of colour, circumcised, speaking with a wominish voice. And if they get a Moore in their power, they flay him a liue. They saw there certaine white thornes, and in the same two Turtles, which seemed to them as a miracle: for in fifteene daies and nights they had neither seeene Birds nor Beasts. They giue their Camells by the way not aboue fiue Barly loaues at a meale, as bigge as a Pomegranate, and drinke once in three dayes. At the end of eight dayes they stayed a day or two to rest them. Their Pilot directed their iourney by the Compasse (in Diodorus times, they obserued the North-starre) no lesse then if it had beene at Sea. They trauelled fiue dayes and nights through the sandie Sea, which is a great plaine Champaine, full of a small white sand-like meale: where if, by some disaster, the winde blow from the South, they are all dead men.  And although they had the winde at North, yet could they not see one another aboue ten paces off. And such as ride on Camels, are inclosed with wood, with holes to receiue the aire; the Pilots going before with their Compasse for direction. Many dyed there for thirst, and many with fulnesse, drinking too much when once they came at water. When the North windes blow, those sands are driuen to a heape. He supposed thatIul. Scaliger. Exerc 104. and Ios Scal. Ep. ad Cosub. Lit. ad Chytr. Aleppo Mis. Mummia was made of such as the sands had surprised and buried quicke: but the truer Mummia is made of embalmed bodies of men, as they vse to doe in Egypt, and other places. For I haue read, not onely of Women, but Infants also, (which were not likely to take such dangerous iourneys) whose bodies haue beene thus vsed to Mummia. As for the other parts of Arabia, they which list, may by this our Author, by Plinie, Niger, and others be informed further. The like iourney  to this of Barthemas, is related by diuers latter Trauellers, Monsieur de Monface, Anno 1608. went with a Carauan of 10000. from Alleppo to Bagdat. Their trauell (he sayth) was all by night, aswell to auoide the vehement heate of the day, as to be guided by the starre. Their guides call themselues Pilots. They trauelled thirty dayes till they came to Nane, where they take water vpon Euphrates. They saw no beasts but Asses, Roes and Gazels (a kinde of wilde Goates) and Stagges innumerable, so wilde, that they often ranne through the Carauan: No fowles but Pigeons, which nestle in the ruines of olde Townes, sometimes inhabited, where also they made vse of olde welles, otherwise hauing no water but what they carryed in Borachoes made of whole Goates skinnes. There can bee no path, by reason of the continuall motion of the sand by the wind. Their King  hath 100000. horsemen subiect to him (gallant horse, men almost naked) himselfe subiect to the Turke.
To come to the disposition of the people, they are small, naked, beggerly. What they haue done in Asia, Afrike, and Europe by force of Armes, vnder the name of Saracens and pretence of Religion, shall follow in the next Chapter: What they still doe, if they meete with purchase, Trauellers know to their cost. Vsually Arabians are reckoned eyther Marchants or Theeues:Plin. 6. 28. Sol. c. 46. Strab. l. 16. Diod. l. 3. c. 12. Psal. 72. Vid. Bern. Aldrete Antig. l. 2. the one hauing certaine habitations, or else trading abroad. Strabo, Plinie, and Solinus admire their wealth, as selling much to others, and buying nothing, thus treasuring vp the wealth of the East and West, the Parthians and Romanes. Their Marchandize was golde, siluer, frankincense, with other spices. Their golde by Diodorus testimony was  often found in whole pieces, pure and shining, so that it gaue splendor and lustre to the gemmes inclosed therein: whence happily that of the Psalme, To him shall bee giuen
 of the gold of Arabia. The ancient practice of Marchandise among some of the Arabian people, and namely, the Ismaelites, theGen. 37.28. Ezek. 27. Scripture recordeth. For their ancient Religion, it is not like it could be good, when as they had so bad an Author of their stocke, accursed Cham: the sonnes of Abraham were better instructed: but as they were borne after the Flesh, and not according to promise, so if they and some of their posteritie did a while hold the Truth, (as the History of Iob and his friends euinceth) yet this lasted not long: but soone afterPsal. 76.1. and 147.20. in Iewrie was God knowne, and hee dealt not so with any other Nation. HerodotusHerodot. l. 3. (Father of the Greeke History) affirmeth in his Thalia, that the Arabians worshipped Dyonisius, whom they named Vrotalt; and Vrania, whom they called Alilat: these alone they esteemed gods. They shaue  their Maidens like to Dionysius, in a round forme about the temples. Suidas tellethSuid. Hist. that they were excellent Archers, their Arrowes were as long as themselues: their Bowes they bent not with hands, but with feet.
CurioCoelius Aug. Curio Hist. Sar. lib. 1. in his Saracenicall History testifieth of them, that as they descended in great part of Abrahams race by Ishmael, the sonnes of Keturah, and by Esau: so they of old had, and still retaine many rites obserued by the Hebrewes: as numbring by Tribes, and marrying onely within their owne Tribe: euery Tribe also had their owne King (which it seemeth the Tent-wandring, or Scenite-Arabians obserue still.) That sonne succeedeth not which is eldest, but hee which is borne first, after hee is proclaimed King or Ruler, being of Noble  race on both sides. They vsed also Circumcision. For their Religion in old times; some were Christians, of which (about the times of Mahomet) there were many Sects: some were Iewes; others worshipped the Sunne and Moone: others, certaine Serpents; others, some kindes of Trees; and some a Tower called Alcaba, which they supposed Ismael had built; and some others, some other Deities.Clem. Alex. Paraen. Clemens Alexandrinus obiecteth to the ancient Scythians the worship of a Sword, to the Persians the like deuotion to a Riuer, adding, that the Arabians worshipped a Stone.Arnob. l. 6. Arnobius hath also the same Testimony, explaining that stone to be rude and vnformed: a fit Deitie for rude, stony, senselesse worshippers.
EusebiusEuseb. de laudib. Constant. Sardus. l. 3. c. 15. tells that they vsed humane sacrifices, which not onely Sardus confirmeth, saying, that they sacrificed euery yeere a child whom they buried vnder the Altar: but NicephorusNiceph. Hist. Eccle. l. 18. c. 23.  also reported of one Naaman a Schenite-Arabian, a Chiefetaine amongst them, who in zeale of that superstition, killed men with his owne hands, and sacrificed them on the Altars to his gods: In the time of Mauricius, warned by a vision, became a Christian, and with him an innumerable company of his, whom hee offered a liuing, vnbloudie sacrifice in Baptisme vnto Christ.
When they entred league with any, their manner was, that one standing in the midst betweene both parties, did wound the hand with a sharpe stone, in the palme neere to the thumbes of them both, and taking flockes of the garments of them both, anointed with that bloud seuen stones set in the midst of them: Meane while inuoking Dionysius and Vrania: and then this Mediator be commeth suretie for the partie, who thereby esteemeth himselfe bound to obserue it. And this didHerod. l. 3. they make league with Cambyses. To these two Arabian  gods, Great Alexander would haue added himselfe a third (saithA^rian. l. 7. Arrianus, in his life.) He made great prouision to inuade them, both because they had sent him no Embassage, and for that they worshipped onely these two Deities; Heauen, for that it containeth the Sun and Stars; and Dionysius, because he had inuaded the Indians: and therefore equalling this his owne expedition to that of Dionysius, hee would also for robbing of men, bee reckoned a god. StraboStrabo l. 15. saith, that in respect of the wealthinesse of this Countrey, he had thought (had not death preuented him) to haue made Arabia the Imperiall seat. Hee affirmeth also that Sesostris the Egyptian King, passing through Arabia, in that his renowmed expedition, erected there in diuers places Egyptian Temples and superstitions:Circumcision in Arabia. that the Troglodytae  which dwelt in Caues, and bordering on the Egyptians, by some reputed Arabians, were circumcised as the Arabians and Egyptians were. The Arabians by testimony both of old and late Writers are accounted no warlike people. Virgil sings of them, Molles sua thura Sabaei. In elder and later times they were gouerned by their Phylarchi,Am. M^^^ Cellin. or heads of the Tribe or Linage. They take Tributes and Customes accordingly, rather by a robbing force, then ciuill forme: making their will their law. On the one side of Euphrates, they acknowledge some obedience to the Turkes, such as it is; On the other side not so much, as appeares by the passage downe Euphrates, recorded by Gasparo Balbi, William Parry, and others, in some places paying a Custome, in others like to bee robbed of all. The ancient Arabians which dwelt in the Cities, are said to haue in each Citie a Prince, faire houses and Temples after the  Egyptian manner: and then Strabo saith, Arabia Foelix was diuided into fiue Kingdomes.
The Nabbathaeans worship the Sunne, burning Frankincense on an Altar vnto him. They neglect the bodies of the Dead, burying euen their Kings in a dung-hill. Of the other Arabians hee reporteth, that they vsed incestuous copulation with Sister and Mother. Adultery
 with them is death: but that onely is Adultery, which is out of the same Kindred, otherwise all of the same bloud to vse the same woman is their (incestuous) honestie. When fifteen brothers (Kings Sons) had by their continuall company tyred their owne and only sister, she deuised a meanes to rid her selfe, or at least to ease her somewhat of that trouble. And therfore whereas the custome was, that he which went in, left his staffe at the doore to prohibite others entrance, shee got like staues, and alway hauing one at the doore, was disburthened of their importunitie; euery one that came, thinking some other had beene there before them. But they being once altogether, one of them stole from his fellowes, and finding this staffe at the doore, accused his sister to his father of adultery, whereof by discouery of the Truth shee was cleered. LinschotenLinschoten, History of the Indies. telleth of the like practice obserued by the Nairos in  Cochin, leauing their Armes at the doore, when they enter to their Nairo-Kinswomen, which they vse likewise in common, being neuer married.
Their Circumcision they obserued, asDraudius in Solin. some write, at the thirteenth yeere of their age, imitating Ismael herein. Euery one abideth in his Fathers profession. The possessions and wealth are common to the whole kindred. Alexander ab Alexandro nameth Dyasares an Arabian Deitie. Their Priests hee saith were attired in linnen garments, with Mitres and Sandals.Sol. Polyhist. Solinus affirmeth, that they abstaine from Swines flesh: neither will that sweet aire of Arabia breathe life to that sordid and stinking creature. This is the Happie Arabia, where happinesse maketh them vnhappy: their sweetsStrab. l. 16. breeding bitter effects in diseasing their bodies, which they are forced to cure with the sents of Brimstone, and Goats beards  burnt. That which others admire, and almost adore for rarenesse and excellencie, is here there common fuell for their fire:D. Sic. l. 3. Vulcans deuouring iawes being fed with hearbs, shrubs, trees, gummes, spices, for humane and diuine vses most esteemed.
Frankincense (saithPlin. l. 12. c. 14. Plinie) groweth onely in Arabia, but not in euery place thereof. About the midst of the Countrey is Sabota (the chiefe Citie of the Sabaeans) in a hie Mountaine: eight Mansions from thence is the Region of Frankincense, which is called Sabb^, that is, a mystery: looking toward the East, euery way guarded and made vnpassable with Rockes. The soyle is Reddish, inclining to white. The length of the Frankincense-wood is twentie schoeni, the bredth halfe as much, (a scoenus in this account is fiue miles.) Other Arabians besides these and the Minaei see not this tree, nor all of these, but onely some three  hundred Families, vnto whom the right of these Rites deuolueth by succession. Therefore they are called Sacri, Holy, neither may they in the time, when they cut them, bee polluted with knowledge of Women or with Funerals. What manner of tree it is, Plinie saith he knew not, nor any Roman to his knowledge. They gathered it in the Spring and Autumne: they cut the trees from whence it sweateth. There needes no watch to keepe them, but the innocencie of the Inhabitants. When Alexander in his youth bestowed large store of Frankincense in his deuotions, Leonides his Master told him, hee should so doe when he had conquered the Countrey where it grew: Hee after enioyning (some part of) Arabia, sent him a ship laden with Frankincense, and bade him serue the gods plentifully. The Frankincense, when it is gathered, is carried on Camels to Sabota by one way, out of which  to goe were capitall. There they pay the tythes to a god which they call Sabis. The Priests take it by measure, not by weight. Certaine portions are allowed to them and to the Kings Scribes. Plautus thereforePl. in Poenult and in Mi^i^e. calls it Frankincense Odor Arabicus. Virgil calls it Panchaan, and Sabaean Frankincense. The manifold Rites which the Heathens vsed in their holy things with this drug, StuckiusStuckius de sacris. sheweth at large. Here also grew the Myrrhe in the same woods, and among the Trogloditae. But this and Cinamon, and other things which grew elsewhere as well as here, need not much discourse. They vsed yet some Religion in gathering of their Cinamon, asIoan. Boemus. some obserue, sacrificing before they began, and after diuiding what they had gathered, with a sacred speare assigning a portion to the Sunne: if the diuision be iustly made, the Sun sealeth his consent by fire, with his beames consuming the same. Thus much  of their Spices, and holy drugs.
Of their other riches I meane not to speake, saue of their sheepe with great tayles, some of which weigh fortie pound. These kinde of sheepe are common through Africa, euen to the Cape of Good Hope, neere to which, at Soldania, our men haue bought many for little pieces of old iron.Leo Africanus. Leo saith, he saw one at Cairo, whose tayle, supported by a Cart with wheeles (for else she could not haue carried it) weighed fourescore pound, and heard of such as weighed a hundred and thirtie pound.Gal. 1.17. Paul, presently after his conuersion, preached the Gospel in Arabia.
Panchaea, and another Iland, called Sacra, are adioyned byD^od. Sic. l. 6. cap. 10. Diodorus to Arabia, both fertile (as hee saith) of Frankincense. In Panchaea is the Citie Panara, whose Inhabitants are  called the Ministers of Iupiter Tryphilius, whose Temple is thence distant threescore furlongs, admirable for Antiquitie, Magnificence and nature of the place, it is two hundred foot
 long, the bredth answerable, hauing in it large Statues, and about it the houses of the Priests. Many fountaines there springing make a nauigable streame, called the water of the Sunne, which is medicinable to the bodie. The Countrey about, for the space of two hundred furlongs, is consecrated to the gods, and the reuenue thereof spent in Sacrifices. Beyond is a high mountaine, called the seate of heauen, and Olympus Triphylius: where Coelus is said to haue instituted the Rites there yeerely obserued. The Priests rule all in Panchaea, both in ciuill and religious cases: and liue very deliciously, attired with linnen Stoales and Mitres, and party-coloured Sandals. These spend their time in singing Hymnes, and recounting the acts of their gods. They deriue their generation from  the Cretan Iupiter.Eadem fere Euseb. de praeparat. Eu. lib. 2. They may not goe out of their sacred limits assigned them, if they doe, it is lawfull to kill them. The Temple is enriched with gifts and offerings. The doores excell for matter and workemanship. The bed of the god is six Cubits long, and foure broad, all of gold faire wrought. The Table stands by, nothing inferiour. In the middest is another bed of gold, very large, grauen with Aegyptian letters; in which are contained the gests of Iupiter, Coelus, Diana, and Apollo, written by Mercurie. Thus farre Diodorus. IustineIustin. hist. lib. 39. mentioneth Hierotimus an Arabian King, which had six hundred children by Concubines. SomeGramay As. Arab. are of opinion that the Wise-men, which by the ancient conduct of a Starre came to Ierusalem, (the first fruites of the Gentiles) came out of Arabia. ScaligerIos. Scal. Can. Isag. lib. 2. mentioneth a conquest antiently made and holden by the Arabians in Chaldaea.  PhilostratusPhilost. de vita Ap. l. 1. saith, the Arabians are skilfull in Auguries, or Diuinations, because they eate of the head and heart of a Dragon. That they eate Serpents, Solinus affirmeth. AthenaeusAthenaeus l. 6. cap. 6. saith, That the Arabians vsed to maime themselues, if their King hapned to bee maimed, and that in the same member: and inAth. l. 12. c. 4. another place hee citeth out of Heraclides Cumaeus, the delicacies of this Arabian King, and his quiet or idle course of life, committing matters of iudgement to Officers: and if any thinke himselfe wronged by them, hee pulls a chaine fastned to a window in the highest part of the Palace: Whereupon the King takes the matter into his hand, and whether part hee findeth guiltie, dyeth for it. His expences were fifteene Babylonian Talents a day. The Arabians killPlutarch. de Inuid. and odio. Mice, as a certaine supposed enemy to the gods, a custome common to them with the Persians  and Aethiopians. TheTertul. de veland. Virg. women couer their faces, contented to see with one eye, rather then to prostitute the whole face. They kill not vipers, but scarre them away with Clappers from their Balsame-trees, saithPausaniae Beotica. Pausanias, when they gather that commoditie, because they thinke them consecrated to those Balsame-trees, vnder which they liue and feed of that liquor, with which also they cure themselues if they are bitten of them.
The Arabike tongue is now the common language of the East, especially among such as embrace the Mahumetan Religion: this language in the first diuision of tongues, according toEpiph. cont. Sethian. Epiphanius, was begun in Armot, the first speaker and Author thereof. It is now the most vniuersall in the world, as Bibliander, Postellus, Scaliger, Aldrete, and Claude Duret in his late  Historie del' Origine des Langues de cest vniuers, doe proue at large; from the Herculean pillars to the Molluccas, and from the Tartars and many Turkes in Europe, vnto the Aethiopians in Afrike, extending it selfe; which was neuer granted to any other language, since that first confusion and babbling at Babel.


CHAP. II. Of the Saracene Name, Nation, and proceeding in Armes: and  the succession of their Chalifaes.

@. I. Of the Saracens before MAHOMETS dayes.
THe Arabians are distinguished by many sir-names, the chiefe whereof (saithScal. E.T. l. 2. Scaliger) are the Hagarens (so called of Hagar the hand-maid of Sara) whom the Arabians call Erabelhagiari, and Elmagarin; and the Saracens, still called by their neighbours Essarak, that is, theeuish. The Hagarens were more ciuill, whose chiefe hold was Petra, and their Princes were all entituled  Aretae, as the Egyptians Ptolemaei. Hierome in many places affirmeth, that the Ismaelites, and Hagarens are the same which now are called Saracens: so in his Commentarie on the second of Ieremie, Cedar (saithIdem in Ier. 25. in Es. 42. and alibi. he) is the Region of the desart and of the Ismaelites,
 whom now they call Saracens. And on the twentie fiue of Ezekiel, the Madianites, Ismaelites and Agarens, are now called Saracens. And on Esay twentie one, he extendeth their desart from India to Mauritania, and to the Atlantike Ocean.Epiph. ad haer. lib. 1. Epiphanius likewise affirmeth, That the Hagarens and Ismaelites in his time were called Saracens.
PlinieLib. 6. c. 28. mentioneth that the Saracens: placing them neere to the Nabathaeans. PtolemeyGeograph. lib. 6. cap. 7. likewise nameth the Scenites, so called of their tents, which with themselues, their flockes, and substance, they remoued vp and downe from place to place. Posteritie hath called all these Tent-wanderers (saithScenitas Arabas quos Saracenos nunc appellamus A.M. l. 22 Scaliger out of Ammianus Marcellinus) Saracens: and so doth Ptolemey in the next words call the next adioyning people, seating them in the Northerly bounds of Arabia Foelix. In the same Chapter he setteth downe Saraca, the name of an Arabian  Citie.Bo^erus, Curio, alij. Some Authors haue written, that because Ishmael was sonne of Hagar a bond-woman, his nicer posteritie haue disclaimed that descent, and deriued their pedegrece, and name from Sara: Peruersonomine, saith Hierome, assumentes sibi nomen Sarae, quod scilicet de ingenua and domina videantur esse generati. Iosephus Scaliger, in his Annotations vpon Eusebius Chronicle, after that hee hath cited the former testimony of Ammianus, and of Onkelos on the thirtie seuen of Genesis, addeth the authoritie of Stephanus; who affirmeth Saraka to bee a Region of Arabia, neere the Nabathaeans, of which hee thinketh that the Saracens borrowed their name. Wee know (saith Scaliger) that the Arabian Nomades are so called; for SARAK in Arabike soundeth as much, that is, (furaces (...)) theeuish or robbers, such as the Cosak-Tartars, bordering on the Turkes, the Bandoliers in the Pyrenaean hills (and the Borderers  sometimes betwixt England and Scotland.) De Sara, peridiculum: To call them Saracens of SARA, is ridiculous: for then either they must bee called SARAEI, or shee SARACA. Mr. Brerewood saith that Sarra signifies a Desart, and Shakan to inhabit, in the Arabike: and therefore as they are called Scenites of their Tents; so might they also of the Desarts their not habited habitation be called Saracens. Booke of Lang. c. 13. And Erpenius saith, that this name is vnknowne to themselues, but all the Muhammedans generally call themselues Muslimos, or Muslemans, which signifieth Beleeuers, as if all else were Infidells or Heretikes.Am. Mar. lib. 14. Marcellinus thus writeth of them; this people stretcheth from the Assyrians to the falls of Nilus: all warriours, halfe naked, in coloured jackes. None ploweth or planteth, bu^ they wander vp and downe without houses or lawes; their life being alwayes in flight. Their wiues  they hire and couenant with for a time: which breed child in one place, and bring forth in another, and neuer rest. Their food is Venison, Milke, Hearbes, and such Fowles as they can take: the most that wee haue seene, know not the vse of Wheat or Wine. Like Kites they snatch their prey, but stay not by it whether they winne or lose. They are such, as the Romanes need neuer wish them their friends or their enemies. In the time of IulianLib. 25. they made out-rodes and spoyles on the Roman Prouinces, because they were denied their wonted stipends by Iulian, who told them that hee had better store of iron then gold. SaintHierom. Trad. heb. in Genesm. Hierome interpreteth that Prophesie concerning Ismael, That hee should be a wilde man, his hand against euery one, and euery mans hand against him, of this robbing, rouing, roguing life of his posteritie: Significat semen eius habitaturum in eremo, id est, Saracenos vagos incertisque sedibus, qui vniuersas gentes quibus desertum ex latere iungitur, incursant, impugnantur ab omnibus.  In his second Booke against Iouinian, hee testifieth that their food was the milke and flesh of Camels, a creature easily bred in those barren desarts: but they thought it vnlawfull to eate swine flesh and ^hat swine were seldome, or not at all found among them. The ProphetIerem. 49.28. Vid. Hieron. in Es. 21. Ieremy reckoneth their Tents, Camels, and Flockes, as their greatest wealth, in that his Prophesie of their destruction by Nabuchodonosor.
This name Saracene may well befit that course of life which they embraced. In the more Southerly parts of Arabia, they are more ciuill and rich, dwelling in Cities, and haue quicke trade, which all are wanting about Medina and Mecca, places so renowmed by the life and death of MahometOr Muhammed.. Neither doth it seeme probable, that those which are called Agarens  in the continued succession of so many ages, as appeareth, 1. Chron. 5.10. and Psam. 83.6. would after grow ashamed of that: or that Ishmael, which derided the hopes conceiued of ISAAC the sonne of SARA, would nourish his posteritie in the same hope, or leaue them any honourable memory of SARA, who had reiected him together with his mother. Yea, and their owne superstitious Legend proueth the contrary, as shall appeare in the next Chapter.
For their Religion in old times, One saith,Constantin. Porphyrogenit. de admin. Imp. cap. 15. That the Saracens adore the Starre of Venus, and in their praying cry, Alla, oua, cubarEuthemius calleth it (...)., that is, God, and Venus. Ioannes Meurfius noteth thereon, That they worshipped the Image of Venus, set on a great stone, on which they beleeue, that Abraham lay with Hagar, or else that hee tied his Camell thereunto  while hee was sacrificing Isaac.Scal. E.T. l. 5. Scaliger calleth her Chubar and Chobar, and saith that neither Circumcision, nor the Friday Sabbath, were of Mahomets institution, but of
 ancient time both those rites had beene vsed by the Arabians, and left by him as hee found them.Herod. lib. 3. Herodotus testifieth that the Arabians worshipped Alilat, which is the Moone; for still they call the Moone newly horned Helal: and the Turkes and Saracens salute the new Moone at her first appearance, with a kind of veneration. In Sylburgius his Saracenica, is reported, that the Saracens, till the time of Heraclius, worshipped the Morning-starre and Venus, which they called Chabar, that is,Arabs nob. ap. Vincent. Bellar. lib. 24. Great. Cedrenus also affirmeth this to bee an ancient superstition of the Arabians, in worship of Venus, whose Starre they say is Lucifer the Morning Starre, which for the greatnesse they call in their language Cubar to this day (saith hee) (...), naming VENVS a god. For proofe  whereof we will vnfold a great mysterie of theirs. The workes of their profane prayer are, (...). Alla, alla, signifieth GOD, GOD, Oua greater, Cubar great, or Luna, and Venus, that is, GOD is the greater GOD, and Venus a great god. And certaine both in earth and in their Paradise, their chiefe deuotions seeme still to hold of Venus. In the beginning of the Spring, and in the beginning of Autumne, the Sunne entering into Aries and Libra, the Arabians vsed (which they had borrowed from the Zechiam and Albarachuma, people of India) to cast stones vpon heapes, being naked and bare-headed, with great cries, and going about their Idols, kissing the corners in honour of their gods. This they vsed at Mecca in honour of Venus: and therefore in that solemnitie did they cast stones vnder their priuities, because those parts were vnder her dominion. Onely  whereas nakednesse was immodest, some ordained that they should bind a cloth about their reines. This Mahomet found before his time, and did not reiect, as hee did some Idolatrous Rites; but in their pilgrimage Rites they still obserue it. Properly they called the morning Starre Chobar or Chubar: but as the Phoenician Astarte was with them in their confused worship, both Iuno, Venus, and the Moone: So they intended the like in this Arabian deitie. For as Orania, and Alilat, and Venus, were the same, as Herodotus auerreth: so the same confusion of deuotion was in Arabia, as well as in their neighbour-countrey, Phoenicia. Their Circumcision, it seemeth, came from Ishmael and the rest of Abrahams sons of old: their Friday-sabbath from this Chubar-deuotion: both before Mahomets time, as was also the abstinence from Swines-flesh, as we before haue obserued out of SaintHieron. in Amos 5.  Hierome, who also mentioneth this their worship of Chobar, so interpreting those words of Amos, The Starre of your God, that is, saith hee, Chobar, or Lucifer, which the Saracens still worship to this day.
And in the life of Hilarion, hee telleth, that Hilarion passing thorow the Desart, came to a Citie or Towne called Elusa, on that very day whereon their Annuall solemnitie had gathered all the people into the Temple of Venus, for they worship her (for the Morning-Starre, to the worship whereof the Saracen Nation is addicted.) These hearing that Hilarion passed by, who had before cured many of them, came flocking about him with their wiues and children, crying in Syriake, Barah, that is Blesse vs. Hee in courteous and milde words, perswaded them rather to worship the liuing God, then those stones; promising, if they  would beleeue in Christ, hee would visite them oftner. Maruellous was the grace of God: they suffered him not thence to depart, before he had laid the line for building of a Church; and their Priest, crowned as hee was, was marked with the signe of Christ. Thus farre Hierome.
SomeGabriel Si^nita and Ioan. Hesronitae. Beduois or Beduines actiuity. of the Arabians dwell in Cities, some in the Desarts; those better ciuilized and fit for Arts; these which inhabit the Desarts are called Bedauyae or Beduois, that is, the people of the Desart; exceed in numbers, and wander without houses, vsing tents made of Cotton wooll, or of Goats and Camels haire, alway mouing and remoouing as water and pasture mooue them, carrying their wiues, children, and vtensils on their Camels. Their horses are leane, little, swift, laborious, bold, and the horse-men actiue beyond beleefe, darting and catching  with their hand the same Dart in the horses swiftest race before it commeth at the ground; and auoiding a Dart throwne at them by sleightie winding vnder the horses sides or belly: also taking vp weapons lying on the ground whiles the horse is running, and in like swift race, hit the smallest marke with Arrow or Sling. Their armes are Arrowes, Iauelins with iron heads, swords, (which they vse not to thrusts, but strokes) Daggers, Slings, and vse the same in aduerse fight, or in auerse flight. They lie in wait for Carrauans, prey vpon trauellers, liue at rapine and spoile, and often make themselues the Great Turkes Receiuers and Treasurers; and raise new Imposts on all such as they can enforce, whether Trauellers or Cities; obeying neither the Ottoman nor any other Souereigne, but being diuided in innumerable Families, obey the heads of their owne Families or Tribes.Their Tribe: or Families. These Tribes are distinguished  by the Names of their first Parents, as Abi-Helal, Abi-Risce, Abi-Zaid, and six hundred others, all esteemed and saluted gentle, and equall in rights. Their foodTheir Food. is browne bread, new and sowre milke, cheese, goats, and camels flesh, pulse, hony, oile and butter.
 Rice is esteemed a great delicacie, by reason of their Tradition that it came of Mahomets sweat.Foolish and blasphemous traditions. For say they, when Mahomet compassed the Throne of God in Paradise, God turned and looked on him, which made the modest Prophet sweat, and wiping it off with his finger, six drops fell out of Paradise: one whereof produced the Rose, the second Rice, the other foure his foure associates. They vse a certaine hodge-podge or frumentie of boiled wheat laid after a drying in the Sun, then beaten and boiled with fat flesh til the flesh be consumed. This they call Heresie, and say that Gabriel the Angel taught it Mahomet for the strengthning his reines; whereby one night he fought against fortie men, and in another had fortie times carnal dealing with women. These might seem calumnies, deuised by some Mahumetan aduersarie, if the former author (both learned in and zealous of the law of Mohamed) had not  related the same in a chapter of the choise of meats. Mohamed or Mahomet commended also the eating of gourds of the Melongene,Melongene. affirming, that hee had seene this plant in Paradise, and measured the quantitie of mens wits by their eating store hereof. When he was once in prison (saith Ben-sidi-Ali) the Angell Gabriel came downe from heauen, and carried him in Gennet Elenaam, or the Garden of Pleasures, where amongst others he saw this shrub, and he asking why it grew there, the Angell answered, because it hath confessed the vnitie of God, and that thou art a true Prophet.Their apparel. Their garments are base, a cotton shirt with very wide sleeues, an vpper garment of wooll wouen with white and blacke lines of Goats or Camels haire; their feet are bare. Their nobler sort go better clothed and vse shooes, a red lether girdle, a white tulipan of cotton or linnen of few folds. Their women goe almost naked, in a blew smocke  of cotton, linnen head tire, and face vailed. They vse eare-rings, chaines, broochen, and rings of glasse, or other base matter, and die or paint with blew markes made with a needle their cheekes, armes, and lips. Thus much of the Beduines.


@. II. Of the Sararcenicall beginnings and proceedings vnder MAHOMET, and his successors of the Maraunian race.  
Cedren. Comp.THis robbing and roguing people liued in much obscuritie, vntill that darkenesse brought them to light, and a Religion newly stamped by Mahomet, in a secret and iust iudgement of God, for the contempt of the Truth, was by as new a kind of preaching (viz. force of Armes) obtruded on the luke-warme world. For when as Mahomet, of whole life followeth a large discourse) had obserued that sicke state of the Empire afflicted with Iewish rebellion, Persian inuasion, and Nestorian infection, besides the securitie of the Head it selfe, Heraclius then Emperour: he thought good to take Occasion by the Fore-locke, and to strike whiles the yron was hot. First,Saracen. hist. Curio. l. 1. Dreshleri. Chron. Boter. Phryg. Chron. Car. Chron. Sabel. Aen. 8. l. 7 Volaterra^. l. 12. Chron. Arab. Politie of the Turkish Empire, etc. vnder pretence of Religon, hauing inueigled a multitude of Disciples, he made a commotion in Arabia: and being therfore driuen out of Mecca, many of his followers resorted to him: Of whom hee appointed Captaines  and Leaders of the rest, Vbequar, Omar, Ozmen, Alifre, Talaus, Azubeirus, Zadimui, Zaedinus, and Abnobeid. The Arabians (as some affirme) aided Heraclius in his warre against Cosdroes the Persian: and after that warre ended, the Arabians complaining for want of pay, the Treasurer answered, that there was scarce sufficient for the Greek and Romane Souldiers, much lesse for that company of Dogs. Whereupon, as long before on like occasion they had rebelled in the reigne of Iulian, so now enraged, they departed into Syria, and adioyned themselues vnto Mahumet, who euen then after the Persian victorie had obtained (some say) of the Emperour whom he serued in those warres, to himselfe and his followers, a Region to inhabite; the Emperour so rewarding his exploits in the late warres. Mahumet with  this supply assailed Mecca, which diuers times before he had in vaine attempted, and tooke it, with other pieces in Arabia, viz. Hunaim, Ietrip, Tambic, etc. He afterwards created foure Generalls, whom he called the foure sharpe swords of GOD, and commanded them to goe into the foure parts of the world, and to kill all such as would not embrace his Law. These foure were Ebubezer,The Arabian names in other languages are translated diuersly. or Vbequar, Omer, Osmen, and Ali. Ebubezer went into Palestina, but was ouerthrowne by Theodorus Begarius, Caesars Lieutenant. About the same time died Mahumet, and thisAbu-becher. Ebubezer succeeded him; although Mahumet had designed Ali his successour. At his death (saith Cedrenus) a Comet appeared thirtie dayes together, at Noone in forme of a sword from the South to the North, foresignifying the Empire of the Arabians. Eubocara or Abubacher (for diuersly is this Ebubezer called) hauing by his might, and the  assistance of Homar and Osmen, obtained to beCalifa, that is, Vicar, was the name of the chiefe place or soueraigntie in cases spirituall and temporal, the successor of Mahomet. And Amira is a Lord, a name applied to the Califa, and the great Rulers vnder him, and also to all of Mahomet his kindred. Califa, ouerthrew the Imperiall, and soone after died. Homar the next Califa, wanne Bosra, the chiefe Citie of Arabia, and all the
 Countrey as farre as Gabata, and put Theodorus, the Emperours brother, to flight. Hee besieged Damascus, and hauing broken the forces that came to reskue it, obtained it: subduing also all Phoenicia. After that, turning his forces into Egypt, Cyrus the Bishop of Alexandria staied him, with promise of two hundred thousand pieces of gold for yeerely Tribute. This was disannulled by Heraclius, and Emanuel the Deputie denied the payment: whereupon entring the second time vnder conduct of Hamrus, Egypt was conquered. After two yeeres siege, Ierusalem also was wonne, into which hee entred clothed in a garment of Camels haire, and very homely, professing great sanctitie. Hee built a superstitious Temple, where that of Salomon had stood. Iaidus one of his Captaines subdued Edessa, and all Mesopotamia.  Afterwards placing Muauias ouer all the Countries betweene Euphrates and Nilus, he inuaded Persia: where the Persians lost both their King Hormisda, their State, Religion, and Name: of Persians being conuerted into Saracens. This victorious Homar made Ierusalem his Royall seat, and while he was praying, was murthered by his seruant.
Ozmen,Othman. 4. A. D. 655. the succeeding Caliph sent a great Armie into Africa; vnder the leading of Hucba: who ouercomming Gregorius Patritius, and destroying Carthage, subiected all that Prouince to their Empire; making Tunes the Mother-citie: but soone after translated that honour to Chairoan, which he built thirtie six miles from the Sea, and a hundred from Tunes. In the third yeere of his raigne Muauias the Deputie of Egypt, with a Nauie of seuen hundred, or as others say, of a hundred and seuentie saile, assailed Cyprus, and taking Constantia,  wasted the whole Iland: and hauing wintred his Armie at Damascus, the next yeere besieged Arad in Cyprus, and won it, and dispeopled all the Ile. Thence hee inuaded the continent of Asia, and carried away many prisoners: and after in a Sea-fight with Constans the Emperour, dyed the Lycian Sea with Christian bloud. Hee wan Rhodes, and sold to a Iew the brazen Colosse or pillar of the Sun, which laded nine hundred Camels, sometimes reckoned one of the worlds seuen wonders, made in twelue yeeres space by Chares. After this hee afflicted the Cyclides Ilands in the Archipelago, and then sent his Fleet against Sicilia, where they made spoile with fire and sword, till by Olympius they were chased thence. Muauias himselfe with an Armie by land entred into Cappadocia: Iaid hauing ouer-run all the neighbouring Armenia, vnto the hill Caucasus. But meane while Ozmen, besiged in his house  by Ali his faction, slew himselfe, when hee had liued eightie and seuen yeeres, and raigned twelue. The Saracens could not agree about their new Prince; Muaui andHali 5. Ali with great armies, being Corriuals of that dignitie: and Ali being treacherously murthered by Muauias meanes, in a Temple neere Cufa, a Citie of Arabia, was there buried, and the place is of him called Massadalle or Alli his house: for (if you beleeue the Legend) his corps being laid on a Camell, which was suffered to goe whither hee would, he staid at this place. Of this Ali or Hali, Mahomets Cousin, the Persians deriue their sect; and tell of him many Legendary fables. Bedwell calls this place, in his Arabian Trudgman, Masged Aly, that is, the Mesged, Mosque, or Temple of Ali.Hasen Ben Ali. Alhacem, the sonne of Ali and Fatima Mahumets daughter, was by Muauia his owne hands crowned,Some say, he resigned, and he with Muaui are reckoned but the sixth Caliph of the Arabians. and by him soone after poysoned. Thus  was Muaui sole Caliph, who granted peace to the Emperour, on condition that hee should pay him euery dayThis daily tribute was both ceased and inuerted soone after, when Abdimelech made peace with the Emperour, with promise to pay him the like t ibute. P. Diacon. tenne pounds of gold, and a Gentleman-seruant with a horse. Damascus was now made the Seat-Royall. Of which Citie, although wee haue said somewhat in our first booke, yet let vs bee a little beholden to Beniamin Tudelensis, to shew vs the Saracenicall face thereof. In his time it was subiect to Noraldine (as hee termeth him) King of the children of Thogarma, that is, the Turkes. The Citie, saith hee, is great and faire, containing on euery side fifteene miles; by it slideth the Riuer Pharphar, and watereth their Gardens:Historicis Adonis, vt and Phar. Orontes. 2. Reg. 5.12. Amana is more familiar, and entreth the Citie, yea, by helpe of Art, in Conduits visiteth their priuate houses; both striuing in emulous contention whether shall adde more pleasure or more profit to the Citie, by Naaman therefore in the heate of his indignation  preferred before all the waters of Israel. But no where is so magnificent a building, saith Beniamin, as the Synagogue of the Ismaelites, which is therein: the people call it the Palace of Benhadad. There is to be seene a wall of Glasse, built by Art-Magicke, distinguished by holes as many as the yeere hath dayes, and so placed, that euery day the Sunne findeth them fitted in order to his present motion; each hole hauing therein a Diall with twelue degrees, answering to the houres of that day, so that in them is designed both the time of the yeere and of the day. Within the Palace are Baths and costly buildings, so rich of gold and siluer as seemeth incredible: I saw there hanging a ribbe of one of the Enakims or Giants, nine Spanish palmes long, and two broad, on the Sepulchre was written the name of Abchamaz. After this, in the time of Tamerlan, the magnificence  of their Temple was not quite extinct, but as is reported, it had fortie great Porches in the circuite thereof, and within, nine thousand Lamps hanging from the roofe, all of gold and siluer. For the Temples sake at first he spared the Citie, but after, prouoked by their rebellion, ^e
 destroyed it and them. Neither were the walls of Damascus rebuilded, till a certaine Florentine for loue of the Gouernours daughter denying his faith, became Mahumetan, and after that both Gouernour and repairer of the Citie; in the walls engrauing a Lyon, the Armes of Florence. He was honoured after his death with a Moskee, and worshipped after the manner of their Saints, the Saracens visiting his tombe, and (hauing touched the same) stroking their beards with their hands. There did our AuthorBaumgarte^. Pereg. l. 3. c. 5. A.D. 1507. The Egyptians still and Turks are more charitable to dogs and ca^s then to men. see a large house compassed with high walls, which was inhabited with Catts. The reason forsooth is this: Mahomet sometime liuing in this Citie, made much reckoning of a Cat, which he carried in his sleeue, and by lucky tokens from her, ordred his affaires. From this dreame the Mahumetans make so much of Catts, and hold it charitable almes to feede them, thinking that he should prouoke the  iudgement of God which should suffer a Cat to starue. And many of them are found in the shambles begging or buying the inwards of beasts to nourish Catts: a superstition more l^kely to descend from the Egyptians, who for the benefit they receiued by Catts in destroying their vermine, of which that Countrey yeelds store, in a Heathenish superstition deified them. But let vs returne to Muaui; hee subdued the Sect of Ali in Persia, and after inuaded Cil icia, and sent (to aide Sapores) a band of Saracens, which afflicted Chalcedon, and sacked Armaria a City of Phrygia; and with a Fleete inuaded Sicill, tooke Siracuse, and carried away with them the riches of Sicilia, and of Rome it selfe lately fleeced by the Emperour, and here horded. Another Armie of Saracens, ouer-running the Sea-coast of Africa, led away eight hundred thousand prisoners.  
Muamad and Caise on the other side subdued to Muaui, Lydia, and Cilicia;About these times another fal^e prophet called Muctar, obtained Persia, and the Arabians were trouble^ P. Diacon. in Iustin. and after, with Seuus another Saracen Generall, besieged Constantinople, from Aprill to September, and taking Cizicum, there wintred their forces, and in the spring returned to their siege, which they continued seuen yeeres; but by Diuine assistance, and force of tempest, they were chased thence. And Constantine slew three hundred thousa^d Saracens, in a battell (not long after) against Susia the Nephew of Muaui, and compelled the Saracens to pay a great tribute.Anno ^79. alij 68^. Iezid raigned after the death of Muaui his father (a better Poet then Souldier) he soone died. Neither did his successours Maruan and Abdalan liue two yeeres in the roome.Abdimelec sonne of Maruan Scal. 9 and P. Diacon in Iustiniano. Abdimelec was chosen Caliph, who descended from Hali, when as Abdalan of the linage of Eubocara (the Arabians call this the Maraunian race, the other Abazian) had possessed h^mselfe of  that title by force, whom Ciafa the kinsman of Abdimelec ouerthrew. Ciafa after this victorie, entring Damascus, pluckt Iazid (one of the former Caliphs) out of his graue, burned his bones, and hurled the Ashes into the riuer, and cruelly persecuted all the Maraunian stocke.
HereuponOthers call him Abdul Mumen. Abedramon one of that house, with a great number of his friends and followers fled into Mauritania Tingitana, where he was welcomed of the Saracens there being, and first intituled himselfe Miralmumim, which signifieth The Prince of Beleeuers, and then buildedLeo writeth otherwise, as in our sixth Booke shal appeare: he saith Marocco was built in the 4^4. yeere of their Hegira. Marocco. Addimelec hauing other yrons in the fire, neglected this: first, appeasing tumults in his owne state; then ouerthrowing the Emperour in the field: after, receiuing (by treason of the Deputie) Armenia; winning that part of Persia, which yet was subiect  to the Romans, and by his forces spoyling Thracia, whiles the Greekes were diuided amongst themselues. He also chased the Romane Garrisons out of the coast-Townes which they held in Afrike. Abdimelec being dead,Called of Leo, Qu^lid, and of Scaliger, Walid. 110 and Tarik Mirkond. Oelid. Scal. E.T. lib. 6. pag. 584. Turquet. Span. Hist. lib. 5. Vlitus the sonne of Abedramon succeeded, vnder whom the Saracens, besides the spoile of Galatia, conquered all Afrike betwixt Niger and the Sea, a little piece excepted at the mouth of the straites, subiect to Rodericus the King of Spaine: Mucas was made Lieutenant of the Saracen Empire in Afrike. To him Iulianus Earle of Cepta full of indignation against his Prince, for deflouring his faire daughter Caba, about the yeere 712. offereth the conquest of Spaine, if hee would furnish him with some competent forces of his Saracens. This traytor, thus strengthened with the authoritie of this place (being Gouernour of the Ile Viridis, and diuers places in Africa and Spaine) backed  with his friends, and aided with the Saracens, ouerthrew the Gotish Empire, which had now ruled Spaine about three hundred yeeres: Rodericus losing the field and his state, and spending the remnant of his dayes with an Hermite, in a solitarie desart of Lusitania. Iulianus himselfe was after slaine by the Saracens, as were the Spanish Traytors; the iust end of vniust treacherie. Scaliger out of an Arabian Geographer, calleth that Captaine, Muses or Moses, son of Nutzir of the Marawan stocke, who had with him a valiant Captaine named Tark or Tarik, of whom the Hill and the Strait is named (as the vulgar pronounce it) Gibraltar, properly Gebal Tarik,M. Bedwel in hi Arab. Trudg. saith, it w^s of the situation: Tarifa signifies the end or outmost b^und of any thing. that is, the Hill of Tarik, because hee had shipped ouer his Barbarians thither, and fortified himselfe in that Hill, in the nintieth yeere of the Hegira: which hee did, least his barbarous souldiers should forsake him, and therefore also caused  his ships to bee burnt. This Vlit, Qualid, Walid, or Oelid (for thus I finde his name diuersified in Authors) besidesTarik Mirkond hist Persic. these his conquests in Afrike and Europe, atchieued by his Captaines
 great exploites in Asia; among which, one called Koteybah Eben Moselem, conquered Korasan as farre as Tarquestan, with all the Countrie of Maurenaher and Koarrazin. On the other side Moseleima ben Abdel Malek forced the Graecian Emperour to tribute. Hee also erected many publike buildings, the most famous of which was the Mosque at Damascus. Osiasge his Deputie in Karason was so cruell, that he put to death aboue a hundred thousand persons in that Countrey during his gouernment, besides an infinite number slaine in the warres. Hee had thirtie thousand slaues of diuers Nations. This Caliph died, Anno Dom. 715. A. Heg. 95. after Mirconds account. Persia was not yet fully subdued; Gerion and Tarbestan, two Prouinces thereof, were brought vnder in the time of Soleyman, Suleiman, or as  Curio calls him Zulciminius, the nextAnno. 717. Suleiman. Caliph. He sent Malsmas with a great power into Thrace, where hauing spoyled the Countrey, he laide siege toCurio. lib. 2. Constantinople: Zulciminius his Master assaulting it by Sea, with a Nauie of three thousand Ships, in which siege hee died, Anno Dom. 719. Aumar,Wolfgang. Droschter. Chro. Omar. his successour, had no successe in this attempt, partly, through the violence of frost, causing famine and diseases in his Campe, and partly, by force of an artificall Glasse, wherewith Leo the Emperour cast fire amongst the enemies Fleete, and fiering euen the Seas about the ships: that by this subtiltie and force of tempest, of three thousand saile, fiue ships onely are said to haue escaped.Iezid. Gizid, sent with supply of three hundred and threescore ships, durst not approach for feare of this fire: and the Saracens by their Caliph were reuoked, when the plague had slaine in Constantinople three hundred thousand people.  In his time Aly Eben Abas, one of the descendents of Abas, Vncle to Mahomet, warred for the Chalifate, challenging it to his stocke. But Aumar or Homar was poysoned by Ochon, and Yezid or Gizid succeeded: whose reigne was troubled with the warres of Aly aforesaid, still continuing his challenge.
After him A. 724. succeeded Ochon his brother, which had poysoned Homar. Persia had some broiles which he pacified. He being murthered, succeeded Walid, or Euelit sonne of Iezid; in whose time the bottome of the Sea, neere the coasts of Asia minor, burned, and sent foorth smoake first, and after, heapes of stones, with which the shores of Asia, Lesbos, and Macedonia were filled, and a new IlandP. Diac. Leo. tooke beginning of the heaping together of earth, which was annexed to the Iland called Sacra.
 The Saracens in Spaine erected amongst themselues many pettie Kingdomes, and by their diuisions made way to Pelagius, with some remainder of the Spaniards to recouer some of their lost countrey, who dying in the yeere 732. his sonne Fafila succeeded, in whose time the Saracens passed the Pyrenaean Hills into France, where Theodoricus the second was then King, butPaul. Aemil. lib. 2. Charles Martell, Master of the Kings house, ruled, as did his father in that office before, and his sonne, (both Pipins) after him. The Saracens tooke Narbone, and after Burdeaux killing in it, man, woman, and childe, and raising the Temples to the ground; they passed Garunna, and ouerturned Angolesme and Bloys, and came intoToures. Turon, where Eudo the Goth then King of a great part of France, in wars with Martell, for feare of the common enemy, entred league, and with their ioynt forces slewScal E.T. l. 6. pag. 584. saith, that the countrie people keepe fresh memorie thereof, as if it were lately done. It was A.D 725. Hegire 106. sixteene yeere after they had inuaded Spaine. three hundred and seuentie  fiue thousand Saracens; and those of Nauarre slew the rest that escaped, in their returne. But when Eudo was dead, Martell tooke part of his Kingdome from his sonnes, Hunoldus and Vaifarus, who thereupon recalled the Saracens, which vnder the leading of Atinus tooke Auenion by the treason of Mauricius then Gouernour, from whence, and out of France they were driuenAnnis. 735. and 737. and 738. by Martellus.
The Saracens made foure inuasions into Thrace while Euelitus was Caliph, to whom succeeded, Anno 744.Iezid. Gizit the third, who wasted Cyprus, and carried away the people into Syria. After him andHisan. Mirkon calls him Ebrahem. Ices (which two ruled not two yeeres) Maruan raigned; and after, another of the same name, and the Saracens were diuided, Tebid Dadac, and Zulciminius, challenged each to himselfe the Soueraigntie: and when all these were ouerthrowne and  slaine, Asmulinus amongst the Persians raised vp the seruants to murther their masters, and with them he ouerthrew Iblinus with one hundred thousand Saracens; and after, Maruan himselfe with three hundred thousand, who fleeing into Egypt, was there also vanquished and slaine in a Temple.
This murther grew through the faction of the Abasian stocke, who conspired against him, because he had slaine one of their kindred. Abulabas the chiefe of this conspiracie, succeeded him, in theIos Scal. Can. Is. lib. 2. and lib. 3 yeere 749. and remoued the Chaliphate to that family from the Maraunians, in the yeere of their Hegeira 132. after the Arabian computation; as wee follow Scaliger herein; and he the Chronicle which Abraham Zacuthi gathered out of the Monuments of the Ismaelites. In the former relations, we haue principally followed Curio his Saracenicall History;  though by the way we haue borrowed of others also.



@. III. Of the Abasian Chalifaes, their Citie Bagadet, with many Persian, Indian, and other occurrences vnder them.
TARIK MIRKOND writes, that the family of Abas had still from the first challenge continued their quarrell, and that Oelid, to satisfie them, had caused the sonnes of Abdala (one of the Abasians) to be proclaimed his successours: one of which, Safa, in this warre against Maruuan, forced him to flee to Meser^, or Cairo in Aegypt, where hee was taken and put to death, and with him eightie persons of the family of Ben Humia. They did also breake open their Sepulchers, and burnt the bones, sparing  onely one of that liue Hamarben Abdala Azis. Safa was sonne of Abdala the sonne of Aly, whose father was Abdula the sonne of Abas. Hee had for Wazir or Vesir (which I mention, to shew the antiquitie of this custome in the Saracenicall regiment, still obserued by the Turkes and Persians, as chiefe Counsellour and swayer of the State) Abuzalemah, whom for conspiracie hee put to death, placing in his roome Kaleb Barmaqui. He made his three Vncles chiefe Gouernours of the Prouinces, Dauid, or Daud of Medina and Mecca; Abdula of Syria, Aegypt, and Africke; and Safa hee sent to Korosan, the chiefe Citie whereof is called Mechad, whereas Ismael Sophi and his successours are interred. This Citie is fortified with three hundred Towers, each from other a Musket shot distant. Thus Mirkond. This Safa, or (as Curio calls him) Abulabas being dead, Abugephar ElmantzarAnno Dom. 753. Heg. 836. succeeded.  Hee imprisoned the twelue sonnes of Hasin, the sonne of Ali, where they perished: He began first to build the Citie of Bagded. Mirkond saith, that in the 145. yeere of the Heg. hauing finished a warre against some Rebels in Arabia, parting from Cufa, hee crossed Mesopotamia, and comming to the bankes of Tygris, the bountie of the soyle, and commodious scituation for the visiting of his Prouinces, caused him to build this Citie, which, by reason of many pleasant and delightfull Gardens which are in that Countrey, the people called Bagadad, of Baga a Persian word, which signifies a Garden. Hee dyed vpon the way to Mecca A. Heg. 759. or after Zacuth 758. Iohn di BarrosAs. dec. 1. lib. 1 ascribeth this Citie to the same Bugiafar also, for so hee calleth him; but Curio to one Muamat long after. ScaligerAnimad. in Euseb. Chron. Lydyat. em. tem. thinketh this to bee Seleucia, a Citie built nigh vnto Babylon by Seleucus, neere  the meeting and mixing of Euphrates and Tygris; of which see our Babylonian Historie in the first booke.
Mahdi his sonne succeeded A. H. 165. Mirkond calls him Mahadi Bila. In his time Akemben Ocem (sometime Secretarie to Abusalem, Gouernour of Karason, slaine by Abuiafar) reuolted from his subiection and Religion. Hee had but one eye, and was of terrible aspect: hee not onely sought to bee acknowledged for King, but would bee worshipped as a God; couering his face with a vaile, saying, That men were vnworthy to see his face, and many Prouinces receiued him for King. But Mahadi sending a strong power against him, his partakers poysoned him, and then gaue out, that hee was ascended into Heauen. But as many of his kindred and followers as were taken, were burned, and the Countries  subdued A. Heg. 169. To Mahadi succeeded Elida Bila Musa, which after fifteene moneths dyed, and Arachid Bila Harun his brother succeeded. Against him rebelled Rafh Eben Nacer of Samarkand, who entituled himselfe King, in expedition against whom Arachid dyed A. H. 193. Mahamid Amin was his successour, to whom hee gaue all he held in Alep, and thence Westward: to Mahamun another sonne hee had giuen Persia and Karason; to Racem the third, Aderbaion and Diarbek. This diuision caused another, in which the Chalife seeking to dispossesse Mahamun by force, was ouerthrowne, Bagadet (whither hee was pursued) taken, and himselfe slaine A. 198. Mahamun or Mamon was the next Chalife, against whom the Gouernours of Aderbaion and Karason rebelled, which hee pacified as he could. Hee spent much to haue all the bookes of Phylosophie,  the Mathematikes, and Physike, which hee could get, to bee translated out of the Greeke. He dyed A. H. 210.
Abu Ezach Matacon, or Mutetzam, the fourth sonne of Harun, succeeded. Hee built Samarrah on Tygris Northwards from Bagdet, which soone after was ruined. Sistom, a Prouince neere the Persian Gulfe, rebelled, and long warres continued in Persia. This Matacon wanne much from the Grecian Emperour. Hee dyed after he had raigned eight yeeres, leauing behind him eight Sonnes, and eight Daughters, with eight thousand Slaues. Hee had taken eight Cities, (the chiefe of eight Realmes) and put to death the eight Kings thereof. Hee left eight millions also of Treasure, hauing liued (to make vp eight eights) fortie and eight yeeres.  
Wacek succeeded, in whose time by a three yeeres famine Karason was almost dispeopled. Afterwards they returned, and warred against the Mayusi, Heathenish people in Persia,
 (whereof, saith Mirkond, there are great numbers at this day) which worship the fire, of whom they made a great massacre. Methucal, or Almoto Wakel Bila Iafar succeeded, A. 222. in whose raigne the descendants of Aly did rise, for that he sought all meanes to hinder their pilgrimage to his Sepulchre, breaking the bankes of Euphrates, with the inundation thereof into the desart, stopping their passage. Montacer sonne of this Chalife, murthered him by his slaues, A.H. 234. but dyed himselfe within sixe moneths after. Abul Abas Hamed his next heyre, after fiue yeeres rule, was cast into Prison by his Souldiers, and there famished. In Persia the Deputies or Gouernours had vnder many Chalifes succeeded by a kinde of inheritance, the Chalife confirming the succession to the heyre. But in these dayes arose one  Acem Ben Zeyd Alauuy, that is, Sent of God: hee entred into Persia, and tooke diuers Cities and Prouinces thereof: Mostahhin the next Chalife enioyed the seate but sixteen moneths. He dyed A.H. 242.
Almatez Bila followed the thirtie three in order of their Chalifes. He sent Mesa Ben Buka against Acem Ben Zeyd, and recouered much from him which he had seised on in Persia: But after thee yeeres and a halfe, this Chalifa was forced by his souldiers, finding him in a Stoue bathing himselfe, to drinke a pot full of cold water, which sodainely killed him. Motady Bila succeded with like fortune, slaine of his Souldiers, after eleuen moneths. In these combustions the Chaliphate was deuided, one raigning in Bagdet, the other in Aegypt, whose historie you may finde in our Aegyptian relations.
Almat Hamed Bila succeeded in Bagdet the thirtie fiue Chalife. Persia was now rent with many factions: for besides Taher the allowed Gouernour, and Ahem Ben Zeyd which still continued his warres, a new Captaine Yacub Leys arose, who ouerthrew Taher, and slew him. This Yacub was a Tinker, as his Father also; after that, a Captaine of Robbers: then (fishing in those troubled waters) tooke part with another Rebell in Sistom, and sharing the Countrey, by his fellowes misfortune became sole Lord. After this hee preuayled against Taher and Acem, and brought Persia vnder him, following his designes against the Chalife himselfe, now much terrified with his fame, and was likely to haue preuayled, if hee had not dyed by the way A.H. 268. His brother Hamer Ben Leys succeeded in Persia, Karason and the rest of his conquests, the Chalife himselfe adding thereto Hierak, the chife Citie  whereof (sayth our Author) is Hispahon, making him Chena of Bagadet, which is the soueraigne Magistrate of iustice, next the Chalife: but Matazed Bila Hamed the next Chalife slew him, being before vanquished by Ismael, to whom he gaue the tytle of King of Maurenahar, Karason, Scyras, Siston and Kermon; Gerion also and Taberstan, which hee tooke from Mahamed Ben Zeyd Alauuy. Moktafy Bila was next Chalife, and after him his brother Moctader Bila, who dyed A.H. 301. And Iafar Ben Matazed succeeded. All this while was Persia and the neighbour-Countries subiect to warre and contention, each calling his owne, whatsoeuer hee could get and hold by force. The particulars I forbeare to recite. In these times the Arabians robbed Mecca, carrying from thence great spoyles, which the superstitious Moores had offered: amongst the rest, carrying away a stone to Cufa, a holy Relique,  brought (forsooth) by Adam out of Paradise, and afterwards it befell to Ismael the sonne of Abraham, and (I know not when) was brought to Mecca. It is white by nature, but being touched by sinners (it were a sinne to deny it) prooued blacke. But Saint Rumwald atLamberti Peramb. Kent. Boxley, and many other Popish stones or blockes had like vertue.
Iafar our Chalife dyed A.H. 320. About these times Abusuia (Zacuth calls him Bawia) a poore Persian dreamed that he pissed fire, which inflamed the countrey, and deuiding it selfe into three parts continued long. An Astrologer interpreted, that hee should command great Prouinces, in which his sonnes should succeed him. Elkaher, or Kaher Bila Mahamet Ben Mathazed was the next Chalife, whose eyes his Souldiers put out after eighteene moneths, and gaue his place to Razibila. Hee cut off the hand of Eben Mokale his Wazir, and  hanged it on a gibbet, for writing a Letter without his priuitie. Hee ordayned also that the Wazirs should preach the Law to the people, which till that time the Chalifes themselues had performed. Muktafy succeeded. In his time was a great famine and pestilence. The Souldiers put out his eyes, A. H. 330. after which he liued fortie two yeeres. But his sonne Mostachfy Abdela was Chalife. Now did the three sonnes of Abusuia finde meanes to make themselues Lords of Persia, and the adiacent Regions, one of which warred vpon the Chalife, tooke him and put out his eyes. A. H. 334. and placed Motyah Bila Fazele, in that dignitie. In his time the stone aforesaid was recouered from Cufa (being redeemed at the weight in gold) and restored to Mecca. And now the Chalifes began to bee but shadowes of that quondam bodie, and Lords in name. Tayaha, Abdel, Carim was Chalife after Motyah:  in whose time the posteritie of Abusuia had ruinated Bagadet by their warres, which was by Azudu Daule (one of them) re-edifyed A. H. 368. This Prince shewed himselfe fauourable to his Diuines, Phylosophers, Physitians, and Poets, and gaue leaue also to the
 Christians his subiects to build Churches, bearing part of the charge. Hee built a goodly Hospitall at Bagadet, A.H. 371. and endowed it with great reuenues, and another at Scyras not inferiour. Hee dyed, A. 372. and left his inheritance to his three sonnes, of which Scerfa Daule went into Persia, and Scams Daule to Bagadet, which soone after possessed his brothers state then dead, and associated Bahao Daule the third brother with him in gouernment, who proued sole heyre by the treason of mutinous Souldiers which murthered Scams Daule, A. H. 380. Bahao deposed the Chalife in the first yeere of his raigne; although the possession of the place since the time of the Daules or Abusuia's race, was but an Ecclesiasticall power, plumed of the Temporall soueraigntie. Hee gaue the place to Kader Bila Hamed, the fortie sixe in order of Chalifes. At this time Mamud Gasney raigned in Karasan and  Maurenahar: who taking the aduantage of the minoritie of Fakoro Daules sonnes, (Fakoro himselfe and Bahao being dead) much altered the face of the Persian and Mahumetane affaires.
From this time forward, the Daules with ciuill contentions weakened each other. Great were the broyles also in all the Northerly adioyning Countries; the Kings of Bokara, Turquestan, Nichabur, Darband, Samarcand, with all the Prouinces in, or neere those parts of Persia, fryed in ciuill combustions, euery man measuring his right by his Sword and Speare. Mamud at this time hauing chased away his brother Ismael,Mamuds exploites in India, Persia, etc. contracted friendship with Ilechkan King of Turquestan, and made a prosperous expedition into India, as his Father Sabutaquin had done before; which Ilechkan enuying, treacherously entred into his countrey,  and forced Mamuds returne: but Mamud being victorious, Ilechkan strengthned himselfe with a new confederacie of Kaderkham, King of Katao kotan (a countrey in Catay) whose great forces forced Mamud to vse the helpe of the Turkes, and with the Calanges, Gazneys, and Aueganys, aduanced, and (fighting on a Elephant) obtayned the victorie. A. H. 397. Now did Mamud returne to his Indian expedition, seeking to conuert the Indians to his Religion, where hee fought with Bal an Indian King, and ouerthrew him in battell, taking fortie Elephants, and rich spoyles: and the Indians retyring with their treasures, and the riches of their Pagodes (or Idoll temples) Mamud entred heere also, where Mirkond sayth, hee tooke seuen millions of dragmes of gold, 700. Ingots of gold, with store of pearles and gemmes. Hee ouerthrew also the Gaores or Guzarates. In Karason was  at this time such a famine, that the people did eate vp one another. This being done, A. H. 400. Mamud went against Bagadet, and by strait siege forced Kader Bila the Chalife to yeeld himselfe, and redeeme his peace with money. After this, and some new exploites in Persia, hee returned into India, where he againe did great Acts: and at his returne, ouerthrowing Nealataquin, gaue the gouernment of Korarrazin to Altuntar one of his Captaines. In a fourth iourney into India, hee ouerthrew Gulkand a Pagan King, who seeing himselfe vanquished with the losse of fiftie thousand men, fearing a beautifull wife which he had, should come into his enemies hands, slew her, and himselfe also. In a fifth expedition hee ouercame Gipal and Iaudebal two Indian Kings, and returning to Gaznehen, built a stately Temple or Mosque, as a Thankesgiuing for his victories: and then entering into Persia, tooke Rey and Hispahon in Hierak (now the seate of Ahas the Persian King) from  Maiudu Daule, whom hee dispossessed of his Kingdome. At this time were great quarrels among the Daules in Persia, Kermon, and Diarbek; and Mocheraf preuayling against Sulton, c^lled himselfe King of Kings. A. H. 411. Gelala (another of the Daules) was the yeere after made King of Bagadet.
A. H. 416. Mocharaf dyed at Bagadet, and the yeere after, the Turkes tooke, fired, and spoyled Bagadet. This made them call Gelala againe to their succours, who not long before was defeated at Bagadet, and forced to flee to Basora; and now entring, went to the Chalifes house to kisse his foot, A. H. 419. But the Turkes which hee brought with him, falling to mutinie for their pay, the Chalife was forced to become pay-master. Mamud amidst  his conquests dyed, A. H. 421. and Mahamed his sonne succeeded, and the next yeere followed Kader the Chalife, which had enioyed (without great ioy in it) his place fortie one yeeres, and Kahem his sonne succeeded. Masud the other sonne of Mamud warred vpon his brother, whom by treacherie of Issuf and Amir Aly traytors to their Master, hee tooke and put out his eyes. Hee that loued the treason, rewarded the Traytors, the one with yron^ in a dungeon, the other with more open, and yet more close ayre, in hanging. Thus hee ruled Karason, Gazneken and Hierak, and sent Altuntax Gouernour of Koarrazin against Taquin, who held Samarkand and Bokara, which warres were bloudie. But A. H. 424. his Garrisons in India, and the Countrey of Gibal reuolted, in recompence of which hee subdued Gerion and Taberstan. TogotelThis was Tangrolipix. Sec. c. 8. or Togozelbek and Iakarbek Salinquis, two Turkish  Captaines, subdued many of his Townes in Karasan, and forced Alaon Daule and Abusale out of their Gouernments; whereupon Masud returning, was by other of his enemies ouerthrowne.
 Herewith enraged, hee put many Turkes to death which had fought in this last battell, but faintly on his part: and making an expedition into India, by treacherie was taken of his followers, and soone after slaine: his blinde brother Mahamed recouering the state, but not his eyes; and therefore resigning to his sonne Hamed, who againe was dispossessed by Moadud the sonne of Mafud. But the Turks in Karasan and Maurenahar would not acknowledge him, and in the 435. of the Heg. had the victorie against his armie. Other Turkes also going out of Turquestan, spoyled the Countries of Garmeer and Kandachar. This seemes a truer storie of the Turkes beginning of greatnesse in Persia, then that which is vsually receiued: and is thus by Mirkond a Persian Historian deliuered. Moadud hauing  relieued Lahor, which his Vassals in India rebelling had besieged, marched against the Turkes, but dyed in the way A. H. 441.
At Bagadet matters had continued in confusion. They had reuolted from Gelata Daule, and proclaimed Abulganiar King, but hee refused: and the Turkes soone after fired the Towne, and spoyled it. This continued till A. H. 428. when the cold was so extreame, that the riuer Degile or Tygris was frozen twelue dayes together, and the Snow lay three spans deepe there. A. H 434. Ebrahem Nealy Saliuqui a Turke, entred Persia in the Prouince of Hierak, and tooke Amedon. Tokzelbek before mentioned tooke Rey, and spoyled all Persia with a victorious Armie. Hee also through the dissentions of the sonnes of Abulganiar, after their Fathers death, found meanes to encrease himselfe. And the Chalife of Damascus forced Kahem  the Chalife of Bagadet to flee to Tokzelbek for succour: whereupon hee entred Bagadet, and put all to fire and sword, rifling the very Sepulchers to search for Treasures. He tooke Malek Rhaym the successour of Abulganiar, whom before hee had helped to winne Scyras, and the best part of Persia, and imprisoned him, where hee dyed. And thus the Empire of the Daules being deadly sicke, soone after dyed. Abd Rachid also the successour of Maodud was so pursued by Tokzelbek, that at last in a Fort he was (through the corruption of his Guard by money) taken and murthered. Then did hee, marrying a sister of the deceased, proclaime himselfe King. But not long after being in a publike place to receiue the salutations which they are accustomed to make in those parts, ten of the chiefe men conspiring together, slew him.
Kahem or Alkahem dyed A. H. 467. and Almoktady Byla was Chalife the fortie eight in order. In his time the Turkes and Ferrogozad (the other sonne of Masud) came to composition. Almostazer Byla succeeded his Father in the Caliphate, A. H. 487. in whose time Bagadet hauing beene ruined by the ouerflowing of Tygris, the situation was changed, and it was new built on the other side of the riuer towards the East, where it now stands in a more commodious seat, hauing had twentie fiue Chalifes since the foundation by Abuiafar, and yet not one of them dyed in it. Hee liued in peace and dyed A. H. 512. This storie is thus told by Zacuth. In his time the Astrologers fore-told an exceeding deluge, not so great as in the dayes of Noah, because then (said they) were seuen Planets in coniunction with Pisces, whereas now there were but sixe, Saturne being excluded. This made the Inhabitants  of Bagded afraid, because of the low situation: and caused them to stop the passages of the waters. The Ismaelites, which of deuotion performed their Pilgrimage, were most of them drowned. The Calipha for this cause arayed the Astrologer, which fore-told this, in royall apparell. Almostarched Byla Fazele his sonne succeeded; hee warred against some Princes of Persia, and seized vpon some Prouinces of Masul Saliuqui King of Karason, but Masud had the better, and slew the Chalife A.H. 529. His sonne and successour Rached Bila sought to reuenge his death, but hauing conquered a great part of Persia, was slaine also by Masud A. 532. He following his victories, made himselfe Master of Bagadet, and placed Almoktafy Bila in the Califate, who taking aduantage of Masuds death, which hapned soone after, marched into Persia, and recouered that which Masud had vsurped, which he enioyed  peaceably, and dyed A. H. 555. And now the Chalifes became great Potentates againe. His sonne Almostanget Byla Issuf succeeded the fiftie three Chalife. After his death which was through heate, by shutting the doore when he was in the Bath, succeeded A. 566. Almostanzy Benur Elah Acen: and heeIn his time the Abasian Chalifes were receiued in Aegypt, which the Phetimaeans of Ali had seperated. Zacuth. dying, A. 577. Nacer held the place fortie seuen yeeres: vnder whom Bagadet did greatly flourish. During his gouernment the Saliuquis were vanquished by the Koarrasmians. Altahar Byla Mahamed, the next Chalife enioyed it but nine moneths; his sonne Almostancer Byla seuenteene yeeres, in whose time the Mogoles or Tartarians wanne some Prouinces, but by him were diuers time defeated. Almostacem, or Musteatzem Byla Abdula was the fiftie eight, (others reckon but fiftie foure) and the last of the Chalifaes of Bagadet the thirtie seuen of this family, which had commanded  about fiue hundred twentie three yeeres, in the Persian Chronicles of Mirkond, and others esteemed as Kings thereof. Hee dyed A. H. 655. I confesse Zacuth and Mirkond doe not fully agree in names, times, and relations, nor yet much disagree. I haue heere most obserued
 the later as the larger. Not long before, one Bada professing himselfe a Prophet sent of GOD, had of the scumme of all Nations gathered an Armie, wherewith hee committed much excesse and slaughter in Asia, both of Iewes and Christians. In the time of this last Chalife, the Tartar King Chita, made his brother Halacho King of Irak and Mesopotamia, who besieged and sacked Bagded, and slew Musteatzem. This Chalipha was starued by his commandement in the middest of his treasures, because hee would not employ the same (through niggardise) for his owne defence. From that time there hath been no Chaliph (saith this Arabian Historie) in Bagdet. In him ended the Abasian line, of which had beene fiue and thirtie Chaliphaes.  


@. IIII. Of their Titles, Greatnesse, and Learning.
AFter Mahumet or Muhammed the false Prophet, the first Captaines of warre were called Emirelmumenim,Iacob de Vitriaco. Hist. Ieros. l. 1. c. 9. Amir, Amira, Amiras, Admirans, a themate AMARA, praecepit. Bedwel. Hence is our title Admirall compounded, and of (...), the Sea. that is to say, Praefecti orthodoxorum, the Captaines of the Sound-beleeuers: and after, because, vnder cloake of Religion, they seized on the Primacie and tyrannie (spirituall and temporall) they named themselues Caliphes,  that is, Vicars. Bedwell interprets, successours. The first Emirelmumenim, was Abubecher. When by his successours, GouernoursSuch were the Gouernors of Chorasan, Irak, Siras, Damasco, Iaman, Mutzul, Halep, Gunia, Mahaan. The Arabian calleth them Kings: and their heyres succeeded them. were sent into Spaine and Africa, they for a time held the same as Deputies, although to their power nothing lacked but the Tytle of a King, yet they professed to doe all in the name of the Emirelmumenim, vntill afterwards they tooke that Tytle also themselues, and became absolute. Whence all the pettie Kings of Spaine, and the African Potentates, were called Emireelmumenim; and the Kings of Barbarie are so stiled at this day, euen as the French King is called Christianissimus, and the Spaniard Catholicus. The Legats of the Chalipha were called Naibin, which also signifieth the same that Chalipha; but this was made peculiar to those Saracen tyrants, which vsed both Swords (to speake in the Romish language) supreame in matters Diuine and Humane. Thus obserueth  Ioseph ScaligerCan. Isag. l. 3. of these names: whereby appeareth, that Emire elmumenim was not giuen onely to Abedramon and his successours in Africa, as is before obserued out of Curio.
Beniamin Tudelensis nameth the Chaliph, which in his time ruled in Bagded, Amir Almumanin Alghabassi, which Montanus translateth, The Prince of the beleeuers which liue in penance, or heauinesse: But I rather encline to Mr. Seldens coniecture, that it is Emirelmumenim of the Abazian race or kindred: for so Beniamin adds after that the proper name of this great King was Al-ghabassi Hhaphtsi, whom I take to bee the same which is before called Moktaphi, the first sillable in that name being common (as you see) to many of them, and Ktaphi or Chaphtsi not so vnlike as many names proue in their transmigration from one language to another. He reports that he had a Palace of three miles compasse within the Citie, within which was  a wood or groue of Trees of all sorts, both barren and bearing, Beasts also of all sorts for game, and in the middest thereof a great lake with plentie of Fish, neither wanted there Fowles for varietie of disport. He was skilfull of the Hebrew, and well respected that Nation. He had imposed this rule on himselfe, not to vse any meate or apparell, which hee had notThe great Turke obserueth some shadow of this custome, in vsing one or other handicraft. first earned: to which purpose hee made fine Mattes, which being sealed with his owne Seale, were by his Courtiers solde, the great men buying them for their vse. None of the Ismaelites (so he calleth the Mahumetans) might see his face: and the Pilgrimes which came from Mecca, in the Land of Eliman, and passing this way, desired to see him, vsed to enter the Palace, and there cryed out, O Lord, Light of the Ismaelites, and Sun-beame of our Law, shew vs the brightnesse of thy face. But hee answered them nothing, as not seeming to regard  them. Then his Courtiers and great Attendants sued for them, saying, O our Lord, spread thy peace ouer these men which come from farre Countries, etc. Then would hee let out at the window a skirt of his garment, which they deuoutly kissed; and (when one of those great men had said, Goe in peace) returned full of gladnesse to their home, where they were receiued almost with veneration for so happie an exploit. Euery of the Princes which attended on him, had their seuerall Palaces within the great Palace, and were duely obserued, wearing also yron chaynes, because they had once conspired to set vp his brother. But they had the reuenues of Townes and Cities belonging to them, brought them by their Officers, notwithstanding.
Thus did hee conserue his Maiestie with the people, and securitie with his owne. I omit  the Edifices and pillars of gold and siluer, adorned with Gemmes, which he mentioneth in that Palace: Out of which the Chaliph came but once in the yeere, in the moneth Ramadan,
 or their Easter solemnitie, at which time they resorted thither out of farre Countries to see him, as if hee had beene Mahomet. He was then carryed on a Mule, royally apparelled, and crowned with a Diadem of vnspeakable price, on which he ware a blacke cloth, in token that the day of death would obscure all that pompe and splendor. The Princes of Arabia, Media, Persia, Tuboth, did attend him: and thus he went to the great Temple built in the gate Bosra. The people, men and women, all cloathed in silke and purple, salute him, Peace be on thee our Lord King: He resaluting them with his hand, or mouing his garment. Being thus conueyed to the Porch, with musicke also of all kindes, and dances, he ascendeth a Tower of wood, and there maketh a Sermon of his Law; the wise-men of the Ismaelites applauding his learning,  the people answering, Amen. After this, hee giueth them all his blessing: and a Camell is brought to him, which hee killeth for the Paschall Feast, and causeth the Princes to distribute pieces of the flesh of the beast which himselfe had slaine; this they esteeme a great gift. This done, they depart, the King returning by another way, by the bankes of Tygris, alone, (the Princes passing in the Riuer) vnto the Palace. Hee had built a Palace on the other side of Tygris, on a branch of Euphrates, which floweth by one side of the Citie, in which hee had raysed great Houses, Hospitals for the sicke, and for the poore, and for mad men, with all prouision for them at his charge. This I haue beene bold to insert out of this Iew, because I know none other Author that can acquaint vs with the State of Bagded in the time of her chiefe flourishing, before it was destroyed by the Tartars.
 Thus haue wee giuen you a Chronographicall view of the ancient Chaliphaes, with their first and greatest Conquests, omitting the lesser and later: as in the yeere 807. in Sardinia and Corsica: in 826. in Creete, 843. in Sicil; and presently after inLud. Reg. l 8. Italy, ouer-running Tuscan, and burning the Suburbes of Rome it selfe, with the Churches of Peter and Paul 845. the next yeere in Illyria, Dalmatia; besides the taking of Ancona: in 847. chased by Pope LeoPlat. in vita Pont. from Ostia. These with other their affaires of warre in Lucania, Calabria, Apulia, at Beneuentum, Genua, Capua, (which Cities they tooke) I passe ouer. After this great bodie grew lubberly and vnweldie, it fell vnder the weight of it selfe, none so much as the Saracens ouerthrowing the Saracens, as theirCairaoan became a Papacie absolute though schismaticall, as they called it: so did Marocco: the Persians were alway prone to such Schismes: and other, as it serued for their aduantage. Sects and Diuisions make plaine. Neuerthelesse, this dis-ioyning and disioynting notwithstanding, their Religion euen still couereth a  great part of the world. For besides the triumphing sword of the Turke, Persian, Mogore, Barbarian, and other Mahumetan Princes: such is the zeale of the superstitious Mahumetan, that in places furthest distant, this their Religion hath beene prea^hed, which they trade together with their Marchandize, euen from the Atlantike Ocean vnto the Philippinaes: It hath sounded in China, it hath pierced Tartaria: and although the name of Christian extendeth it selfe into so many Sects and Professions in the Countries of Asia, Afrike and America, besides Europe (almost wholly Christians;) yet it is hard to say, whether there bee not as many Disciples and Professors of this ridiculous and impious deuotion, as of all those which giue their names to Christ, in whatsoeuer Truth or Heresie. Master Brerewood accounteth the Mahumetans more then the Christians, in proportion of sixe to fiue.
 Thus hath the Field and the Church stooped to Mahomet: wee may adde more, (Saul among the Prophets:) learning hath flourished among the Mahumetans, at first vnlearned and rude, but enemies to learning in others. Yea, theyBer. Aldrete var. Antiq. l. 3. c. 33. sought to propagate their impious Mahometrie, and extirpate the Christian truth by that pollicie of Iulian, prohibiting all learning to their Christian subiects. Such a decree of Abdalla, A. 766. is recited by Theophanes.
When the Kings of Africa possessed Spaine, they founded Vniuersities both at Marocco (it isScal. Epist. Step. Vberio. Hee saith that the figures which we vse in Arithmetike, came fro^ the Arabians or Moores to the Spaniards, and thence to vs, about three hundred yeers since, and then much differing from those chaacters which now wee vse. Scaligers report) and in Spaine, allowing yeerely stipends to the Professors. And in those times was great ignorance of good learning in the Latine Church, when good Disciplines flourished exceedingly amongst the Muhammedans. Yea, whatsoeuer the Latines writ, after the industrie of the Arabians had acquainted them with their ignorance, is wholly to  be ascribed to the Arabians, both their Philosophie, Physicke, and Mathematikes. For they had no Greeke Author which was not first translated into Arabike, and thence into Latine, as Ptolomey, Euclide and the rest; till Constantinople being taken by the Turkes, the Greeke Exiles brought vs backe to the Fountaines. Iohn Leo testifies, that many ancient Authors and great volumes are amongst them, translated out of the Latine, which the Latines themselues haue lost. But now the Muhammedans are growne artlesse in Africa: only in Constantinople may good Arabike and Persian works be gotten by the helpe of the Iewes. Lud. ViuesDe Trad. Discip. lib. 4. and Ludouicus Viu. de caus. corrupt. art. l. 4. Omnia illa Arabica videntur mihi resipere delira nent^ Alcorani, and blasphemas Mab insanias: nihil fieri illis potest, indoctius, infulsius, frigidius. saith, That they translated Arabike out of the Latine, but he was not so well able to iudge therof, although he rightly ascribeth the corrupting of Arts to vnskilful translations, and sheweth the difference of Abenrois or Auerrois his Aristotle (as the Latins haue him) from the Greeke. But  his inuectiue is too bitter in condemning all the Arabians, as vnlearned, doting, and sauouring
 more of the Alcoran, then of Art: and the Spaniard might beare some grudge to that Nation, which so many hundred yeeres had spoyled Spaine; still leauing the fourth part of the Spanish Language (as ScaligerScal. Epist. ad Casaub. testifieth thereof) Arabike, in monument of their Conquest.
Of their learned men wereLud Reg. 7. 14. Auicen, Auerrois, Auempace, Algazel, etc. Philosophers; Mesue, Rasis, and many other Physicians and Astrologers, mentioned in the Chronicles of Zacuthi; Leo, and Abilfada Ismael, Geographers; Cairaon, Bagded, Fez, Marocco, Corduba, etc. were Vniuersities of Saracen students. But now Learning and Schooles are decayed and ruined: euen as at first also it was amongst some of them little countenanced, as appeareth by that Hagag in the 96. yeere of the Hegira, who being Gouernor or King ofWhereof Taurus is chiefe Citie: M. Polo. lib 1. cap. 9. calleth it Hierach. Magin. Med a maior. Irak, in his sicknesse consulted with an Astrologer, Whether the Stars had told him of any Kings death  that yeere: he answered, That a King should die, but his name was Cani: Whereupon Hagag remembring that at his birth his mother had imposed that name on him: I shall die, saith he; but thou shalt go one houre before: and presently caused his head to be smitten off. An vnhappie Harbengership in regard of his Art: an vnhappie Art which can better tell others Destinies then their owne. But no maruell in Hagag, who was fleshed in bloud, that his Herodian Testament should bee thus bloudie, who in his life had in that Median Prouince slaine an hundred and twentie thousand men, besides fiftie thousand men, and fourescore thousand women, which perished in his imprisonments.
Baghdad or Bagdat.Baghdad (which is also called Dar-assalam, that is, The Citie of PeaceThe Deuils Ierusalem. The Tartarian conquest is here omitted.) receiued that name of a Monke called Bachdad, who as Ben-Casen writeth, serued a Church builded in  that Medow. But Abu-Giapar Almansur the second Abassaean Chalipha, who wanne it, A. Heg. 150. named it Dar-assalam. It is the Citie Royall of Mesopotamia, now called Diarbecr, which the said Almansur placed in a large Plaine vpon Tigris, and diuided by the Riuer into two Cities, ioyned by a Bridge of Boats. This Citie built in this place, Almansur ruled many yeeres, and after him other Chaliphaes, till the 339. yeere of the Hegira, in which King Aadhd-eddaule and Saif-eddaule tooke it, who with their Successours enioyed it till Solymus the Ottoman Emperour subdued, and is now ruled by a Bascia, with many Ianizaries. But hereof Ahmad Abi Bacr of Bachdad, in his Annals, will shew you more. This Citie is famous for Schooles of all Sciences, both in former and the present time. Here Ahmad Assalami a famous Poet wrote his Verses. Here Alpharabius the renowned Philosopher  and Physician, borne at Farab in Turcomannia, professed these studies publikely with great applause, and leauing many of his Schollers in this Cities, went to Harran of Mesopotamia,Aristotles books of Physicks admired. where finding Aristotles Booke, De Auditu, hee read it fortie times, and wrote vpon the Booke, that he was willing againe to reade it. Hence hee went to Damascus, and there dyed, A. H.This number seemeth false. Bochara the Citie of Auicenna: some say in Bocara neere Samercand. 339. Thus Ben-Casem in his Booke, De viridario Electorum.
Bochara is an ancient Citie vpon Euphrates, in a Village belonging whereto Honain Ali Bensina (whom the Latines call, Auicenna) was borne, A. H. 370. Hee gaue himselfe to Physicke very young, and was the first which became Physician to Kings and Princes, who before in that Countrey vsedThis seemed to arise of their opinion of Fate. Auicenna. no Physicians. He published neere an hundred bookes, manie of Physicke, some of Philosophie, a Dictionarie of Herbes and Stones, Verses of the Soule, etc. He liued eight and fiftie yeeres, and dyed in Hamadan. He had runne thorow all  Arts, at eighteene. Thus Ben-Casem. But others affirme, that a certaine Physician flourishing of great note, vpon whom no praying nor paying could fasten a Disciple, lest the secrets of his Art should bee made common: the mother of Auicenna offers her sonne to doe him seruice in decoctions, and other meaner offices, which hee could not doe himselfe, nor was there feare of danger from him whom nature had made deafe, and therefore dumbe. Hee made tryals,His dissimulation. and found Auicenna deafe, as he thought, and entertayned him, who watched his times, and transcribed his bookes and notes, sending them closely to his Mother, which after his mothers death hee published in his owne name.
DamascusDamascus. is called of the Arabians, Sciam, and Demasc, of the Syrians Darmsuc. It is luxurious in Fruits of all kinds, rich in Oliues, and Yron of excellent temper by nature, and  so bettered by Art, that no Helme or Shield can withstand it. It is seated in a large Plaine at the roots of Libanas, there called Hermon, sixe miles in compasse, double walled, with a strong square Tower in the midst, built by a Florintine, beautified with Springs, Market-places, publike Buildings, Meskits, Bathes, Canes, and all sorts of like weauing, and in all ancient times with Learning and learned men. Here flourished Saint Damascen: and heere Almotannabbi excelled in Arts and Armes,Comparison of Mahomet and Almotannabbi. M. Abi Abdillah emulous of Mahomet, but not with like successe. Hee was called Nabion, that is, The Prophet; this Motannabbi, that is, Prophecying: hee wrote the Alcoran elegantly and eloquently; this excelled in Prose and Verse: both had Followers, but this mans Disciples after his death were disperst, which hapned, A. H. 354.  Ben-Casem also relates, that Mohamed Abi Abdillah professed Philosophie in this Citie, and to dispute with all commers, and wrote a huge Booke, De vnitate existendi principiorum. He dyed there, A.H. 638.

AleppoAleppo. is called of the Inhabitants, Haleb, the chiefe Mart of all the East, frequented by Persians, Indians, Armenians, and all Europians. The Port is Scanderoone, called by the Inhabitants Escanderuneh. The soyle is very fertile, and nourisheth abundance of Silke-wormes. A.H. 922. Sultan Selim tooke it, and found therein infinit wealth.Sciarfeddin a Turkish Historian. Sciarfeddin which wrote the Victories of the Othomans in two Tomes, saith, that it had of Gold and Siluer coyned 1150000. and a mightie masse vncoyned, Vests of cloath of Gold, tissued or wrought with gold, silk, and scarlet, aboue 300000. besides abundance of Gems and Pearls. And besides oth^r wealth innumerable, it had eight Armories well furnished. It now flourisheth in the next place to Constantinople and Caito, and may be called, Queene of the East: Here are store  of Gems, Amber, Bengeoin, Lignum Aloes, and Muske,Muske how made. which is taken from a little reddish beast, beaten with many blowes on one place that the bloud may all come thither. Then is the skin so swolne and full of bloud bound straight that the bloud may not issue; and put into one or more bladders, is dryed on a beasts backe till the bladder fall off of it selfe, and that bloud after a moneth becomes excellent Muske. At Aleppo was borne that great Grammarian Othaman Abu Homar, surnamed Ben-ellhhageb, which wrote Cafia and Sciafia of Grammer, and dyed, A. H. 672.



CHAP. III. The Life of Mahumet, Mahammed, or Muhammed the Saracen Law-giuer.

@. I. Mahumets Life after the Histories of Christians.
THe life of Mahomet is at large described by diuers Authors, but I finde it no where so fully as before the Alcaron in the Italian Edition, the sum whereof, and of the other reports touching the same, is this. Ismael was the first (according  to that Italian Author, others ascribe it to Abraham) that built the Temple at Mecca; and hauing to wife an Egyptian Idolatresse, had by her twelue sonnes, which (as he saith) being dispersed in Arabia, Persia, Armenia, sowed so many sorts of Religion: and Chedar his second sonne, placed in the Temple of his father (vpon an high Tower called Alquibla) an Idoll named Allech and Alleze, instituting certaine cremonies: and amongst the rest, the sacrificing of a Ram, in remembrance of that Ram which was presented to his grand-father Abram at the offering of Isaac. Of ChedarFortalicium fidei reckoneth another genealogie: and the Saracen Chronicle continueth this, euen from Adam; not agreeing with themselues or any truth. descended Thebic, and so in order, Caab, Numhib, Almucaien, Ahlucen, Acaha, Amubasca, Amir, Celif, Nisca, Abhimaistae, Aadirem, Scaad, Mudhar, Ilges, Mudicita, Hudhaifa, Chinene, Anascere, Melich, Phasce, Paliff, Lunai, Cabnai, Morta, Chelef, Facien, Abdamanef, Abdalmutalif,  Abdalla the supposed father of Mahomet: his mothers name was Hennina or Hemina a Iewish (as someI. Bo. Ben. Volater. etc. write) his father was an E^hnicke or Pagan Idolater. His base condition and obscuritie was such, that the Turkes themselues doubt whether he were an Arabian or Persian, notwithstanding that genealogicall rabble.Christ. Richer. Richerius reporteth, that he was a Cyreuean by birth, and that in the time of his minoritie or child-hood, he was by some Plagiarie stolne away from his friends, and sold to the Ismaelit-Marchants. Others say, that hee was abandoned both of father and mother, and (according to the cruell custome of that barbarous people) sold to strangers. From so base a beginning did this cunning Impostor and Seducer of the world arise to be the scourge of Princes, and disturber of the world.
He was somewhat comely of person, and of sharp wit, and therefore was made ouer-seer  of the businesse of Abdalmutalif his Master, or (as some say) his Grand-father: and traded for him in Soria, Egypt, and Persia, and after his death, inherited his goods: continuing his trade of Marchandize with a great man of Corozan, he succeeded him in his bed and wealth, by the marriage of his widdow Gadisa (whomArabs Nobilis in Alcor. refut. Cedrenus calls her Chadicha. others call Adega the daughter of Hulert) and that (as some suspect not vnprobably) by the helpe of Sorceries and Incantations. With this widdow, after shee was become his wife, he liued in his wonted course of life thirteene yeeres, and had by her one sonne, and three daughters. And by this meanes growne great, he aspired higher; assembling to himselfe a company of theeues, vnthrifts and out-lawes, which with him became voluntaries and aduenturers in the warres of the Emperour Heraclius against the Persians: in which he valourously behaued himselfe, and was wounded in the  visage, and Cosdroes the Persian King was ouercome.
After this, Mahomet deuising further how to satisfie his ambitious desire of Soueraigntie, met with occasion fitting those his aspiring designes. The Arabians being ^enied their pay
 (as is said) raised a mutinie andThis mutiny, according to others, hapned many yeeres after that Mahumet had vnder the cloake of Religion furthered his ambition and rebellion. rebellion: these chose Mahomet to be their Captaine, who vsed them as his instruments of robbery and violence about the countries of Mecca. But the Nobles opposing themselues against him; hee, perceiuing that their power and authoritie would be a perilous rub in his way, thought it his safest course to insinuate with them; and therfore sought by alliance to winne their better liking, taking some of their daughters to his wiues; of which he had at one time eleuen, and in all his life fifteene, besides two slaues.
Heraclius at that time fauouring the Heresie of the Monothelites; and neglecting the affaires of the Empire, Mahomets proiects tooke better effect. Hummar also and Mauchia caused all Soria, and Iudaea and Egypt to rebell. Sergius at that time a Nestorian Monke of Constantinople (thence for that Heresie excommunicated) resorting to Mahomet kindled these sparkes into a great fire, perswading him to countenance his Rebellion, with the pretence of  Religion; the rather now that Heraclius had offended the Christians by his exactions and Heresies, and the Iewes, by new cruelties, because by Magicke he had beene warned to beware of the Circumcised Nation. Thus some male contented Iewes, and some hereticall Christians being called to counsell, it was agreed, that hee should professe himselfe to be chosen in this turbulent state of the world, to bring vnto the same a New Law, appointed hereunto by Diuine authoritie: to the Iewes affirming himselfe their expected Messias; to the Christians promising amiddest so many Heresies, The rule of Truth; to the excommunicate Heretikes, restitution of their persons and goods; to seruants, libertie; to subiects, immunity from tribute.  
And thus hee caused himselfe of Sergius to bee baptized, and to beeHe neither was circumcised himselfe. (saith an Arabian nobleman in confutation of the Alcoran) nor did command any thing thereof in his law, but the Arabians vsed Circumcision before his time. circumcised also of Abdalla a Iew, hauing before beene a Paynime. After, hee got himselfe into a Caue two miles from the Towne called Garbe, continuing there two yeeres in companie of Sergius and Abdalla, which acquainted him with the Christian and Iewish Principles: and in the night resorted to his wife, whom he peswaded to this vaine beliefe by Zeidinus his seruant, rewarding him therefore with freedome, and proclaiming (as by an Edict from Heauen) the like libertie to all seruants of all sorts, which would follow him. This rout resorting to him, and by their numbers strengthening his faction, their masters not a little aggrieued, gaue out a rumour, that Mahomet was mad, and possessed of a Diu^ll, and that an euill end would befall him and his followers. And although they might haue gotten him into their hands,  yet in regarde of his nine vncles, and some noble Families linked him in kindred, viz. the Corasists, the H^ssinists, the Benitamines, they abstained from further rigour.
Thus with the helpe of Sergius andSansouino calleth h m Bacira, and addeth also Nicholas a Priest of Rome. Baira a Iacobite; and Cillenus in the caue, with the fauour of his two vncles, Hanza, and Alaben at Mecca, with his elder brother (that tooke his daughter Fatima) and Eubocara (a chiefe man of that place, afterwards his father in-law) he composed after his and their pleasure Constitutions and Canons, and published the same at Mecca; with protestation that the Angell Gabriel had been sent to him from God, as in old times to the Prophets, to teach him these things. And in the first place commanding them to beleeue in God the Creator of heauen and earth, the causer of raines and fruites, that inflicteth death on men, and after raiseth them vp to giue them either, in reward of their  good workes, Paradise; or of their bad, Hell; and such other things, neuer before heard of among these simple Idolatrous Inhabitants of Mecca, he grew in great estimation.
For in Persia and A^^bia, before this time, some worshipped a Tree, which they called Putulangua, offering sacrifices thereto: some an Idoll, called Bliomum; and some the Sunne; and others vsed other Idolatries; spred by the so many sonnes of Ismael: and therefore the ruder multitude, astonished with these Propheticall and Angelicall titles, were easily bewitched. And by degrees he published his intended wickednes, not sparing outragious villanies, asMahomet a Theefe and Murtherer. the stealing of a Camell, the murthering of a Iew sleeping vnder a tree. Yea, hee pretended not humane infirmitie, but diuine authority, to his most mischieuous designments. For example, being lustfully affected toAn Adulterer. Zamech, the daughter of Gaissi, the wife of Zaidi,  he writ in his Law, That after vow or promise of marriage, it was lawfull for him to enioy her, and (if he pleased) to take her to his wife. And being reprehended, that Aissa hisA Wittall. wife was dishonest with Zaphagam, the son of Almuthathum, the Angell (forsooth) said, she was chast. And being found by his wiues, with Mary the wife of Macobe, the King of the Iacobites, he in another Chapiter is absolued of his oath, and free to lye with any woman, not being able to containe himselfe, notwithstanding he had sworne so to do. And by the same authority he enioyned them penance, for blaming the Prophet. And willing to diuorce one of his wiues, but fearing the greatnesse of her kindred, hee frameth one Chapiter, blaming him for fearing man more then GOD. Meeting once with a woman on the way, hee would haue abused her, but she refusing, he set vpon her Asse (Lettice befitting his lippes) affirming  that that woman had more sinned, then if shee had slaine an hundred men. And the Saracens to this day, saithPet. Alf. apud. Breidenbach. Petrus Alfonsi, deplore that fact of this Saracen woman.

He wanteth not his miracles also in his Legend. As he iourneyed in the heate of the day withMahomets miracles. his Camels, a Cloud couered his head from the scorching heate of the Sunne, about the seuenteenth yeere of his age. And when hee first entered the Caue, he saw the Angell Gabriel in his proper shape, with white wings on a seate of gold betwixt Heauen and Earth, who brought him his Prophecie: and going to Mecca to tell his wife; the Beasts, Trees, Stoues, and Hearbs, saluted him with the name of a Prophet, and a messenger of God; and the trunke of a Tree standing in the way, diuided it selfe for him to passe betweene, and then after closed againe. Hee also, to satisfie his incredulous vnckle Bugellinus, caused the Moone to descend from heauen, which entred into his sleeue, and after parted it selfe in two, and then ascended againe. To satisfie the peoples doubtings, he caused a Bull (taught  before to come at his call) to bring on his hornes a Chapiter, which hee there had tyed, to testifie the truth of Mahomet.
But, while the fame of this Propheticall Function filled the mouthes of the vulgar with acclamations, it no lesse filled the hearts of the Nobles of Mecca with disdaine, who sought therefore to apprehend him; but hee closely fled to Ietrib or Medina with his followers, where he liued with the name of a Prophet thirteene yeeres. From this flight they begin the computation of their Hegira: the word Hegirathi signifieth a persecution for Religion. Wherein Mahomet imitated the Christians of those parts, who accounted their yeeres from the persecution of Dioclesian. That his flight hapned on the sixteenth of Iuly An. Dom. 622.  on Friday: Therefore doe they keepe holy the Friday. And because then the Moone shewed her new hornes, that became a sacred ensigne to the Mahometans: and on Towers where they watch to obserue the new Moone, they set vp an horned Moone, as Christians on Steeples vse to erect the Crosse. For then there was no new Moone day of there moneth MuharramFor the vnderstanding of this, reade Scal. E.T. lib. 2. and 5., but was the second day after the Iewish account: and therefore the new Moone might then be seene. But for the Friday it was obserued before Mahomets time, as shall after be shewed. Hee depriued a certaine Carpenters poore Orphans of their patrimonie, and consecrated their House into a Temple. This Citie being for most part inhabited with Iewes, they asked a signe in confirmation of his Office. He said, That hee was not sent with miracles, but denunciation of Armes heere, and Hell hereafter: and those which would not  receiue his new Doctrine, he expelled by force. Being absolute Lord heere, he aspired also to the Dominion of Mecca. He sent thirtie Horse with Hanzeta to rob the Marchants, trauelling thither: but being then preuented, hee sent foure yeeres after, sixe hundred of his best Souldiers vnder Hugaida to assault Mecca, but hee also was discomfited: yet not desisting his enterprize, seuen yeeres after he atchieued it, and after eleuen battels entered and sacked the Towne, and gaue the spoyle to his souldiers: and for feare, the neighbouring-Cities submitted themselues. Mahomet here with encouraged, assaulted the Persians and Aegyptians, exchanging with, those hee conquered, his new Religion for their old wealth and libertie, binding the Gouernours thereunto. But now being old, and through his intemperances weake, and diseased also with the falling Sicknesse, he coloured his often falling with  pretext of Gabriels brightnesse, and the vnsufferable splendour of his presence.
Hee was of meane stature, large sinewes, browne colour, broad face, with a cut lip, and had one of his fore-teeth stricken out in one Expedition, and in another his face wounded. He had great head, thinne haires, long shankes, not proportionable to his head. He was of few words, but deceitfull; couetous, and withall prodigall, (but of other mens goods) and in deeds of lust equalling himselfe to fortie other men, or (as some say) fiftie. When hee was threescore and three yeeres of age, he dyed; of which he liued in trade of Marchandize thirtie eight, and in the Caue two; at Mecca ten, in Medina thirteene. He had commanded, that they should not burie him; for that on the third day after hee would ascend in bodie and soule into Heauen. Meanewhile the Earth being poysoned with the stinke of his Carkasse,  they buryed him, not at Mecca (as some affirme) but at Medina. His Law, in his life-time, sustained many alterations; Cellenus his Scribe writing what himselfe pleased: and the seuerall parcels of the same being collected by Odmen, one of his successours, this Booke was thereupon called Alcaron, that is, a Summarie, or Collection of Precepts. Thus Mahomet aduantaged himselfe with the mutinous Rebels, Fugitiues, Vnthrifts, Apostata-Iewes, and hereticall Christians in that diseased State of the Empire: the body wherof was afflicted on the East by the Persians, on the West by the Gothes and other Barbarians, and fretted within his owne bowels by intestine rebellions: the Soule thereof being no lesse torne and rent by the Sects and Heresies of the Arians, Donatists, Nestorians, Pelagians, and others. He fishing in these troubled waters, set on foot his new Religion, to bring light to the Gentiles,  and to mitigate to the Iewes and Christians the seueritie of the Law and Gospell. But the Mahumetans themselues doe report otherwise, fabling of this Fabler great matters, as if hee had been the Promise and Hope of Nations, and the most excellent personage of the World.



@. II. The Saracens storie of Mahomets life.
THey haue written a Booke of the generation of Mahomet to this effect:Legend of Mahomet, Hermano Dalmata interprete. The Booke of the generation of Mahomet, the Messenger of God, (the Prayer and Saluation of God bee vpon him) from Adam and Eue, to the time when God brought him forth, gracious perfect, and fit for himselfe. When as Kabachbar had learned out of theThese prophets were Abnabdalla, Abnalmutaira, Abuzaid, Abamacumet, Alabez, Alfad, Abulambez Ezerigi, Abnamare, Kabalchabar (scholler of Kabalmedi) or Kabalachbar. Scriptures, and by Astrologie, that this Prophet should be borne to the  world, hee heard, That there was a man borne in Ieseras, a Citie of Arabia, hauing all such markes and tokens, as hee had fore-seene by the Prophecies and his Art, viz. A spot on his fore-head, a print betweene his shoulders, etc. And to satisfie his desire, hee went thither to see; where finding those tokens fulfilled in young Mahomet, hee thereupon expounded the darke mysterie of his farre-fetched Light, learned of his Master Kabelmedi, in this manner: When Adam was newly created, as he stood vp, his braine shaked and made a noyse, as the leaues doe, which are shaken with the winde: wherea^ Adam wondring, GOD said vnto him, The sound which thou hast heard, is the signe of the Prophets and Messengers of my Commandements. Take heed therefore that thou commit the Seed of Light onely to worthie Loynes, and to a cleane Wombe. And thisA mahumetan Chronicle saith, That this Light claue to the hands of God t^^ thousand yeeres before Adam, worshipping him as the Angels; after inclosed in the Rib of Adam, etc. Light of Mahomet that should be borne,  shined from the face of Adam; as the Sun or Moone at the full. And when hee had begotten Seth, that Light passed instantly from the face of Adam into the face of Eue, in so much, that the birds of the Aire, and beasts of the Earth, wondred at her beautie. Yea, the Angels, euery day saluted her, and brought her odours out of Paradise, till she brought forth Seth alone, hauing before at euery burthen, brought forth a brother and a sister.
Seth inherited this Light, which remained betweene heauen and earth, the Angels thereby ascending and descending vpon Seth, and crying alwaies, Reioyce thou Earth, worthie of the Light of Mahomet, on him be Prayer and Saluation of God. Adam drawing neere to his end, declared vnto him, by his Testament, the mysterie of that Light, and the Genealogy of the Prophets. Then descended Gabriel accompanied with threescore and ten thousand Angels,  bearing euery one of them a white leafe and a pen, which signed the writing, for the continuance of the order of the Propheticall generation. Seth receiued this writing, and was cloathed with a double red garment, shining as the Sunne, as saft as the violet-flower.
From him it passed by succession to Noe and Sem; then to Abraham, at whose birth two lights from the East and West (meeting in the middest) lightned the whole world: and the Angels were heard singing, That it was the Light of the Prophet, Mahomet who should be borne of his Seed. whose Word should bee in the vertue of God. This Light passed from Abraham to the face of Hagar, being with childe, and after to Ismael; and God told him, That the soule of Mahomet, in the beginning of the Creation, was mingled with his, and that his name in Heauen should be Asmet, in Earth Mahomet, in Paradise Abualtrazim. At this  Sara grieued, vntill three Angels comforted her with the promise of ISAAC. From Ismael it remoued to Keidar his sonne who being indued withSound, couragious, faire, swift, iust, a Hunter, and Archer. seuen Gifts, married Nulia of the Land of Isaac, but, being warned by an Oracle, he tooke to wife Algadira an Arabian; and after, by diuine warning, carried the chest of this Light vnto Iacob. Then was Hamel borne to him, and receiued the same Light; in which succeeded Thebicht, Hamiessa, Adeth, Aduve, Adne, Machar, Nizar, Musar, Aliez, Madraca, Horeima, Knieua, Anofra, Melic, Falhrem, Lui^, Galiben, Kab, Murran, Cudai, Abdamenef, Hesim, a man by diuine testimonie free of all vncleannesse. To him did all Kings offer their daughters in marriage, and among the rest Constantine, which he refused, and married Seline, the daughter of Zeit, and had by her Abdalmutalib, whose Light caused raine in drought. To him an Elephant postrated himselfe, and said  with mans voice, Saluation be on you, and on the Light that shineth out of your Reines, Dignitie, Fame, Honor, and Victorie bee on you, and that there should proceede from him a King, greater then all the Kings of the earth: Another time, as hee slept on the stone which was placed by Abraham in his Oratorie at Mecca, hee dreamed of a chaine reaching East and West, and to Heauen, and to the Depth, which was presently conuerted into a flourishing hearb. Noe and Abraham presented themselues interpreters of this Dreame. Abdalla his sonne, the father of Mahomet, had a Tutor giuen vnto him: to defend him from his enemies, who seemed a man, but was none. Hee was preserued from the lying in waite of the Iewes, by threescore and ten Angels, which seemed Men. Hee weddedOr H mina Daughter of Abdemenes. Ermina, and therefore two hundred Women perished for his  loue; some hanging, some burning themselues.
When the prescribed time was come, in the moneth Dulheia, on a Fryday-night, GOD
 bad Ariduvan to open the gates of Paradise, that the innermost of his secret might be manifested: for it pleaseth mee (saith hee) this night to transport the Light of my Prophet from the reines of Abdalla into the wombe of Ermina, and that it come into the world. This being done, as Abdalla, the Iudge and Lord of the Arabians, went into the house of Prayer, hee perceiued a great light to lighten from his house vp toward Heauen, and presently dyed. On the twelfth day of Rab, on a Tuseday, Mahomet was borne, circumcised and all frolik. And then all Idolls fell and became blacke: All Kingdomes were destroyed, and not one stood vp-right. Lucifer was cast into the bottome of the Sea, and in fortie dayes could not get out, and then called his fellowes, and told them, that Mahomet was  borne with the power of the sword, who would take away all their power. The same also, GOD caused to bee proclaimed in Heauen and Earth. His mother said, that she was deliuered of him without paine, and Angelicall Birds came to nourish the child, and a man clothed in white presented him with three keyes, like to Pearles, which he tooke; the key of Victorie, the key of the Lawes, and the key of Prophecie. And after came three persons with shining faces, presenting him a Cauldron of Emeralds, with foure handles, which Mahomet accepted as a signe of his rule ouer all the world. The Birds, Clouds, Windes, Angels, contended for the nourishment of the childe. But the cause was determined by heauenly voice affirming. That hee should not bee taken from the hands of men. An Asse, almost famished, worshipped him, and receiuing him on her backe, became  Herald to this new Prophet, with mans voyce proclaiming the worthinesse of her Carriage. Three men carried him vp into a Mountaine: of which, one opened him from the breast vnto the Nauell, and washed his entrailes with snow: the second cleaued his heart in the middest, and took out of it a black graine, saying, That it was the portion of the Deuill. The third made him whole againe. Seraphin nourished him three yeeres, and Gabriel nine and twentie, who gaue vnto him, in the fortieth yeere of his age, the Law, and carried him to Heauen. This his iourney is related by Frier Richard, sometimes a studient in the Vniuersitie of Baldach, Chapter 14. and in hisSee also Bellon. Obseruat. llb. 3. cap. 7. life.
Gabriel, with threescore and ten paire of wings, came to Mahomet, in the chamber of Aissa, his best beloued wife, and said, That GOD would haue him to visit him where he is;  and brought with him the beast Elmparac, or Alborach, of nature betweene a Mule and an Asse. This beast told Mahomet, That hee would not take him on his backe, till he had prayed to God for him. His steps were as farre as one could see, so that in the twinkling of an eye hee had brought Mahomet to Ierusalem. Then Gabriel with his girdle tyed the beast to a Rocke, andLa vita Mahometi saith, In a shining ladder they went vp to heauen, where the stars hung by golden chaines, as big as mount Notho by Medina. carried Mahomet on his shoulders into heauen: where he knocked, and the Porter opened. Here Mahomet sawThere were in the first heauen Angels of the shapes of all creatures, praying for the creatures of their shapes: and a Cock, whose feete touched one Heauen, and head the other, whose crowing moued the Cocks of the earth to doe so. In the second was Noe. This heauen was of gold; the third of Pearles, wherein was Abraham, and the huge huge Angell of Death, with h^s booke and pen in hand, writing the times and mens liues: (which fatall opinions maketh them hardie.) The fourth was of Emerald, here was Ioseph and the Angell of Compassion, weeping for the sinnes of men. The fifth of Diamond, and in it Moses. The sixth of Rubie, and in it Iohn Baptist. The seuenth of fire, and in it Iesus Christ. All these recommended thems^lues to his Prayers. troupes of Angels, and prayed twice on his knees for them: and amongst the rest, old Father Adam, reioycing for such a Sonne, and commending him to his prayers. Then hee brought him to the second Heauen, which was a iourney of fiue hundred yeeres, and so forth on to the seauenth Heauen: Heere hee saw the Angelicall people, euery of which was a thousand times greater then the World, and euery of them had threescore and ten thousand heads, and euery head three-score  and tenne thousand mouthes, and euery mouth seuenteene hundred tongues, praysing God in seuen hundred thousand Languages. And he saw one Angell weeping, and he asked the cause: who answered, That he was Sinne. And Mahomet prayed for him. Then Gabriel commended him to another Angell, and he to another, and so forth in order, till he came before GOD and his Throne. Then GOD (whose face was couered with threescore and ten thousand cloathes of light, and from whom Mahomet stood two stones cast below) touched him with his hand, the coldnesse whereof pierced to the marrow of his back-bone. And GOD said, I haue imposed on thee and on thy people Prayers. When hee was returned as farre as the fourth Heauen, Moses counselled him to returne back, to obtaine case vnto the people, which could not beare so many praiers, which he did oftentimes, till there remained  but few, thus returning to his Elmparac, he rod backe to his house at Mecca. All this was done in the tenth part of the night. But when he was requested to doe thus much in the peoples sight, he answered, Praysed be GOD, I am a Man, and an Apostle.
The Booke Asear (saith (Bellonius) telleth further, That in this iourney Mahomet heard a womans voice, crying Mahomet, Mahomet, but hee held his peace. Afterwards another called him, but he gaue no answere. Mahomet asked the Angell, who they were? He answered, That the one was shee which published the Iewes Law, and if hee had answered her, all his Disciples should haue beene Iewes: the other was shee which deliuered the Gospell, whom if he had answered, all his followers had beene Christians.


The said Booke telleth, That GOD gaue him a fiue-fold priuiledge. First, that he should bee the highest creature in heauen or earth: Secondly, the most execellent of the sonnes of Adam: Thirdly, an vniuersall Redeemer: Fourthly, skilfull in all languages: Fifthly, that the spoiles of Warres should be giuen him. Gabriel after (saith that Booke) carryed him to Hell, to see the secrets thereof, and the seuen gates thereof, etc. where (as in the place fittest for him) wee will leaue him. The booke of the vertues of Mahomet saith, That in glorying of his strength hee would boast, that hee had knowne his eleuen wiues successiuely in one houre.
One of their Chronicles telleth of his Martiall affaires. This Chronicle reckoneth from Adam to Noe one thousand two hundred fortie and two yeeres: From thence to Abraham,  one thousand and fourescore: Hence to Moses fiue hundred and fifteene: After him to Dauid, fiue hundred threescore and nine: and from this time to Christ, one thousand three hundred and fiftie: from whence to Mahomet is numbred six hundred and twentie; in all fiue thousand three hundred threescore and sixteene, from Adam to Mahomet. All the Prophets were in number an hundred and twentie thousand, and the Messengers of GOD three hundred and fifteene: whereof Adam, Seth, Esdrik, Noe, Abraham, were Hebrewes; Huth, Schale, Ishmael, Schaib, Mahomet, were Arabians.
If this Historie of Mahomets life be long and tedious, I thought good, out of an Arabian Chronicle, to adde this Epitome thereof. His Mother dyed in a iourney to Mecca, when he was fourescore yeeres old, and his Nurse restored him to his Grand-father Abdalmutalif,  with whom hee liued eight yeeres. The Seraphim preserued him, but was neuer seene. After that, Gabriel was his Guardian, of whom hee receiued the Law, which he kept close three yeeres, communicating it onely to some of his owne opinion, by whose helpe hee became Priest and Prince of the Arabians and Saracens, and about eighteene moneths after was carried into Heauen: and being returned into the Earth, he tooke Eubocara, Ali, and Zaid, to be his companions in this enterprise. He went to Zaif, or Atharf, and preached publikely, and thence to Mecca, ten yeeres going from place to place. And of his Conuerts, he chose some for guard of his Person, who sware the obseruance of his Law, to the number of fortie, who now with Word, now with the Sword, set forward this Doctrine. After ten yeeres, Mecca was peopled onely with beleeuers; and all Arabia was conuerted without difficultie. Then  hee sent to the neighbouring Kings to become of his Religion; to the King of Persia, to the Roman Emperour, to King Cinna, to the Lord of the two Seas, to the King of Aethiopia, etc. After he returned to Ietrib, and on Tuesday, the twelfth of Rab, in the eleuenth yeere, dyed, His Sepulture was appointed by GOD, in the house of Aisca his Wife, in the chamber where hee was wont to sleepe, where, at this day is a Temple of bricke. His bodie was wrapped in three white clothes, without any pompe. His seale was a siluer Ring, with this inscription, Mahomet the Messenger of God. He went twise on Pilgrimage, and nineteene times conducted an Armie.
The place of his buriall is at Medina, surnamed of him TalnabiNobi, a Prophet., that is, of the Prophet; not (as some write) at Mecca. Neither doth his corps hang in the ayre by force of Load-stones drawing vp his yron Coffin or Chest, but lieth buried in the ground (if any where) as  Ludouicus Verttomannus, by his owne view, hath obserued. Of this place, and of Mecha, we shall speake more, in relating the Rites of the Pilgrims that visit them.
The Booke of the Policie of the Turkish Empire.Some relate otherwise of the death of Mahomet, as that hee dyed at fortie yeeres of age, being poysoned by one of his disciples, called Albunor, to make triall of his boasting Prophesie, that he would rise againe within three daies after his death. This Albunor after comming to see him, found his bodie torne in pieces, and deuoured of dogs: whereupon gathering together the bones that remained, into a Coffin, hee caused them to bee buried. Which in my minde is not so probable as the former report. The day of his death Scaliger accounteth the tenth yeere of the Hogira,Scal. E.T. p. 741. on Munday the twelfth of Rabie 1. or rather the euening before,  that is, the sixteenth of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord 631. and was borne the fifth of May, An. Dom. 570. on the same day and moneth, sixtie three Arabike yeeres before.
Vnto this which hath been spoken, I haue thought good to adde out of Arabike Authors, collected by Gabriel and Iohn the Maronites this which followeth.Computation of their Hegera. Mahomed was borne at Mecca, and in the fortieth yeere of his age, and as Ben-Casem hath, in the 933. of Alexander the Great, began to vtter his doctrine, first priuily, after that publikely; whereupon hee was banished the Citie in the fiftie two of his life,Note for reconciliation thereof with Christian account. or according to Abdillatif Ben-Iusof, the fiftie three, and fled to Iathreb, from which flight, which they call Hegeraton, or Hegera, which hapned A. B. 622. or thereabouts. And although this yeere 1623. bee to them 1032. Yet, because they reckon according to the yeeres of the Moone, which they say consist of three hundred fiftie foure dayes, the Moones course hath in this space exceeded that of the Sunne, some moneths aboue thirtie one yeeres. Whereupon their moneths are vncertaine.
 In this Citie by subtile hypocrisies, Mahomed became Politicall and Ecclesiasticall Prince; and beganne to procure the friendship of many, and to promulgate his lawes by degrees. In the second yeere of his flight, he enacted his lawes of Fasting; in the third, forbade wine and swines-flesh; and so proceeded with the rest, that within eight yeeres, hee brought into subiection Mecca (whence he had beene expulsed) and Muna, and went forward with his law and conquest. As concerning his wiues, Ben-Casem saith, he had foure: hee is also reported to haue many harlots and concubines: and in this Chapiter Surato-lbaqra, or de vac^a, hee bids them marrie one, two, three, or foure wiues a man,Mahomets filthinesse. and to take as many concubines as they are able to keepe. Ben-Sidi Ali saith, That he gloried that he had the power of ten Prophets  in copulation giuen him by God: yea, he ascribed all his villanies to God, by ministerie of the Angell Gabriel. His first wife was named Chodaige, by whom he had two sonnes,His foure wiues and his children. and foure daughters, Zainab, Fatema (whom Ali married) Om Kalihum the third; and Rakia the fourth (both which Abu-beer married.) His second wife was Aifee daughter of Aba-Becr the first Chalifa, which was but six yeeres old (Ben-Cas^m is our Author) when Mohamed tooke her to wife: the Moslemans call her The Mother of the faithfull:Mo her of the Moslemans. who besides the knowledge of tongues, perused diligently the Arabike histories, loued exceedingly, and alway praised Mohamed. The third was named Mary, which brought forth to Mohamed Ebrahim, sirnamed Casem (whence Mohamed is often called Abulcasem) though Ben-Abdilatif will haue Ebrahim to be one, and Casem another; but Ben-Casem saith, he had but three sons,  of which Ebrahim Casem dyed at eighteene moneths and Taiheb and Taher his sonnes by Codaigre, dyed both in their cradles. Mohameds last wife was Zainab, whom also they call the Mother of the faithfull, before the wife of Zaid Ben-Harteh, Mohameds Master, who diuorced her, whereupon Mohamed gladly tooke her to wife.
He had foure Councellors or Companions; the first, Abdollah, or Abu-Bacr,His foure associates, or counsellors. Abi-Bacr. Homar. his sincerest and most inward friend, a man very rich, and releeuer of Mohameds necessities, his successour after his death. He dyed the thirteenth yeere of the Hegira, and sixtie three of his age, and was buried in the same graue with Mohamed. The second was Homar the sonne of Chattab, surnamed Faruq, who succeeded Abi-Bacr, and ruled ten yeeres and six moneths. Hee was the first which was called King of the faithfull, and writ the Annalls of the Moslemans, and  brought the Alcoran into a Volume, and caused the Ramadam Fast to be obserued. He was slaine the twentie three of the Hegira, and buried by Abi-Bacr. The third was Othman,Othman. who in his twelue yeeres raigne subdued Cyprus, Naisabur, Maru, Sarchas, and Maritania, and dyed A. H. 35. and was buried in the buriall place of the Citie. AaliAali. is the fourth, who is called also Emir Elmumenin, that is, King of the faithfull; Hee was slaine A. H. 40. in the sixtie three of his age, and was buried in the Citie Kerbelai. Hee was Vncles sonne, or Cosin-German to Mohamed, and his sonne-in-law, and deare familiar from his youth, and receiued the Mosleman law together with Mohamed; whereupon hee was wont to say, I am the first Mosleman. And therefore the Persians detest the other three Chalifas, as heretikes, burne their writings wheresoeuer they finde them, and persecute their followers, because forsooth  they were so impudent; to prefer themselues before Aali,Mohameds death and Sepulchre. and spoiled him of the right-due by Testament. Hence are wars and hostile cruelties betwxit them and the Turks, and Arabs. Mohamed the false prophet, in the eleuenth yeere after his Hegira or flight, and the sixtie three of his age, dyed at Medina, and was buried there in the graue of Aaisee his wife. Here is a stately Temple and huge, erected with elegant and munificent structure, daily increased and adorned by the costs of the Othomans, and gifts of other Princes. Within this building is a Chappell not perfectly square, couered with a goodly roofe, vnder which is the Vrne of stone, called Hagiar Monauar, sometimes belonging to Aaisce aforesaid. This is all couered with gold and silke, and compassed about with yron grates guilded. Within this, which shineth with gold and gems, Mohameds ^arcasse was placed, and not lifted vp by force of  Load-stone or other Art; but that stone-Vrne lieth on the ground.
The Mosleman Pilgrims after their returne from Mecca, visit this Temple, because Mohamed yet liuing was wont to say, That hee would for him which should visit his Tombe, as well as if he had visited him liuing, intercede with God for a life full of pleasures. Therefore do they throng hither with great veneration kisse and embrace the grates (for none haue accesse to the Vrne of stone) and many for loue of this place leaue their Countrey, yea, some madly put out their eyes to see no worldly thing after, and there spend the rest of their dayes. The compasse of Medina is two miles, and is the circuit of the wall, which Aadhd Addaule King of Baghdad built A. H. 364. The territorie is barren scorched Sands, bringing forth nothing but a few Dates and Herbes.





CHAP. IIII. Of the Alcoran, or Alfurcan, containing the Mahumetan Law: the summe and contents thereof.

@. I. Of the Composition of the Alcoran.  
THe Booke of Mahomets Law is called by the name of ALCORAN, which signifieth a collection ofRobertus Retinensis. Precepts; and Alfurcan, (as it is expressed and expounded in a Booke,Harman. Dal. interprete. called, The Exposition or Doctrine of the Alcoran) because the sentences and figures thereof are seuered and distinguished, for Al is the Article, and phurcan signifieth a distinction, or as some say, Redemption. Claude Duret citeth an opinion that of the Hebrew word Kara, which signifieth the Law or Scripture, commeth this word Koran, which with the Article Al signifieth (...) the Scripture, as with them it is esteemed: The like hath Soranzo. Master Bedwel in his Arabian Trudg-man, saith, that the Thema is not KARANA, coniunxit, colligit,  as before is deliuered; but KARA which signifies to read, so that Alkoran in Arabike, is iust as much as Hammikra is in Hebrew, that is, the Text, Corpus iuris, the authenticall bodie of their Law. It is called in that language the Koran, without the Article Al, and Korran (so Cantacuzenus, (...)) as if one should say, their Bible, Scripture, or Booke of the Law.
The Word of GOD (saith Mahomet in that Booke) came not to mee all at once, as the Law vnto Moses, the Psalmes to Dauid, and the Gospell to Christ. The Sentences or Chapters thereof are called Azoaras, which is interpreted a Face, as wee call them Capita, Heads. So saith one which hath written Notes vpon the Alcoran: but Master Bedwel (who hath published an Index or Table of all these Azoara's or Chapiters with their Arabike Titles, as they  are named and cited by the Mahumetans) saith, That they call the name of the Chapiter Sura, and with their Article Assura, or Suraton, Assurato. And hee deriues of the Hebrew word Zobar that Azoara: but this Arabike Sura is expressed not by Zain, He, but by S^^, Wau, and Resh, differing letters, being no other then the Syrian Suriya, which signifieth, principium initium. For as the Bookes of Moses in the Hebrew, and the Sections of the Ciuill and Canon Law: so these Chapiters, for the most part, are denominated of some notable word in the beginning of the same: and are so cited by Mahumetans and learned Christians. Yet these sometime name it by the interpretation, as the chap. Albacara, the chap. of the Cow, because the word so signifies. The stileThe stile of it. is not in Meter, as some haue imagined: for Iosephus ScaligerIn annotationibus in Euseb. Chron. Solum. Canticum Mosis extremo Deuteronomio, Prouerbia Salomonis, and totus f^re liber ^ob quada^ rythmi necessitate cohibentur, qui rythmus est instar duarum dimetriarum Iambicarum-- Sed aliquando pauciorum sunt syllabarum, aliquando plurium, etc.--Nam vt in Hebraico Syriaco, Arabico and Abyssino idiomate vlla metri species co^cipi possit, nemo efficere possit, quia id natura sermonis non patitur. (a great Criticke, and reputed one of the greatest Linguists in the world) affirmeth, That that Language is not capable of metricall measures by quantities  of Syllables; as neither the Hebrew, Abyssine, or Syrian. Hee saith yet, That the Alcoran is composed in Rime, but such, as is not in any tunable proportion; but that word, which maketh vp the Rime, being sometimes neerer, and sometimes farre beyond all harmony, distant from that word whereto it answereth. A hobbling kinde of Rime, saith Master Bedwel (in his Index Alcorani) and rude Poeme, without all care, for (it is Postellus his testimony) you shall haue a period of two hundred Syllables to rime, and hold like cadence to as other very short. Scaliger addes, that at the end of such Rimes are set the figures of Flowers, or some such matter: which if it be so, the Turkish nicetie of making no likenesse of any thing in their Carpets, or other workes, is stricter then these Alcoran bookes themselues, and indeed is not common with them vnto other Mahumetans, who vse their libertie in this point.
For the words andThe Phrase. phrase; no man euer writ any thing in Arabian more rudely (saith an Arabian Christian in confutation hereof) and much better might Muz^ilenia, Helcasi, and Alabazbi the Aethiopian, and Calliata Ellecedi, which vpon emulation composed also euery one an Alcoran, glory of those their Workes, containing more honestie and truth. Neither hath it pleased any noble or wise man, but the rude vulgar: of which sore the wearie Labourers gladly gaue eare to his promise of Paradise, the poore delighted to heare of Gardens in Persia, and Bankrupts and Felons easily listened to securitie and libertie. The language is vulgar, (Postellus also testifieth) and without all Art of Grammar, such as is obserued of their learned Writers; without all bounds of reason or eloquence. The MethodThe method is so confused, that our Arabian Author (who liued before it was so generally
 embraced, and in freer times) saith, That hee had heard euen good Saracens affirme with griefe, that it was so mixed and heaped together, that they could finde no Reason in it. Bad Rime, as you haue heard, and worse Reason. Hierome SauanorolaHierom. Saua^. hath the like saying, That no man can finde herein any order: Nor could so confused and foolish a Worke proceed from any naturall or supernaturall light. It is yet craftilyThe subtilty. Ric. Florentinus. contriued, when hee hath set downe some wicked doctrine, presently to lace and fringe it with precepts of Fasting, Prayer, or good manners: alwayes taking away things hard to bee beleeued or practised: and where it deliuereth any truth, it is maymed with defect, eclipsed with obscuritie, and serueth for a stale to falshood. Erpenius hath translated the Chapiter of Ioseph, containing a hundred and  eleuen Verses; the second of which calls it Coran, and the next Alcoran, the Article added. His Annotation is Per verbum Dei intelligunt legem suam qua Coranus ipsis dicitur, and quam Muhamed ijs persuasit coelitus ad se demissam. And although the matter bee absurd and impious, yet he saith (others perhaps haue of zeale said otherwise) that this Coran is composed with such puritie of speech, accurate analogie, and expressed with perfection of writing, that deseruedly it is to them the matter and rule of Grammar. They call it Koran of a word which signifies to read, as a reading Lecture, or collection of Chapiters, as the learnedst Arabs will haue it. It is not much lesse then the New Testament in words. The Arabs extoll it aboue all creatures, and ranke it next to God, and thinke him vnworthy to liue, which toucheth it vnreuerent as a contemner of God. They vse it therefore with all reuerence, nor will permit  a Christian or a Iew to touch it: to sit on it is a grieuous crime capitall to Iewes or Christians. Nor may they themselues touch it vnwashed, and therefore write on the couer thereof, Let no man touch it but he which is cleane. In it are one hundred and fourteen Chapiters of vnequall quantitie (that of Ioseph the twelfth) the second as large as the last fortie. The first is but of six Verses, and therefore not reckoned a Chapiter by our Country-man Robert of Reading, who also diuides the fiue following into more by tenne, that the seuenth is his seuenteenth. Euery Chapiter hath the name of the first word, or of the subiect, as this is called Ioseph; the first, opening, because it presents it selfe at the opening of the booke. It was composed out of diuers papers of Muhamed, found at his house (which hee professed to receiue from Gabriel at diuers times) by Abubecr his father in law, the Numa of that Saracen Empire.  Each Chapiter is called Souraton, and with the Article Assurato, whence the Latine call it Azoara (z. for ss.) and o. a for o. u) as in the word Alcoran: it is not to be construed vultus, but gradus, a degree or step; for these steps the whole is passed: and each of these was a lesson also to be conned of children and of his disciples. After these fancies had caused him to bee expelled Mecca, he fled ten dayes off to Iatfrib, and there diuulged the rest. This is called Medina, and Medinatalnabi, the Citie of the Prophet: and hence some Chapiters haue title of Mecca, some of Medina. This flight was the fifteenth of Iuly at night, A. 622. which is their Aera or computation of their yeeres, reckoned by the Moone: so that their 1026. began the twentie ninth of December A. D. 1616. Euery Chapiter consists of Verses very vnequall and lame affected rithmes. Yea, sometimes a sentence is patched in, to make vp a rithme.  Before euery Chapiter is prefixed Bismillahirrahmanirrahimi, for so they read it coined together with Articles, as if it were all one word: the signification is, In nomine Dei miseratoris misericordis, that is, In the name of God shewing mercie, mercifull, which is as much as summe misericordis, exceedingly mercifull (or mercifull in Act and Nature.) To these words they ascribe innumerable mysteries and vertues; so that they thinke that almost no worke can haue good successe, vnlesse they preface it with this sentence. Therefore in the beginning of their bookes they vse it, and whatsoeuer businesse they goe about (if it be to mount their horse, or set forth to rowe a boat, etc. as I haue beene told.) Also there are in the beginning of Chapiters, fourteene mysticall words of the signification, whereof the Arabs professe their vncertaintie, and Abubecr was wont to say, That in euery booke God kept somewhat secret to  himselfe, which in the Alcoran were those mysticall beginnings of Chapiters. Diuers haue diuersly deuised to hunt out Cabalisticall senses and state-periods, with other vanities from them. They hold that all the Alcoran was sent in one night, which they call therefore, nox demissionis and nox potentiae, and lest it might breed a contradiction that some parts were deliuered at Mecca (for so it must be written, not Mecha) they say, that Muhamed receiued them by pieces of the Angell, as occasions required; but hee from God all in one night: and so they will haue the name signifie also a booke sent from heauen. Thus much Erpenius in his Annotations on that Chapiter, wherein also he blameth the old translation of Robert Reading, as in other things, so in that, that when his mistresse brought Ioseph before other women, they were all (saith the translation) menstruous, and cut their hands, saying, hee was rather an  Angel then a man. He translates for menstruate sunt, magnificarunt eum, they magnified him; adding concerning that cutting off the hand, that it is still an vse of the Arabs, Persians, and people of the East to expresse loue. My friend Mr. Bedwel fortie yeeres studious of Arabike,
 hath told mee that that translation of Reading is generally reasonable well done; nor is so faultie as some will haue it, or much reading supply that way. As for other supply, it needs a sword (like that Gordian knot) rather then a penne, that (as by the sword it hath beene obtruded on the world, as a iust punishment of ingratitude to the Sonne of God the eternall Truth; and not by reasons or Scriptures, which it corrupts, mingles, mangles, maimes, as the Impostors obliuion sometimes, sometimes the memorie of his owne designes occasioned, so) by the sword and fire it may be rooted out of the world againe. The first Surat or Chapiter, which is the Pater noster or daily prayer of the Muhamedans, I will transcribe out of Erpenius, called by them, Opening, as before is said, and the Mother of the booke, foundation, treasure, and perfection. In the name of God, the shower of mercie, mercifull. Praise to God the Lord of  the Creatures, the shewer of mercie, mercifull; the King of the day of Iudgement. Wee worship thee, and we call vpon thee. Direct vs into the right way, the way of them who are gracious towards them, without anger against them, and not them which erring not, Amen. The Copies ofThe agreement of Copies. the Alcaron were diuers; and after Mahomets death made (if it could be) worse, at least otherwise, then he left them. For Hali had one Copie left him by Mahomet, which the Iewes corrupted, adding, racing, changing at their pleasure, and promised him their assistance, if hee would professe himselfe a Prophet. But Ozimen commanded all the Bookes to be brought and deliuered into the hands of Zeidi and Abdalla, to bring all into one booke, and, where they dissented, to reade after the Copie of Corais, and to burne all the rest.
They thus composed the Alcoran, whereof they left foure Copies, which after were lost.  And yet Hali, Abitalib, and Ibenmuzod then refused to deliuer their Bookes: Whereupon arose diuers Readings, and afterward diuers Schismes; which to compound, others often endeuoured by like labours after, but could not throughly perfect the same. Neither doth that which we haue translated, agree with those things which Frier Richard, and others cite out of it, in their confutations thereof.
TheThe truth of the matter in it. truth thereof is such in his deuisings of new, and seeking and altering the old, that it is not probable in Viues opinion, that euer hee read the Old and New Testament: For (saithIo. Lu^^^^^. Viu. he) though I thinke of him exceeding badly, yet thinke I him not so mad to change and wrest the Scripture, there especially, where it made nothing against him; but he had partly heard of such things, partly was so perswaded by his fellowes, Apostata-Iewes and Christians.  This riming, harsh, confused, packing worke, disagreeing each Copie from other, and all from truth and honestie, hath beeneThe Translaters. translated into LatineAnno 1143. Moued by Pet. Cluniacensis, whose Epistle thereof to S. Bern. is extant. once by an English man, Robertus Retinensis; and after by Ioannes Segobiensis, a Spaniard, at the Councell of Constance; and after out of Arabian into Italian, published by Andraea Ariuabene. The first and last of these, (that of Robert of Reading, and the Italian) translations are here by vs followed. For the Arabike I vnderstand not, nor can warrant this, when so great a man as Scaliger findeth great fault with it: He that vndertooke to mend the Latine stile, marred the sense; and the Italian beguileth the world, in professing to haue translated out of the Arabike. Thus Scaliger, who mentioneth another translation then in hand, which we are almost out of hope to see. In the meane while, such as we haue, we giue to you.  
It containeth Chapters, or Azoara's 124. euery of them beginning, In the name of the mercifull and pittifull God. Euthymius Zigabenus mentioneth but 113. Mr. Bedwel saith, that all the Arabike copies which euer hee saw, whether written in the East, or West amongst the Moores in Barbarie, doe constantly with one consent reckon 114. The reason of this difference is this, some Interpreters doe not account the first for any Chapiter, but make it a kinde of Preface. Robert of Reading of the second Chapter maketh foure, of the third three, of the fourth foure, of the fifth two, of the sixth three. The firstIn the Italian are 124. chapt. besides this first: and the Easterne Saracens reckon it but one Azoara to the fifth. Bellon. l. 3. diuided it into foure bookes and 201. chap. of these are the words of Mahomet, and is called the Mother of the Booke, and is as it were their Creede: the rest are all deliuered as the words of GOD; hee being induced as speaker. The first is in this sense. In the name of the mercifull and pittifull God. Thankes bee vnto God, the Lord of the World, mercifull,  pittifull, Iudge of the day of Iudgement. Wee pray vnto thee: wee trust in thee. Lead vs into the right way, the way of them whom thou hast chosen, not of them with whom thou art angrie, and of the Infidels. PostellusPostel. de orbis concordiae. l. 1. c. 13. thus translateth it. In the name of God, mercifull, pittifull. Praise bee to God, King of the World, mercifull, and pittifull; King of the day of Iudgement; O let vs serue him, and wee shall bee helped; Direct vs in the right point; the point of them with whom thou art well pleased; without anger against them; and they shall not erre. This prayer is (saith hee) as common to them as the Lords Prayer to vs: and is so ouer and ouer with battologies by some of them repeated, that they will say ouer the same word, or two, or three words an hundred times, saying, Alhamdu lillah, hamdu lillah, hamdu lillah, and so on with these, and the other words in like manner. And thus doth the Priest  in their publike prayers; which (they say) supplieth the defects of such as are negligent in praying: some will say, and repeat it in the fields, till with wearinesse they fall downe.
 Others with wheeling about their bodies, till they be besides themselues, and then in imitation of Mahomet, vtter some ridiculous, obscure, phantasticall speeches. They diuide it into seuen periods, which they cal miracles, as they are here by the points. That which is before them, In the name, etc. Mahomet vsed to vtter alwayes, when hee arose from his sicknesse or traunce; and therefore is prefixed to all the Chapters; and by deuout Authors also in the beginning of their Philosophicall workes. By these words, the point, and the right point they vnderstand the Alcoran. Now let vs see the Doctrine contained in this booke, which with much labour I haue thus reduced into Theologicall heads, reducing that which therein is confusedly heaped and handled in diuers places, to this Method, naming the Chapter or  Azoara, where the Reader may finde each sentence.


@. II. The Doctrine of the ALCORAN brought into common Places.
OFOf God and Christ. GOD heAzo. 122. writeth, that he is One, necessary to all, incorporeall, which neither hath begotten, nor is begotten, nor hath any like him: the Creator, long-suffering,  searcher of the heart, true. That he will confound inchantments, that without his gift, none can beleeue (this his Alcoran) that hee hath no sonne, for hee needeth nothingAzo. 20., and he which setteth a second in the place of GOD, shall goe into hell, Az. 31. and he hath no partaker, 32. yet in Azoar. 67. hee induceth God, speaking thus: To Christ the sonne of Marie, wee haue giuen the Gospell, that by him men may obtaine the loue and fauour of GOD: and that the beleeuers amongst them (Christians) shall receiue a great reward: as also in Az. 2. he saith, Euery one whosoeuer liueth rightly, be he Iew or Christian, or if he leaueth his owne Law, and embrace another, if hee worship GOD, and doe good, shall vndoubtedly obtaine Diuine fauour. Az. 2. The Creator said, I am the onely Creator, alwayes the same, pittifull, mercifull, besides whom there is none other;  whose miracles and great workes are vnto the wise the frame of Heauen and Earth, the intercourse of night and day, the ships in the Sea fit for the vse of men, raine for the refreshing of the earth, the composition of all creatures, the windes, the cloudes, etc. 15. Inuoke and worship one GOD alone. 43. All the miracles of GOD cannot bee written, if all the Trees in the world were pennes, and the Sea seuen times greater, and were inke; with whom it is a small thing to raise the dead.
OF THE BIRTH OF CHRIST hee writeth thus, Azo. 29.Of Christ. Wee sent our Spirit to Marie (the best of all women, and the wombe vntouched, Azoar. 31.) in likenesse of a man, professing himselfe a Diuine Messenger concerning a Sonne, etc. And when shee in trauell plained, Christ came from vnder her, and said, Feare not: and when some chid with her about the childe, the childe it selfe made answere, I am the Seruant and Prophet of God. Hee  saith, the Iewes did not slay Christ, but one like him: Azo. 11. and vpbraideth them for not receiuing him, Azo. 2. and chap. 4. To Christ the Sonne of Marie, properly communicating our owne soule, wee haue giuen him strength and power more then other Prophets: yet chap. 13. he disclaimeth that worship which is done him and his mother.
Az. 4. Wee giuing our soule to Christ, the Sonne of Marie, preferred him before all others, that had beene exalted by me, to speake with GOD, to power and vertue. He inserteth the Prayer of the Virgins Mother, when shee felt her selfe with childe by Ioachim; and maketh Zacharie to bee the Virgins Tutor. 5. Who (hee saith) for his vnbeliefe was dumbe three dayes. The Angell saluted Marie, saying, O thou the purest of all women and men, deuoted to GOD. Ioy vnto thee of that great Messenger, with the Word of GOD, whose  name is IESVS CHRIST, an excellent man, at the command of the Creator: he shal come with D^uine power, with knowledge of all learning, with the Booke of the Law and Gospell; shall giue Commandements to the Israelites; shall giue life; cure diseases; shew what is to be eaten, and to be done; shall confirme the Old Testament; shall make some things lawfull, which before were vnlawfull, etc. Hee acknowledgeth that his Mother knew not man. 11. They say (the Iewes) that they killed Christ, the Sonne of Marie, the Messenger of GOD, but it was not true, but they crucified in his stead another like him; for the incomprehensible GOD caused him to goe vnto Him. IESVS is the Spirit, and Word, and Messenger of GOD, sent from heauen. 11. And GOD spake to him (Az. 13.) and gaue him  a cleane and blessed soule, whereby he made yellow formes of birds, and breathing on them, made them flie. Hee cured one borne blinde, and the leprous, and raised the dead. GOD taught him the Booke and Wisdome, and the Gospell and Testament.

ConcerningOf his law, and the followers therof. his LAVV and ALCORAN, he handleth it in the second Chapter of Azoara, which beginneth thus. In the name of the mercifull and pittifull God. This booke without any falshood or errour, shewing the Truth (to them which loue, feare, and worship GOD, and are studious of prayers and almes) and the obseruation of the lawes giuen of GOD from heauen to thee and other thy Predecessors, and the hope of the world to come, hath manifested the true Sect. For this bringeth the followers thereof to the highest, inricheth them with the highest good, as to the vnbeleeuers and erroneous, it menaceth truely the greatest euill to come. This hee after applieth to Paradise and Hell, which is due to the Enemies of Gabriel, which intimateth this Booke to his heart by the Creator, and to all the Enemies of GOD and Michael, and the Archangels. This his Alcoran hee calleth  the establishing of the Law of the Israelites: and Azo. 21. hee arrogateth to his Booke, wisdome and eloquence: and 47. hee saith,Azoara. 47. it was composed of the incomprehensible and wise GOD, euery where agreeing with it selfe, and calleth it (63.) the Booke of Abraham: and (69.) if it should be placed on a Mountaine, that Mountaine for Diuine feare would be dissolued. Those which will not be conuerted, take and slay, by all meanes intrapping them: and fight against them till they be your Tributaries and Subiects. And 18. the fifth part of all the prey is due vnto GOD, and his Prophet, and to your Kindred and Orphans, and the poore. Those that are taken in Warre, kill or make slaues; but pardon them if they will turne to your Law, and GOD also will pardon them. Such good Warriours sh^ll haue full pardon. The Iewes and Christians (contrarie to that he had said  before) let GOD confound. He hath sent his Messenger with the right way and good law, that he may manifest and extoll it aboue all lawes. Of the twelue moneths, foure are to be consecrated to fight against the enemies. Those that refuse this war-fare, lose their soules, and they which flie in the day of battell (Az. 6.) doe it by the Deuils instigation, thus punishing them for their former sinnes: Yea, the Deuils themselues Az. 56. being conuerted thereby, say to their Diobolicall Nation, We haue heard a Booke sent after Moses, which approoueth all his sayings, and teacheth the true and right way. And Az. 12. he calls the Alcoran a Booke of truth sent from aboue, a Confirmer of Christs Precepts: Hee saith, Az. 15. That Moses deliuered some things in writing, more vnwritten. He makes his Booke to bee the same which GOD had taught Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Iacob, Moses,  and CHRIST. Az. 5. he saith, his booke containes some things firme, and without exception, some things contrarie, which froward men peruert to controuersies: but the exposition thereof belongs to GOD onely, and to the wisest which beleeue that all of it came from God. Az. 6. he excites them to defend it when hee shall be dead or slaine, and God will reward them. Neither can any die, but by the will of God, to wit, in the time appointed. They which in the expedition shall haue pardon, which is better then all possessions, and an easie iudgement. And they which die in the wayes of God, are not to bee esteemed dead, for they liue with GOD. That life is firme, this and all worldly things mutable. 7. If the Alcoran (Az. 9.) were not of God, it would haue many contrarieties in it, which himselfe yet Az. 5. confesseth. They which are well (Az. 10.)  and remaine at home, are not of like merit, as they which goe to warre. The fire of hell is hotter then the danger of warre. And although thou (Prophet) shouldest pardon the resisters of God and his Messenger seuentie times, yet God will neuer pardon them. The sicke and weake, and such as haue not necessaries, are excused from this necessitie of warre: but to the good Warriours God giueth Paradise, in reward of their soules and goods, whether they kill or be killed. Azo. 18. 19. And in 57. Kill the vnbeleeuers whom you conquer, till you haue made great slaughter. God could take vengeance on them, but hee chuseth rather to doe it by you: he shall lay deafenesse and blindnesse on the faint-hearted. Yet in 52. and 98. as contrary to himselfe hee affirmeth, that hee is sent onely to teach, not to compell and force men to beleeue: and Az. 4. Offer no man violence for the law; then the right way and  the euill are opened: except wee expound it rather, that Iewes, Christians, and all vnbeleeuers, are compelled to bee tributaries and their slaues; not forced to their Religion, but instructed onely; which agreeth with their practise. From this Doctrine and that of Destinie in the 50. Az. hath risen their forwardnesse to the warre, and the greatnesse of their Conquests. Agreeable to this doctrine is their manner of teaching it: the Reader or Preacher (as saith Frier Richard, Student amongst them in the Vniuersitie of Baldach) holdeth a bare sword in his hand, or setteth it vp in an eminent place, to the terrour of the gaine-sayers.
But DisputationMahomet disclaimeth diuine miracles, and humane Disputations, prouing with the sword. and reasoning about his Law, hee vtterly disliketh, Az. 32. To such as will dispute with thee, answer that God knoweth all thy doings, which in the last day shall  determine all controuersies. And 50. Nothing but euill cleaueth to the heart of such as vnwisely dispute of diuine Precepts; but commend thou thy selfe vnto God, that knoweth all
 things. And Chap. 4. 15. Hee is commanded to goe away from such. This Booke is giuen to take way discord from men: miracles he disclaimeth as insufficient proofe: for though it should make plaine the mountaines, and make the dead to speake, yet they would be incredulous: But it is thy dutie onely to shew them my Precepts, Azo. 23. And Az. 10. Yee which are good, beleeue in GOD, in his Messenger, and in the Booke sent from Heauen. They which first beleeue, and after deny, and become incredulous, shall haue no pardon nor mercy of GOD, but shall goe into the fire. And (11.) We will bring infinite euill vpon him, that will not obey GOD and his Messenger, and will be Disputing. To them whichNot to dispute nor seeke a signe in proofe of the Law. demand that the Booke may raine vpon them from Heauen, thou shalt say, That  some asked a greater thing of Moses, that he would shew GOD vnto their eyes, and were therefore smitten with lightning from Heauen. (12.) To Iewes and Christians, GOD hath giuen disagreements, till GOD shall determine the same at the day of Iudgement. Make not your selues Companions of them which deride our Law. No man receiueth the perfection of the Law, but he which beleeueth the Testament, the Gospell, and this Booke sent of GOD. 14. They which erre will say, Let GOD shew vs miracles. These hurt none but their owne soules, for if they should see allThe Fox wil eate no grapes becau^e they are sowre, and hang too high. miracles done, they would dispute with thee, saying, That they could not be done but by inchantments. Thou shalt not come to them with manifest miracles; for they would refuse them, as odious things. 15. Dispute not with them which will not heare; and if they demand miracles, say, GOD only doth them: I know not the secrets  of GOD, and follow nothing but that which GOD and the Angell hath commanded; and if Angels should speake to such, they would not beleeue. 16. GOD himselfe and his blessed Spirit haue compounded this most true Booke. 26. 44. They which say his Law is new or fained, go to the Deuil. 47. He induceth some gaine-sayers, saying, We will not leaue worshipping our Images for this Iester and Rimer. Yet is he alone come with the truth, confirming all the other Messengers. 55. He saith, I (GOD) writ this Booke with my owne hand. 56. The vnbeleeuers say I am a Magician, and haue fained it: but then I pray GOD I may haue no part in him when he shall be our Iudge. Say not there are three GODS, but one GOD alone without a Sonne, to him all things are subiect. Christ cannot deny but that he is subiect to GOD, as well as the Angels. 12. We sent Christ, to whom we gaue the Gospell,  which is the light and confirmation of the Testament, and the right way to him which feareth GOD; The complement of the Iewish law. Therefore let euery seruant of the Gospel follow his precepts, otherwise he shall be a bad man. No religion or law attaines to perfection, but such as obey the precepts of the Testament and the Gospel, and this Booke (the Alcoran) sent from GOD. To beleeuing Iewes and Christians he promiseth pardon: but Az. 13. preferres the Christians to the Iewes. All that say that Christ is GOD, are vnbeleeuers and lyers (Christ himselfe hauing said, Yee children of Israel beleeue in your GOD and my Lord) of whom he which will be partaker, shall be cast into the fire eternall. Christ is but the Messenger of GOD, before whom were many Messengers: and his Mother was true, and they did eat. Good people exalt not your selues in your Law, further then the truth. 3. The soule of Christ  was cleane and blessed, he cured the leprous, raised the dead, taught wisedome, the Testament, and the Gospell. The vnbeleeuing Israelites beleeued that he was a Magician. And 34. We haue giuen a good place and abounding with water to the Sonne of Marie, and to her, for hauing done such miracles in the world.
Of theCreation. Creation he affirmeth (Az. 2.) that when GOD had made the world, he disposed the seuen Heauens: he told the Angels he would make one like vnto himselfe in the earth: they answer, We in all things are subiect to your Maiestie, and giue praise vnto you: but he will be wicked, and a shedder of blood. Then GOD testifying, that he knew a thing not knowne to the Angels, taught Adam the names of things by himselfe, not knowne to the AngelsOf the Angels., and therefore commanded the Angels to doe reuerence before Adam, which wickedBelzebub said, he was made of fire, and therefore better the^ he which was made of earth. Azoar. 17.  Belzebub refused; they obeyed. And Az. 25. We made man of clay, and I breathed into him a portion of mine owne soule, after that I had created the Deuill of pestiferous fire: and because Belzebub refused to humble himselfe to this man (made of blacke mire) he was damned, and when he desired respite till the resurrection, it was denied: and therefore he said he would teach all euill things, that they shall not giue thee thankes, etc. Of the Angels he affirmeth (45.) that some of them haue two wings, some three, some foure: and (52.) the Heauen would fall vpon men, were it not for the Angels that call vpon GOD.
OFParadise. The Turkes Paradise a beastly carnall one. PARADISE he dreameth in this sort. Az. 5. and 65. He which feareth GOD, shall receiue the two Paradises full of all good, pleasant with streaming fountaines. There they shall possesse rings of Gold, Chaines, Iewels, clothed with Cloth of Gold; their beds  shall be of Gold, and this for euer. There they shall lie on silken and purple Carpets, and shall be accompanied with many Maidens, beautifull as the Hyacinth and Pearles, neuer deflowred of men or Deuils, neuer menstruous, sitting in pleasant shades with their eyes
 fixed on their husbands: their eyes large, with the white of them exceeding white, and the blacke very blacke, lying on the shining greene. Faire young men shall serue them with Vials and other Vessels, full of the most excellent liquor, which shall neither cause head-ach nor drunkennesse, and shall bring them the choisest fruits, and flesh of fowles. They shall there heare no filthy or displeasing word: and (Az. 86.) In Paradise shall be administred to them in well-wrought vessells of glasse and siluer, drink, as the sauourie Ginger, out of the fountaine Zelzebil: they shall haue garments of silke and gold, chaines of siluer, blessed Wine, Maidens likewise with pretty brests: there shall be tall trees of colour betweene yellow and greene. They shall haue in Paradise all pleasures, and shall enioy women with eyes faire, and as great as Egges: sweet smelling Riuers of Milke and Honie, and fruits of all sorts. Az.  6. He saith, Paradise is of as great capacitie as Heauen and Earth.
OF HELLOf Hell. hee fableth that it hath seuen gates; that it shall make the wicked like to fleas, that they shall be fed with the tree Ezecum, which shall burne in their bellies like fire; that they shall drinke fire; and being holden in chaines of seuentie cubits, shall be kept sure; the fire shall cast forth embers like Towers or Camels. They which contradict, shall bee punished with the fire of hell: they which feare, shall goe into Paradise; and as it were in aOf Purgatorie. MIDDLE SPACE betwixt the one and the other, there shall stand some other with hope and expectation of Paradise. We haue set Angels ouer hell, and haue appointed their members 84. 98. There shall be fountaines of scalding waters, and they shall eate vpon a reede, but shall not satisfie their hunger: they shall be bound in chaines. 121.  
HeOf the Prophet Mahomet. sometimes excuseth his owne basenesse, as Azo. 17. where he saith he could nor write nor read, adding that his name and mention is in the Testament, and Gospel, and 36. The vnbeleeuers (saith he) murmure that he is followed onely of Weauers, and the raskall-rour, And 53. That the Alcoran was not committed to a man of great possessions: and they say, that it is Art-magike, and that I haue fained it. And in 64. The Moone was diuided, and they say, it is Sorcerie. (The tale is told by Frier Richard thus: Mahomet pointed to the Moone with his thumbe, and middle finger, and it was diuided, the two pieces falling on the Hils of Mecha, which entring into Mahomets coat, was made whole againe.) HeeMahomet guiltie of his witchcraft, often speaketh of it: that he may not bee thought such a one. sometimes extolleth himselfe, blasphemously inducing Christ, thus saying to the Israelites; O yee Israelites, I being sent a Messenger vnto you from GOD, affirme by the Testament  which I haue in my hand, that a Messenger shall come after me, whose name is Mahomet, of whom they shall say he is a Magitian. 71. His beastly prerogatiue he boasteth, (43.) saying, he is the seale and last of the Prophets. To Thee, O Prophet, we make it lawfull to lie with all women which are giuen thee, or which thou buyest, and thy Aunts, thy Kindred, and all good women which freely desire thy company, if thou be willing: and this is permitted to thee alone. Diuorce these, couple thy selfe to those at thy pleasure. And being by some other of his wiues found in bed with Marie the wife of a Iacobite Christian, hee sware that he would neuer after vse her company: but after being impotent in his lusts, hee ordaines a Law to himselfe, Az. 76. Why doest thou, O Prophet, make that lawfull for the loue of thy woman, which GOD hath made vnlawfull? GOD full of pittie, and giuer of pardon, hath commanded thee to blot out, or cancell thine oathes.  
Of his iourney to Heauen, to receiue the Law, he speaketh. Az. 63. and 82. mingling iniunctions of deuotion. 83. Thou, O Prophet, rising in the night, spend halfe the night, or a little more or lesse, in watching, and continually and deuoutly reade ouer the Alcoran: bee thou iust, patient, and refuse not to wash thy garments, O thou man cloathed in woollen. 43. Let none enter into the house of the Prophet, before hee call; but let him stand without the gate: let none doe dishonestie within his house, let none hurt the Prophet in any thing, or haue his wife after him.
SomeOf the Prophets in Scripture.Prophets hee mentioneth, not named in Scripture; and of those there named hee telleth many fables. Ismael was a true Prophet, and found a good man before GOD. Ioseph  nine yeeres imprisoned for the Queene. Abraham ouerthrew his Fathers Idols, and should haue beene burned for the same; but the fire lost his force. The Mountaines and Birds that praise GOD, were subiect to Dauid.Such tales as these of Abraham, Salomon, etc. you shall finde both in the Iewish and Popish Legends, as if the Iew, Papist, and Mahumetan, had contended for the whe^stone: which any one that readeth shall finde. Salomon learned Magick of Arot and Marot, Diuels so called: hee knew the language of Birds: and when hee was in the middest of his Armie, consisting of Deuils, Men, and Birds; the Lapwing brought him newes of the Queene of Saba's comming, to whom by this Lapwing hee sent a Letter, etc. Of this Armie the Ants of Pismires being afraide; one Ant perswaded her fellowes to get them into their holes, lest they should bee troden on. Moses married Pharaohs Daughter. (37.) One Ascemel made the golden Calfe in the Desart against Aarons will. Pharaoh requested H^men to build a Tower, whereon to climbe to heauen, to the GOD of Moses: (50.)  In the time of Noe they worshipped Idols, whom hee nameth Huden, Schuan, Iaguta, Iannea, Nacem.

The Prophet Huth was sent to the Nation Haath, to teach them the worship of one GOD: and Schale to Themuth; and Schaibe to Madian; and Abraham and Lot to the Sodomites; on whom, because they were incredulous, it rained yellow and sharpe stones. (Az. 21.) Moses was sent to Pharaoh, etc. His scope of these Narrations is, that hee is sent likewise a Prophet, and therefore iudgement will pursue them which refuse him, as it did those incredulous Nations. These fauour of a Iewish helpe. Hee telleth also of AlexanderAlexander; Mahomets fittest Saint to follow. Mag. that hee had all knowledge: he found the Sunne, (where it lay resting in a yellow fountaine) and the mountaines in which it riseth. And finding men without vse of speech, hee diuided them from other men, etc. Az. 28.
 He prouethOf the Resurrection, and last Iudgement. substantially that there shall be a RESVRRECTION by the History of the seuen Sleepers, which slept in a Caue 360. yeeres. (28. Az.) and (49.) Hee saith, that at the time of death, GOD taketh away the soule at an houre knowne, restoring it to some; to some, neuer: at the first sound of the Trumpet all shall die, except those which shall bee protected by the will of GOD: at the second sound all things shall reuiue, and be iudged: and (66.) The earth shall tremble, the mountaines shall be brought to dust, and the whole company shall bee diuided into three parts: some before, others on the right hand, both which sorts shall be blessed: but those on the left hand, in their left hands shall receiue the scroll or sentence of their condemnation. And (79.) In the last Iudgement the earth shall be ouerthrowne, the heauen shall be powred forth. (8.) Angels shall beare vp the Throne  of God. And (80.) The heauens shall vanish as smoke, and the earth shall bee plucked as wooll. And (111.) There shall be set vp the ballance of Iudgement: they to whom shall befall a light weight, shall liue, but they which haue a heauie weight shall be cast into fire. The booke of bad Workes shall bee kept in the bottome of the earth; the booke of good Workes in a high place.
In diuers places of the Alcoran, the better to colour his filthinesse,Morals and Iudicials. hee hath dispersed good SENTENCES, like Roses scattered on a dung-hil, and flowers in a puddle: concerning Almes, Prayer, Tithing, Iustice, etc. Others he hath of another sort, establishing his owne Tyrannie and Religion. Az. 26. Swines-flesh, Bloud, that which dieth alone, and that which hath the necke cut off, not in Gods Name, is vnlawfull.Azoar. 33.34. Be chaste euery where, but with your owne  wiues, or such as are subiect to you, and doe serue you. Euery Adulterer shall haue an hundred stripes in the presence of many. He which accuseth a woman of Adulterie, not prouing it by foure witnesses, shall haue eightie. The iealous husband accusing his wife, must sweare foure times that hee chargeth her truely; and a fifth time curse himselfe, if it bee otherwise. The woman must doe the like to cleere her selfe. (43.) AfterSee more in the Title of Women, following. a woman be diuorced from one, any other may marrie her. (19.) Trust not a sonne or a brother, except hee be of your owne Law. 72. On Friday when they are called to prayer, they must lay all businesse apart: when prayers be ended, they may returne to their commodities. Redeeme captiues; and thy sinnes by good workes. About Circumcision I finde no iniunction in the Alcoran. In the 3. 8, and 9. Az. Hee permitteth all licenciousnesse with all women which they haue of their  owne: but prescribeth washings after Venery, and after naturall easements. Loue not your enemies: the women of another faith proue first: and if they fauour the vnbeleeuers, diuorce them. 52. The women must couer their faces. 43. Wilfull murther is prohibited. Az. 10. But casuall killing is to be satisfied with redemption of some good man, and the kindred recompenced, except they forgiue it.
THE going onPilgrimage to Mecca. PILGRIMAGE, and the perpetuall abode at the Temple of Haran (that is, vnlawfull, because nothing but there holies are thereContrarie to which is the word common in Scripture, for that which is lawfull in common vse. Mecha (saith Scal.) alwaies in the Alcoran is called Haram: and the Pilgrims Hurmun: that is, votaries. lawfull we repute of equall merit. They which loue it not, or doe it iniurie, shall sustaine grieuous euils. Abraham founded this Temple, Az. 6. and blessed it, and cleansed it, for them which abode there, and for the Pilgrims. HeeAbraham Author of pilgrimage rites. preached one GOD without partaker, and the pilgrimage to this Temple, that  on the dayes appointed they might, in naming GOD, sacrifice beasts, wherewith to feast themselues and the poore, and might fulfill their vowes, and goe in Procession round about the old Temple, a worke which GOD will greatly reward. Az. 32. and 19. In the times of fasting and pilgrimage hunting by land is vnlawfull, except that so gotten bee bestowed on the poore at Mecca: taking fish by Sea as they goe or returne, is lawfull. Az. 13. The vnbeleeuers are not worthy to visit the Temple Haran. And these good Pilgrims are not equall to the good warriours. 38. He entred into the Temple Haran with his head shauen.
Az. 2. We enioyne vnto you (as to your Predecessors) FASTING in the time thereto appointed, and in a certaine number of dayes, that is, in the moneth Romadan, in which, this Booke (which discerneth betweene good and euill) was sent you from heauen. Euery one  must obserue it, but the sicke and traueller, and let them doe the same in the remainder of the time. The rich vse to satisfie their fasting with almes; let them doe both the one and the other. He permitteth you the vse of your wiues in the night, because it is hard and impossible
 to abstaine. But let none vse their company in the Temples. Fast all the day, and when night is come, eate and drinke as much as you please, till the morning. By the Moone is knowne the time of Pilgrimages, and of Fastings, whereby is knowne that you loue and feare GOD. Spend your money in the loue of GOD in Pilgrimage, not despairing. Hee that is impotent, and that is not accompanied with his wife in the Pilgrimage, must fast three dayes in the voyage, and seuen after his returne. To the sick, fasting with almes is sufficient. They which purpose this Pilgrimage, let them not giue their mindes to any euill. Let them not be ashamed to aske necessaries. 2. Hold it for iust and good to enter the house at the doore, not at the side, or back-side thereof. 35. Salute those which yee meete, when ye enter into the house.
His oathes.Ridiculous is the confirmation of this holy Law, by such variety of OATHES, as I am  almost afraide to mention, in regard of our Gull-gallants of these times, who would sometimes bee at a set in their braue and brauing phrases, if they should not haue variety of Oathes and curses, to daube vp with such interiections all imperfections of speech, and make smoother way for their current of their gallantrie. But yet euen for their sakes, let vs mention a few, that they may see Mahomet had as braue a humor this way as they. He induceth GOD swearing by lesse then himselfe, as by the order of Angels, by the Alcoran, by the blowing Windes, by the waterie Cloudes, by the sayling Ships, by the Mount Sinai, the Heauen, the Sea, the euening Sarre, the West, his Pen and Lines, the guiltie Soule, the Deuils, by the Morning, ten Nights, the Passeouer, by the Figges and Oliues, by the Dawning, and Twilight,  and a World more of the like: onely he saith (Azoara 100.) that he may not sweare by the earth, nor by the Sonne like to the Father. Yet he allowes not others to sweare or forsweare: as after you shall see.
Inheritances and Iust dealing.Az. 8. They which eate the inheritance of Orphans, euerlasting fire shall eate them. Be faithfull in keeping and deliuering their goods, for GOD taketh knowledge of all accounts. Let one Sonne haue as much as two Daughters. In barganing vse no lying, slaying your owne soule. The couetous shall haue endlesse punishment: he that killeth vnwillingly, shall giue to the Kindred of the partie slaine, another man, or if he cannot doe that, let him fast two monethes together: he which killeth wilfully shall be cast into the fire. Az. 70. It is no sinne to reuenge iniuries.  
Courtesie. Mortall Sentences. Sententias loquitur Carnifex.Salute him which saluteth thee, for salutation is much pleasing to GOD.
Az. 27. Worship one GOD alone. Honour thy Father and Mother, and doe them good. Giue them no bad word when they are old. Be subiect with all humility, and pray GOD to pardon them. Giue to the poore and to your kindred, but not superfluously: for they that doe superfluously are of Kinne to the Deuil. Slay not your children for no cause. Bee yee not Fornicators; for that is wickednesse, and a bad way. Be reuenged on Murtherers. Say nothing till yee know it; for you must giue account of your saying. 26. In disputing or reasoning vse onely good words. Answere in honest sort to him which asketh thee. 27. Be iust in weight and measure. 37. The Deuill standeth ouer the makers of songs and lies, that is, the Poets, if they amend not, doing good. 68. If you cannot giue, be daily in prayers. Pay  your tithes, following GOD and the Prophet. They which do not good but for vaine glory and ostentation, shall bee damned. 118. The Histories which are in the Old Testament are so cited by him, as if hee neuer had read them, so many dreames and lies are inserted.
Washings and Prayer.Az. 12. Before PRAIER WASH the face, the hands, the armes vp to the elbow, the feete vp to the ankles; and after carnall company wash in the Bath: and if water cannot bee had, with dust of cleane earth. GOD desireth cleannesse. 9. In prayer let them be sober, that they may know what they say. 2. GOD will not aske why men pray not toward the East, for the East and West is his; but will demand of the workes which they haue done, of their Almes, Pilgrimages, and Prayers. He commandeth that they be humble in prayer, and that  in prayer they turne towards Mecca. Euery one which shall pray, asking that which is good, which way soeuer hee shall turne him, shall be heard of GOD: although the true manner of praying be toward the Center of the Temple of Mecca. They which are good, make their prayers to helpe them by their patience and abstinence. GOD dwelleth in such men. Pray according to the vsuall custome in all places, the foot-man on foote, the horseman on his horse.
Az. 3. He that giueth his owne for Gods sake, is like a graine that hath seuen eares, euery of which containeth an hundred graines. Good men loose not your AlmesAlmes. by vaine glorie. 4. Giue almes of the good gaines of your money, and of that which the earth produceth; but GOD re^pecteth not gifts of that which is vniustly gotten. Satan perswaded you  to giue nothing for feare of pouertie. To giue almes publikely is good, but to giue priuately is better: and this blotteth our sinnes. Giue especially to those which stay in one place,
 and are ashamed to aske. 6. GOD will giue Paradise to them which in time of famine and scarcetie giue liberally, and which receiue iniuries, and repent of their sinnes.
Az. 2. Euery one which draweth nigh to death, let him leaue of his money to his family and kindred to distribute in almes, and they which shall change that vse, shall be iudged of the Creator, etc.
Az. 2. They which are intreated to beleeue the Diuine Precepts, say,Tradition. they will follow their Ancestors in their Sect. What, would yee follow your Fathers if they were blinde or deafe? Will yee be like them in being mute, blinde, and foolish?
Az. 2. O good men, EATE that good which he hath giuen you, and giue him thanks;Meates. vncleane.  aboue all other things calling vpon him. Abstaine from that which dieth of it selfe, from Swines flesh, from bloud, and from euery other creatur that is killed, and not in the name of the Creator. But in case of necessity it is not sinne; for GOD is mercifull, and will forgiue you this. 12. Eate not of that which is drowned, burned in the fire, and touched of the Wolfe. 16. Eate nothing which hath not before beene blessed. To the Iewes we made many things vnlawfull, because of their wickednesse. 2. Hee which shall contradict this Booke, shall continually bee consumed in vnquenchable fire, and none of his workes shall helpe him.
Az. 3. To them that doubt of WINE, of Chesse, Scailes, and of Tables,Drinkes and Games. thou shalt say that such sports, and such drinkes are a great sinne, and although they be pleasant or profitable,  yet are they hurtfull sinnes: if they say what shall we then doe, thou shalt say, the good things of GOD. Perswade them to seeke the Orphanes, and succour them as their Brethren, or else GOD will make them so poore, that they shall not bee able to helpe either themselues or others. 13. Wine, Chesse, and Tables, are not lawfull, but the Deuils inuentions, to make debate amongst men, and to keepe them from doing good. Let none goeon hunting in the Pilgrimage moneth.
Az. 3. Take not a WIFE of another Law,Women, Marriage, Diuorce. nor giue your daughters to men of another Law, except they before conuert to your Law. Let no man touch a woman in her disease, before she be well clensed. Vse your wiues, and the woman which are subiect to you, where, and how you please. Women which are diuorced, may not marrie till after foure moneths,  hauing had three times their menstruous purgation. Let them not deny their husbands their company at their pleasure. They are the heads of the women. After a third diuorce from one man, they may not marrie the same man againe, except they haue in the meane time beene married to another, and be of him diuorced. Let the woman nurse their children two yeeres, receiuing necessaries of the fathers. After buriall of a husband, let them stay vnmarried foure moneths and ten daies; and not goe out of the house in a yeere after. Take yee two, three, foure wiues, and finally, as many as in your minde you are content to maintaine and keepe in peace. It is vnlawfull to marry with the Mother, Daughter, Sister, Aunt, Neece, Nurse, or the Mother or Daughter of the Nurse; and take not a whore to wife. 9. Let the wiues keepe their husbands secrets, or else let them be chastised, and kept in house and bed, till they be better. 10. Let the husband seeke to liue peaceably with his wife. 31. Cast not thine eyes on  other mens wiues, though they be faire. A woman conuicted of adulterie by testimonie of foure women, must be kept in her house till shee die and let none come at her. Az. 8. If you loue not your wiues you may change them: but take away nothing of that which is giuen them.
Az. 3. Sweare not in all your affaires by GOD and his names. They which forsweare themselues shall haue no good thing in the world to come. And 35. Sweare not rashly,Swearing. for GOD seeth euery thing. They which sweare from their hearts are bound thereto before GOD; and not else. To redeeme such an oath, they must feede or cloath ten poore men, or fast three daies. Az. 13.
Az. 4. Offer violence to no man in respect of the Law,Forcing to baleeue. for the way of doing good and  euill is open. 4. GOD gaue first the Testament, then the Gospell, and lastly the true Booke, the Alfurcan of the Law, in confirmation of those former.
Az. 4. They which liue of VSVRIE shall not rise againe otherwise then the Deuils:Vsurie. they embrace that which GOD hath said is vnlawfull: but they say vsurie is as Merchandize. Ye which are good feare GOD, and forsake Vsurie, lest the anger of GOD, and of the Prophet assaile you. Take onely the principall; and if he cannot pay you, stay still he can, and giue him almes; for this shall be better for you. And Az. 6. Euery one which feareth GOD, must very much beware of this vice, fearing the fire prepared for vnbeleeuers. And Az. 11. ascribeth the miseries of the Iewes to their wickednes and vsuries.
Az. 4. and 15. He which repenteth him, and leaueth his sinne, obtaineth pardon, and the cancelling of that which is past; but returning againe thereto, hee shall suffer eternall fire.Repentance. In the 5. Vnto bad men is denied humane and diuine mercie, except they repent. GOD careth
 little for the conuersion of them, which, after that of Infidels they are made beleeuers, become worse. Such shall suffer without any remission intolerable punishment. 10. GOD pardoneth lesse faults, but not criminall.
Friendship.Az. 5. Let no man reckon him a good friend, which is an vnbeleeuer, except it be for feare. If betwixt you there grow discord, laying aside all stomacke, doe the will of GOD, and become Brethren together, imitating GOD, who hath deliuered you from the fire, and from dangers. 6. GOD would not that any should doe euill to those of his owne Nation, and those which consent to your Law, but rather their profit and commoditie.
Infidels.Az. 6. Thinke not that euer Paradise shall be open vnto you, if you be not first valiant and couragious in battaile: and before you enter into battaile prepare your selues for death:  and after the death of the Prophet Mahomet, defend the orders by him giuen with Armes. No man can die, but when GOD will, that is, when his time is come. Those which flee out of the warre, are prouoked of the Deuill; but GOD pardoneth them which repent. They which die in the way of GOD, are not truely called dead: They liue with GOD. Let none feare them which are gouerned of the Deuill. 7. Be patient, and you shall haue eternall life. 10. Accompanie not with vnbeleeuers, neither in friendship, nor other businesse. They which goe on warfare for GOD and the Prophet, shall receiue abundance in the Earth, and after death the mercie of GOD. They which refuse (except they be sicke or children) shall be cast into Hell. Neglect not prayers in your expeditions: Some may pray, whiles other stand in Armes. Pray not for them which hurt their owne soules. 18. Looke to your selues that  there be no discord amongst you.
His last Azoara is this: In the Name of the mercifull and pittifull GOD; sanctifie thy selfe, and pray continually, and humbly vnto him, which is Lord of all Nations, Lord of all, GOD of all, that he will defend and deliuer thee from the Deuill, which entreth into the hearts of men, and from deuillish and peruerse men. (From Mahomet himselfe, and from his diuellish and peruerse Law. AMEN.


@. III. The Saracens opinion of their ALCORAN.  
THus haue I endeuoured to bring some order out of confusion, and haue framed these heads out of that Alcorau-Chaos,Magdeburgense^ in Centuria 7. haue so ga^he^^ed some heads of this headlesse Monster, the same is done by Cantacuze nas, and in summula sectae Sara^. etc. but not thus fully. where is scarce either head or taile: this tale they haue and beleeue (for what will not? What shall not they beleeue, which refuse to beleeue the Truth?) that he which readethAnonymi in Alcoran. Annotat. this Booke a thousand times in his life, shall haue a woman in Paradise, whose eye-browes shall be as large as the Raine-bow.
But amongst the more studious and iudicious the manifold contradictions therein, hath bred no scruple, as in their ordinary discourses in speech and writing may appeare. For (as  many Marchants and such as haue liued with them, report) it is a common thingM. Bedwels Mahammedis imposturae, in the preface. to heare from themselues obiections and doubts touching their Law: in their Bookes also and Tractates are contained many Morall sentences and exhortations to vertue and holinesse of life, and those things called in question which the Alcoran hath seemed to determine. Of these their Bookes Master Bedwel hath lately translated and published one, a Dialogue written some six hundred yeeres since, in which many scruples are propounded and left vndecided: many things found contradictory: yea, and the Bookes of the Old and New Testament, commended and approued, and the Doctrine of the Trinitie explained: the exceptions also made by the other Mahumetans to the Gospell, answered. In that booke it is affirmed, that there were written by Mahomet a hundred and twentie thousand sayings, of  which onely three thousand are good: the residue false: that the descent of the Moone into Mahomets sleeue is impossible: that shedding of blood is too slippery an argument for proofe of Doctrine: that the Sunne, his beames, and heat, doe represent the Trinitie and Vnitie: that the state of Paradise is like to that of Angels, without meate, drinke, women, and therefore that voluptuous Paradise is one of Mahomets fictions; for himselfe, saith hee, did write some things in iest: that it seemeth absurd, and against reason and faith, to follow a Law, which (it selfe saith) none can vnderstand but GOD: that the Alcoran in the Assor^ Ionas, sends men to the Iewes and Christians for the right vnderstanding thereof: that wheras it sayes Christ is the word of GOD, it followes hee is the Sonne of GOD, as reason and speech, the Sunne and his layes, are one Essence, and the Vnderstanding, Will, Memory, in  one Man that the Chrstians could not (as the Mahumetans obiect) blot the name of their prophet out of their Scriptures, seeing the Iewes and Christians, and Heretiques and Christians
 haue alway beene watchfull aduersaries to each other: and they are more ancient sixe hundred yeeres then Mahomet: that the storie of the speaking Ant, and other things are triuiall and impertinent: that Moses Law was giuen with open miracles, and the Gospell approued with diuers languages, and martyrdomes; that these nor any Law of GOD hath therein any contraritie that virginitie is a chiefe and bodily good, and their prophet writes of himselfe, polygamy, adulteries and the like, with many libidinous precepts and practises: that these things seeme contrarie, that the Deuills shall be saued, the Iewes also and Christians, which yet he counselleth to slay, with other the like contradictions: that their prophet onely vnderstood the Arabike, and by an Interpreter heard that which is contained in the  Bookes of Iewes and Christians (which easily appeares in his falsifying the Histories of the Bible) that hee hath no Testimony but his owne: that there are many absurd things in their law not confirmed by Miracle: and others excuse them by Metaphors, etc.
These things are there religiously discoursed with shew of reuerence to their Law, but exceeding magnifying of Christ and his Gospell: which is so generall with the more learned sort, that some also haue hazarded their liues in thisRelat. Master Harb. quarrell. And Auicen that learned Physician saith against their Paradise, that wise Diuines more respect the minde, the coniunction whereof with truth is a felicitie beyond those sensuall pleasures of the bodie. And were it not for sensualitie, ignorance, and the sword, these Alcoran-fables would soone vanish.



CHAP. V. Other Muhameticall speculations, and explanations of their Law, collected out of their owne Commentaries of that Argument.
OF such writings as haue come to our hands, touching Mahomets doctrine and Religion, that seemeth most fully to lay them open, which is called  byF. Sansov. and Bellar. lib. 3. some, Scala, a booke containing the exposition of the Alcoran, in forme of a Dialogue, translated into Latine by Hermannus Dalmata, and made the twelfth Chapter of the first Booke of the Alcoran in Italian. I haue therefore presumed on the Readers patience, to those former collections out of the Alcoran it selfe, to adde these ensuing, as a further explanation of their opinions. The Messenger of GOD (so beginneth that booke) was sitting amongst his fellowes (the praier and salutation of GOD bee vpon him) in his Citie Iesrab; and the Angel Gabriel descending on him, said, GOD saluteth thee, O Mahomet, etc. There came foure wise-men, Masters in Israel, to prooue thee; the chiefe of whom is Abdia-Ben-Salon, Mahomet therefore sent his cousin Hali to salute them; and they being come to Mahomet, after mutuall salutations, Abdia telleth him, that he and his fellowes were sent by the people of the Iewes, to learne  the vnderstanding of some obscurer places of their Law. Mahomet asketh, if he come to enquire, or to tempt. Abdia saith, to enquire. Then Mahomet giuing him full leaue, he beginneth; hauing before gathered out of the whole bodie of their Law, an hundred most exquisite questions. The principall dregs you shall here haue.
Abdia. Tell vs (O Mahomet) whether thou bee a Prophet or a Messenger? Mahomet. GOD hath appointed me both a Prophet and a Messenger. Ab. Doest thou preach the Law of GOD, or thine owne Law? Mah. The Law of GOD: this Law is Faith, and this Faith is, that there are not Gods, but one GOD, without partaker. Ab. How many Lawes of GOD are there? Mah. One, the Law and Faith of the Prophets, which went before vs, was one, the Rites were different. Ab. Shall we enter Paradise for Faith or Workes? Mah. Both are  necessarie; but if a Gentile, Iew, or Christian, become a Saracen, and preuent his good Workes, Faith onely shall suffice: But if Gentile, Iew, or Christian, doe good Workes, not in the loue of GOD, the fire shall consume both him and his worke. Ab. How doth the mercie of GOD preuent his anger? Mah. When before other creatures Adam rose vp, he sucesed and said, GOD be thanked: and the Angels hearing it, said, The Pittie of GOD be vpon thee, Adam, who answered, Amen: Then said the Lord, I haue receiued your Prayer. Ab. What be the foure things which GOD wrought with his owne hands? Mah. Hee made Paradise, planted the tree of the Trumpet, formed Adam, and did write the Tables of Moses. Ab. Who told thee this? Mah. Gabriel, from the Lord of the world. Ab. In what forme? Mah. Of  a man standing vpright, neuer sleeping, nor eating, nor drinking, but the praise of GOD. Ab. Tell me in order what is one, what is two, what three, foure, fiue, sixe, etc. to an hundreth. Mah. One is GOD without Sonne, partaker or fellow, Almightie Lord of life and death. Two, Adam and Eue. Three, Michael, Gabriel, Saraphiel, Archangels, Secretaries of
 GOD. Foure, The Law of Moses, the Psalmes of Dauid, the Gospell, and Alfurcan (so called of the distinction of the Sentences.) Fiue, The prayers which GOD gaue mee and my people, and to none of the other Prophets. Six, The dayes of the Creation. Seuen, Heauens. Eight, Angels which sustaine the Throne of GOD. Nine, Are the Miracles of Moses. Ten, Are the Fasting-dayes of the Pilgrimes: three, when they goe, seuen in their returne. Eleuen, Are the Starres whereof Ioseph dreamed. Twelue moneths in the yeere. Thirteene, Is the Sunne and Moone, with the eleuen Starres. Fourteene, Candles hang about the Throne of GOD, of the length of fiue hundred yeeres. Fifteene, The fifteenth day of Ramadam, in which the Alcoran came sliding from heauen. Sixteene, Are the Legions of the Cherubims.  Seuenteene, Are the names of GOD betweene the bottome of the earth and hell, which stay those flames, which else would consume of the world. Eighteene, Interpositions there be betweeene the Throne of GOD, and the ayre; for else the brightnesse of GOD would blinde the World. Nineteene, Be the armes or branches of Zachia, a Riuer in hell, which shall make a great noise in the day of Iudgement. Twentie, The day of the moneth Ramadam, when the Psalmes descended on Dauid. The one and twentieth of Ramadam, Salomon was borne. The two and twentieth, Dauid was pardoned the sinne against Vriah. The three and twentieth of Ramadam, Christ the Sonne of Marie was borne; the prayers of GOD be vpon him. The foure and twentieth, GOD spake to Moses. The fiue and twentieth, the Sea was diuided. The sixe and twentieth, He receiued the Tables. The seuen and twentieth, Ionas was swallowed  of the Whale. The eight and twentieth, Iacob recouered his sight, when Iudas brought Iosephs coat. The nine and twentieth, Was Enoch translated. The thirtieth, Moses went into Mount Sinai. Ab. Make short worke, for thou hast done all this exactly. Mah. Fortie are the daies of Moses his fasting. Fftie thousand yeeres shall the day of Iudgement continue. Sixtie are the veines, which euery of the heauens haue in the earth, without which varietie there would be no knowledge amongst men. Seuentie men Moses tooke to himselfe. Eightie stripes are due to a drunken man. Ninetie, the Angell said to Dauid, This my fellow hath ninetie sheepe, and I but one, which he hath stollen from mee. An hundred stripes are due to the Adulterer.
Ab. Well, shew vs how the earth was made, and when? Mah. GOD made man of mire:  the mire of froth: this was made of the tempests; these, of the sea: The sea, of darknesse; the darknesse, of light; this, of the word, the word of the thought; the thought of Iacinth; the Iacinth of the commandement: Let it be, and it was. Ab. How many Angels are set ouer men? Mah. Two, one on the right hand, which writeth his good deeds; another on the left, which registreth his bad. These sit on mens shoulders. Their pen is their tongue, their inke is their spittle, their heart is the booke. Ab. What did GOD make after? Mah. The bookes wherein are written all things past, present, and to come, in heauen and earth; and the pen made of the brightest light, fiue hundred yeeres long, and eightie broad, hauing eightie teeth wherein are written all things in the world, till the day of Iudgement. The booke is made of the greatest Emerald; the words, of Pearles, the couer of pitie. GOD ouer-looketh the same an hundred and sixtie times in a day and night. The heauen is made  of smoake of the vapour of the sea: the greennesse of the sea proceedeth from the mount Kaf, which is made of the Emeralds of Paradise, and compasseth the world, bearing vp the heauens. The gates of heauen are of gold, the lockes of light, the keyes of pietie. Aboue the heauens are the sea of life, aboue that the cloudie sea; then the arie sea, the stony sea, the darke sea, the sea of solace, the Moone, the Sun, the Name of GOD; Supplication, Gabriel, the parchment rased, the parchment full written, all these in order one ouer another. Then aboue all these, the threescore and ten spaces of light: then threescore and ten thousand hils, with threescore and ten thousand spaces betweene, and threescore and ten thousand troupes of Angels on them, in euery troupe fiue thousand Angels alway praising the Lord of the  world: aboue these the limits or bounds of Angelical dignitie: and aboue the same the banner of glory, and then spaces of pearles, and in their orders one aboue another, the spaces of Grace, of Power, of Diuinitie, of Dispensation, the Foot-stoole, the Throne, the house of the Vniuerse.
Ab. Are the Sunne and Moone faithfull or not? Mah. They are faithfull, and obey euery command of GOD. Ab. Why then are they not of equall light? Mah. GOD created them equall, but by this it came to passe, that the vicissitude or intercourse of day and night was vncertaine, till Gabriel flying by the Moone, darkened her with the touch of his wing. Ab. How many orders are there of the Starres? Mah. Three, the first of those which hang by chaines from the Throne of GOD, giuing light to the seuenth Throne: the second chase away the deuils, when they would enter into heauen: the third, in the sight of the Angels.  There are seuen seas betweene vs and heauen. There are three windes: the first barren; the second tempestuous, which shall blow the fire in the day of Iudgement: the third ministreth
 to the earth and sea. Ab. Where is the Sunne? Mah. In a hot fountaine: this, in a Serpent, which is a great space in the mount Kaf, and this Kaf is in the hand of the Angell, which holdeth the world till the day of Iudgement. Abd. What is the manner of them; which beare vp the Seat of GOD? Mah. Their heads are vnder the Seat of GOD, their feet vnder the seuen Thrones, their neckes are so large, that a bird in a thousand yeeres continuall flight, should not reach from the one eare to another. They haue hornes, and their meate and drinke is the praise and glory of GOD. Abd. How farre is it to heauen? Mahom. Fiue hundred yeeres iourney to the lowest, and so from each to other. Abd. What birds are betweene vs and heauen? Mahom. Some which touch neither heauen nor earth, hauing manes  like horses, haire like women, wings like birds, and lay their Egges, and hatch them on their tailes till the day of Iudgement.
Ab. What was the forbidden tree? Mah. Of wheat, which had seuen eares, whereof Adam plucked one, wherein were fiue graines; of which, two hee eat, two hee gaue to Eue, and one hee carried away. This graine was bigger then an Egge, and being bruised, brought forth all kindes of seed. Ab. Where was Adam receiued after his expulsion from Paradise? Mah. Adam in India, Eue in Nubia. Adam was recouered with three leaues of Paradise; Eue, with her haire: They met together in Arafe. Further, as concerning Eue, she was made of a rib of the left side, for otherwise she had beene as strong as the man.
Ab. Who dwelt in the earth before? Mah. First the Deuils, seuen thousand yeeres after  them the Angels: lastly Adam, a thousand yeeres after the Angels. Ab. Who beganne the Pilgrimage? Mah. Adam. Gabriel shaued his head, and hee circumcised himselfe; and after him Abraham. Ab. To what land spake GOD at any time? Mah. To Mount Sinai, that it should lift vp Moses to heauen: Abitabil and Moses are the two men whose sepulchers are knowne. Moses by chance found a sepulcher, which while hee measured with his bodie, the Angell of Death drew from him his soule out of his nostrils, by the smell of an Apple of Paradise.
Ab. Where is the middle of the earth? Mah. In Ierusalem. Ab. Who made the first ship? Mah. Noe: hee receiued the keyes thereof of Gabriel, and going forth of Arabia, compassed Mecca seuen times, and likewise Ierusalem. In the meane while Mecca was receiued vp into  heauen, and the Mount Abikobez preserued Ierusalem in her belly. Ab. What shall become of the children of the Infidels? Mah. They shall come in at the day of Iudgement, and GOD shall say vnto them, Would yee doe that thing which shall be commanded you? And he shall command to flow forth one of the riuers of hell, and bid them leape into the same. They which obey, shall goe into Paradise. This shall bee the triall of the children of the faithfull also, which are borne deafe, blinde, etc. Abd. What resteth vnder these seuen earths? Mah. An Oxe, whose feet are on a white stone, his head in the East, his taile in the West; he hath fortie hornes, and as many teeth; it is a thousand yeeres iourney from one horne to another. Vnder that stone is Zohot, a mountaine of hell, of a thousand yeeres iourney. All the Infidels shall ascend vpon the same, and from the top shall fall into Hell. Vnder that Mount is the  land Werelea; vnder that, the Sea Alkasem: the Land Aliolen, the sea Zere: the land Neama, the sea Zegir: the land Theris, the land Agiba, white as Milke, sweet as Muske, soft as Saffron, bright as the Moone: the sea Alknitar; the fish Albehbut, with his head in the East, his taile in the West: all these in order one after another. And beneath all these in like infernall order the Winde, the Mountaine, the Thunder, the Lightning, the bloudie Sea, Hell closed, the fierie Sea, the darke Sea, the Sea Po, the cloudie Sea, Prayses, Glorification, the Throne, the Booke, the Pen, the greater Name of GOD.
Ab. What hath come out of Paradise into the World? Mah. Mecca, Iesrab,Ierusalem was rased of them. An. 1219. yet durst they not destroy the holy sepulchre, because of that Testimony of Iesus in their Alcoran: yea, they kisse the Gospels in reuerence, especially, Luc. 1. missus est Gabriel, which they will often re^terate. Vit^. l. 3. They call it not Ieru^alem, but BEITAALMIKDAS, that is, the house of the Sanctuary, and Cudsi Mubarrak, that is, the blessed Sanctuarie. Bed. Trud. Ierusalem: as on the contrarie, out of Hell; Vastat in Egypt, Antiochia in Syria, Ebheran in Armenia, and Elmeden of Chaldaea. Ab. What say you of Paradise? Mah. The ground of Paradise is  of gold, enameled with Emeralds, and Hiacinths, planted with euery fruitfull Tree, watered with streames of Milke, Hony, and Wine: the day is of a thousand yeeres continuance, and the yeere of fortie thousand yeeres. The people shall haue whatsoeuer can be desired, they shall be clothed in all colours, exceptThe Turkes reckon Greene the Prophets colour. black, which is the proper colour of Mahomet: they all shall bee of the stature of Adam, in resemblance like Christ, neuer encreasing or diminishing. As soone as they are entered, shall bee set before them the Liuer of the Fish Albehbut, and whatsoeuer dainties they can desire. They shall not need going to stoole any more then the childe in the wombe, but they shall sweat out all superfluities, of sent like Muske. They shall eat but for delight, not for hunger. Vnlawfull meates, as Swines flesh, they shall refraine. And if you list to know why this beast is vnclean, vnderstand that Iesus on a time called forth  Iaphet to tell his Disciples the Historie of the Arke; Who told them, that by the weight of the Ordure, the Arke leaned on the one side, whereupon Noe, consulting with GOD, was bidden bring the Elephant thither, out of whose dung, mixed with mans, came forth a Hog,
 which wrooted in that mire with his snout, and by the stinke thereof was produced out of his nose a Mouse, which gnawed the boords of the Arke: Noe fearing this danger, was bidden to strike the Lion on the forehead: and by the Lions breath was a Cat engendred, mortall enemie to the Mouse. But to returne from this stinking tale, to refresh our selues with the like sweets of this Paradise. He addeth, that there they haue the wiues that here they had, and other Concubines; whom, how, when, wheresoeuer they will.
Abd. But why is Wine lawfull there, and here vnlawfull? Mah. The Angels Arot and Marot, were sometime sent to instruct and gouerne the world, forbidding men, Wine, iniustice, and murther. But a woman hauing whereof to accuse her husband, inuited them to dinner, and made them drunke. They inflamed with a double heat of Wine and Lust, could  not obtaine that their desire of their faire Hostesse, except one would teach her the word of ascending to heauen, and the other of descending. Thus she mounted vp to heauen. And vpon enquirie of the matter, shee was made the Morning-Sarre, and they put to their choice, whether they would bee punished in this world, or in the world to come: they accepting their punishment in this, are hanged by chaines, with their heads in a pit of Babel, till the day of Iudgement.
Hell, saith Mahomet there, hath the floore of Brimstone, smoakie, pitchy, with stinking flames, with de^pe pits of scalding Pitch, and sulphurous flames, wherein the damned are punished daily: the trees beare most loasome fruits, which they eate.
The day of Iudgement shall be in this sort. In that day GOD will command the Angel of  Death to kill euery Creature; which being done, hee shall aske him if nothing bee aliue: Adreiel the Angell of Death shall answere, Nothing but my selfe. Then goe thy waies betwixt Paradise and Hell; and last of all kill thy selfe. Thus he, folded in his wings, prostrate on the earth, shall strangle himselfe with such a bellowing noise, as would terrifie the verie Angels, if they were aliue.
Thus the world shall bee emptie fortie yeeres. Then shall GOD hold the Heauen and Earth in his fist, and say, Where are now the mightie men, the Kings and Princes of the World? Tell mee (if yee be true) whose is the Kingdome, and Empire, and Power? Repeating these words three times, he shall rise vp Seraphiel, and say, Take this Trumpet, and goe to Ierusalem, and sound. This Trumpet is of fiue hundred yeeres iourney. At that sound all Soules shall come  forth, and disperse themselues vnto their owne bodies, and their bones shall be gathered together. Fortie yeeres after hee shall sound againe, and then the bones shall resume flesh and sinewes. After fortie yeeres the third sound shall warne the Soules to re-possesse their bodies: and a fire from the West shall driue euery creature to Ierusalem. When they haue here swum for^ie yeeres in their owne sweat, they shall with much vexation, come to Adam, and say, Father Adam, Father Adam, Why hast thou begotten vs to these miseries and torments? Why sufferest thou vs to hang betweene hope and feare? Pray to GOD, that hee will finish his determination of vs, between Paradise and Hell: Adam shall excuse his vnworthinesse for his disobedience, and send them to Noe, Noe will post them to Abraham, Abraham to Moses: He shall send them to Iesus Christ: To him they shall come, and say, The Spirit, Word, and  Power of GOD, let thy pitie moue thee to make intercession for vs. He shall answer them, That which you aske, you haue lost. I was indeed sent vnto you in the power of GOD, and Word of Truth, but yee haue erred, and haue made me GOD; more then euer I preached to you: and haue therefore lost my benefit. But goe to the last of the Prophets, meaning him with whom thou now talkest, Abdia. Then shall they turne to him, and say; O faithfull Messenger, and friend of GOD, we haue sinned, heare vs, holy Prophet, our only hope, etc. Then shall Gabriel present himselfe to helpe his friend, and they shall goe to the Throne of GOD. And GOD shall say, I know why you are come: Farre be it that I should not heare the prayer of my faithfull one. Then shall a bridge, be made ouer Hell, and on the top of the bridge shall bee set a ballance, wherein euery mans workes shall bee weighed, and those which are  saued, shall passe ouer the bridge, the other shall fall into Hell. Abd. How many bands of men shall there be in that day? Mahom. An hundred and twentie; of which, three only shall be found faithfull; and euery Band or troupe of men shall be in length the iourney of a thousand yeeres, in breadth fiue hundred. Abd. What shall become of Death? Mah. He shall be transformed into a Ram, and they shall bring him betweene Paradise and Hell. Then shall arise much dissentions betweene these two peoples, through feare of the one, and hope of the other. But the people of Paradise shall preuaile, and shall slay Death betweene Paradise and Hell. Abd. Thou, O Mahomet, hast ouercome, and I beleeue, that there is but one GOD Almightie, and thou art his Messenger and Prophet.
In this long and tedious Summarie, of that longer and more tedious Dialogue, compared  with the former Iewish opinions, touching their Behemoth, Leuiathan, Ziz, Ierusalem, Swines flesh, the Angell of Death, and other their superstitious opinions, it
 may appeare, that the Iewes were forward Mint-masters in this new-coyned Religion of Mahomet.
In the beginning of this Dialogue, are mentioned their fiue Prayers, and their Ramadam, or Ramazan: Of which, that Arabian Noble-man, in confutation of the Alcoran, writeth thus:Arab. Nob. in Consut. Alcor. He which hath fulfilled these fiue Prayers, shall bee praised in this world, and in the next. They are as follow: Two kneelings in the morning, after-noone, foure; at Vespers, or a little before Sun-set, foure; after Sun-set, foure; at their beginning of supper, two; and after supper, when it is darke, two; in all eighteene kneelings in a day.
Their LentOf Mahomets Lent., or Fast of the Moneth Ramazan, is thus: In the day time they must fast  from Meate, Drinke, and Venerie, till the Sunne bee downe: then is Riot permitted them, till a white threed may be discerned from a blacke. But if any be sicke, or in iourneying, he may pay at another time the same number of dayes.
Sampsates Isphacanes, a Persian, in a letter written to one Meletius, which had conuerted to Christianitie, and fled to Constantinople, to reduce him to his former vomit, alleageth this saying of GOD to Mahomet: I haue made all things for thee, and thee for mee: obiecteth to Christians the worship of three Persons, the Father, Mother, and Sonne, the worship of many gods. And how (saith he) can GOD haue a Sonne without a woman? And how can they agree together? How can GOD be made Man? And why could he not haue saued man by a  word, but, as if he had beene hindred through weaknesse, did therefore become man? And if he were GOD, how could he suffer? Yea, the name of Mahomet, saith hee, was expressed both in the Old Testament, and the Gospel, Christ himselfe commending it, which the Christians haue raced out: yea, from euerlasting it was written on the right side of the Throne of GOD. And the Musulmans deriue their faith from Abraham. This I haue inserted, to shew the vaine conceits they haue of our Religion, and their blinde confidence in their owne, with their carnall dreames of Diuine Mysteries, and diuellish slanders of our Scriptures, which they know not: their scandall also from the worship of Images and Saints.
Frier RichardRichardus Confut. Alcor. reciteth among Mahomets opinions, That of threescore and thirteene parts of the Saracens, one onely shall be saued; and, that the Deuils shall once bee saued by  the Ascoran; and that the Deuils call themselues Saracens, fit companions with them in their holy things.
SomePietro Messia tradotto per F. Sanso vino, lib. 4. cap. 1. make it a Canon of Mahomet, That they should looke toward the South when they pray, that when they pray they should say, GOD is one GOD, without equall; and Mahomet his Prophet: which, Lod. Barthema saith, Are the Characters of the profession of a Mahumetan, and that, by the pronouncing of those words, hee was tried whether he was an Infidell, or no. These words, saith the aboue-said Arabian (as they affirme) before the beginning of the world were written in the Throne of GOD.
BelloniusBell. Obseru. lib. ^. cap. 9. in his Obseruations telleth out of their Bookes, that there is a Tree in Paradise which shadoweth it all ouer, and spreadeth her boughes ouer the walles, whose leaues are of pure gold and siluer, each of them after the Name of GOD, hauing therein written  the name of Mahomet. And that if a Christian, at vnawares, should pronounce the said Prayer, Laillah, etc. GOD is one GOD, and Mahomet his Prophet, hee must either die or turne Turke. Such reputation haue they of this forme, which they call a Prayer, with as good reason as the Aue Marie among the Romists, wherein yet they pray not for any thing. Bellonius also saith, That they hold the Heauen to be made of Smoke, and the Firmament stablished on the horne of a Buffall, by whose stirring Earthquakes are caused: That there are seuen Paradises, with Houses, Gardens, Fountaines, and whatsoeuer sense accounteth delectable; where they shall enioy all delights without any sorrow, hauing Carpet, Beds, Boyes, Horses, Saddles, Garments, for cost and workmanship most curious, and readie for attendance. Those Boyes richly adorned, when they haue satisfied their hunger and thirst, shall  present euery Saracen a huge Pome-citron in a golden Charger, and as soone as they shall smell thereof, there shall thence proceed a comely Virgin in gallant attire, which shall embrace him, and he her; and so shall they continue fiftie yeeres. After which space ended, God shall shew them his face, whereat they shall fall downe, not able to endure the brightnesse, but hee shall say, Arise, my seruants, and enioy my glory; for heereafter yee shall neuer die, nor be grieued. Then shall they see God, and each lead his Virgin into his Chamber, where all pleasures shall attend them. If one of those Virgins should come forth at midnight, shee would lighten the world no lesse then the Sunne, and if shee should spet into the Sea, all the  water thereof would become sweet. Gabriel keepeth the keyes of Paradise, which are in number threescore and ten thousand, each seuen thousand miles long. But hee was not able to open Paradise, without Inuocation of the Name of GOD, and Mahomet his friend. There is a Table of Adamant seuen hundred thousand dayes iourney long and broad, with seates of gold and siluer about it, where they shall be feasted.

Methodij Constitut. in Bib. Pat. vbi and Abucara disput. cont. Sar.There is extant a Constitution of Methodius, Patriarke of Constantinople, touching the diuersities of Penances (according to the diuersitie of the offence) to bee performed by such as haue reuolted from the Faith to Mahumetisme. Likewise, there is a fragment of Nicetas, wherein are expressed the abiurations, and renunciations of Mahomet, and his Law by new conuerts, both before Baptisme, when they were admitted into the number of the Catechumeni, and at Baptisme, as was then vsed in the Church, some of which I here mention, as fitting to our purpose. After the Anathema pronounced against Mahomet, Ali his sonne-in-law, Apompicertus, Baeicer, Amar, Talcan, Apupachren, Sadicen, and the rest of his consorts and successours; also against Gadise, Aise, and others his wiues, with Phatuma his daughter:  he Anathematiseth the Core, that is, Mahomets Scripture, and all his learning, lawes, Apocryphall narrations, traditions, and blasphemies. The fifth Article is against Mahomets Paradise, there thus expressed, That in it are foure Riuers, one of cleare water, a second, of sweet milke, a third, of pleasant wine, a fourth, of honie: and that the Saracens at the day of Iudgement (which shall be fiue hundred thousand yeeres after his time) shal liue carnally with their wiues vnder the shadowes of certaine trees, called Sidra, and Telech, and shall eate what fruits and birds they will, and shall drinke of the fountaines Caphura and Zinciber and wine out of the spring Theon. Their age shall be the same with the heauens: their members foure cubits: they shall haue their fill of lust in the presence of God, who is not ashamed. Sixthly, He Anathematiseth Mahumets Angels Aroth, Maron, Tzapha and Marona, with his Prophets, Chud,  Zalech, Soaip, Edres, Duaciphel and Lechina. Seuenthly, His doctrine of the Sun and Moone, and his challenge to be the Key-bearer of Paradise: also his house of Mecca, in the middest wherof, they say, is a stone representing Venus, on which Abraham lay with Hagar, and tied thereto his Camell, when he should haue sacrificed Isaac: where the Pilgrimes holding their eare with one hand, point to the stone with the other, and so turne round till they fall downe with giddinesse.See of this in the next Chapter, and in the second Chapter. Cateches. Myst. pro aduenis ex Secta Mahom. He renounceth likewise their casting seuen stones against the Christians, and the tale of Mahomets Camel, and them wh^ch worship the Morning-starre, or Lucifer and Venus, which the Arabians call Chobar, that is, Great. And thus hee proceedeth in two and twentie Articles, abandoning his former sect: after which he desireth Baptisme.
Of like subiect are the Catecheses Mystagogicae, or instructions of Peter Guerra de Lorca,  concerning conuerting and keeping from Mahometisme, in which are rehearsed, and refuted a great part of their superstitions, dedicated to King Philip the second: But King Philip the third, hath otherwise conuerted the Moores of Spaine, for whom he writ his booke, by an vtter subuersion and turning them quite out of his dominions. He therin telleth of the deuils appearing to Mahomet in forme of a Vulture, with a beake and feathers of gold, professing himselfe to be Gabriel, sent of GOD to teach him his Law: that Mahomet would not permit Iewes to turne to his Law, without baptizing them first vnto Christianitie: that the Saracens worship the New-Moone: that the women spend all their time and care to adorne themselues for their husbands lust, and because they respect fatnesse in their wiues, these therefore with idlenesse, sleepe, and diet according, doe fat themselues like Swine: that a Mahumetan  may attaine to that perfection, that he may satisfie for sinne past, and after liue without sin, especially by Fastings and Pilgrimages: that the blessed Virgin shal (as they dreame) in the other life bee married to that cursed monster Mahomet: that women shall rise againe in the male sex, and shall also haue women for their lust, which shall bee produced out of certaine trees:Thesaur. sapientiae diuinae in salute om. gent. procuranda. with diuers other things scarcely obiected to them by others. Thomas a Iesu another Spaniard, hath written prolixly of this Argument, but I may not heere now follow him.
Let me yet be bold out of certaine Arabikes of the best note to adde the Creed, the Commandements, Mescuites, with other Mahumetan Rites and Custome, collected by Gabriel and Iohn, two Maronites, and first touching the Easterne Languages and Authors.  
Easterne languages.THere are in the East eight principall Languages, the Arabike, Persian, Turkish, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriake (which little differs from Chaldees) Greeke, and Armenian. The Arabike is most noble and vsuall, and is extended as far as Mohameds name, as their sacred Language, know to all Moslemans of better fashion. In this is their Alcoran and their publike Prayers, and most of their Lawes. Yea, saith Zaheri, the blessed in Paradise vse it. In this also are writ en their Bookes of Physicke, Astrologie, Rhetorike. The Persian hath little but Poets and Historians, the Turkish almost nothing; the Chaldee and Syriake are nigh lost, as the Greeke.Arabike Authors. But Auerroes, Algazeles, Abu-Becer, Alfarabius (called of the Moslemans, the second Philosopher) Mohamed Ben-Isaac, and Mohamed Ben-Abdillab adorned the Arabike: besides very many Astrologers, Mathematicians, Physicians, and Historians. Ben-Sidi  Aali reckons one hundred and fiftie, which haue written on their Law; Ben-Casem, innumerable Grammarians and Rhetoricians.

Now for the Moslemans Religion, Ben-Sidi Aali expresseth it to consist herein,Moslemans Creed. that they beleeue all the speeches made by Gabriel the Angell to our Prophet, when hee questioned him of the things to bee beleeued and done: which are these, to beleeue in one God to whom none is equall (this against Christians) and that the Angels are the Seruants of God, to beleeue in the Scripture sent to the Apostles, diuided in their opinion into one hundred and foure Bookes, of which tenne were sent to Adam, fiftie to Seth, thirtie to Enoc (called Edris) ten to Abraham, the Law to Moses, the Psalmes to Dauid, the Gospel to Isa, or Iesus Christ; lastly, the Alcoran to Mohamed. That they hold these sent for mens good; and beleeue in the Resurrection after death, and that some are predestinate to fire, some to Paradise, according to the will of God (for it is said in the Alcoran; there is none of you which  hath not his place in Paradise, and a place determined in Hell) that they beleeue also the reward of the good and punishment of the bad; and the intercession of the Saints. Also this is of the things to bee holden, that they firmely beleeue in the Diuine Pen, which was created by the finger of God. This Pen was made of Pearles, of that length and space that a swift Horse could scarcely passe in fiue hundred yeeres. It performeth that office, that it writes all things past, present, and to come: the Inke with which it writes is of light; the Tongue by which it writes, none vnderstandeth, but the Archangel Seraphael. That they beleeue also the punishment of the Sepulchres; for the Dead are vsed often to be punished in their Graues, as happened in a certaine Sepulcher betwixt Mecca and Medina.
The Precepts of the Moslemans are, first Circumcision, not on the eight day, as to the Iewes,Mosleman Precepts are; Circumcision. Fiue houres Prayer.  but at the eight, ninth, tenth, eleuenth, twelfth yeere, that they may know what they doe, and may professe their Faith with vnderstanding. And although most hold women free therefrom, yet in Egypt they circumcise women at thirteen, fourteene, or fifteene yeeres old (many of them till then goe starke naked) and Sidi-Ben Aali saith, that it was commanded to men, but is vsed to women for honour.
The second Commandement is Prayers hourely, which in the Church, at home, or abroad, they are bound to performe, fiue times in the day and night: first, at breake of day; the second, about noone; the third, in the afternoone; the fourth, after Sun-set, when the Starres begin to appeare: the last, in the first watch, or before mid-night (for after, it is vnlawfull, saith Ben-Sidi Aali) neither may any transgresse these houres without sin; yea, saith he, if one  were cast into the Sea, and knew the houre of Prayer, if he be able, he ought to doe it; as also women in trauell must hide the Infants head as they can, and doe it. Trauellers when they perceiue that houre is come, goe out of the way and wash; or if they haue no water; lightly dig the Earth, and make shew of washing, and go not thence till they haue finished their Deuotion. Thirdly, Almes is also commanded;Almes. Fast. and they which are so poore that they cannot giue to Orphans and the poore, must helpe in Hospitals and High-waies, by such seruice to satisfie God. Fourthly, Ramahdan Fast of thirtie dayes is commanded from morning to Sunset, and the Stars appearing:Pilgrimage. Fighting. for then after euening Prayer they eate any food (except Wine) with Bacchanall cheere, and tumults. Fifthly, Pilgrimage once in their liues to Mecca and Medina is also commended; and sixthly, to fight against the enemies of their Faith is no lesse commanded; not to preach by the Word and Meekenesse, as Christ, but by the Sword and  Warre, to inuade and reuenge. And if by their persons and blood they cannot, they must (saith our Author) by their purse and goods helpe the Prince herein. And if they die in Wat, the sensuall pleasures of Paradise, Riuers of Milke and Honey, beautifull women and the like, are their present purchase. Therefore do they giue to Apostataes, which become Moslemans,Note. an Arrow borne vp by their fore-finger; the Arrow signifying Warre, and that one Finger the Vnitie of the Deitie. Their last Commandement is washing with water, which is three-fold,Washings. one before Prayers, handled in three Chapiters by Ben-Sidi Aali, thus performed; the armes stripped naked to the elbow, they wash the right hand and arme, then the left, after the Nose, Eares, Face, Necke, Crowne, Feet to the ioynts, if they bee bare, or else their shooe-tops; lastly, their Priuities; meane-while mumbling their Deuotions. These washings they  thinke to wash away their Veniall and lighter sinnes; for their greater they vse Bathes, and say all the bodie must be washed to wash away Crimes. The third washing is of their secrets by themselues, or their Seruants after the Offices of Nature, deliuered by him in two Chapiters, too foolish and filthy to be related. Adde the prohibition of Images painted or carued, Thefts, Homicides, Robberies, Adulteries, Swines-flesh, Wine, strangled bloud, and things dying of themselues, and all vncleane creatures.
He also instructs at large of their Testaments and Funerals. The Moslemans being sicke,Order of visiting the sicke, of Wils, Restitutions, and Burials. presently send for an Abed, Religious man, or Santone to strengthen them in the Faith, and  propound heauenly things to him, reciting somewhat out of the Alcoran. And if the Disease be very dangerous, they wash and make their Testament; and are bound to restore all illgotten goods, giuing the creditors a bill of their hand. And if they know not to whom to restore, they must bequeath a summe of money to publike vses, Hospitals, Mescuits, Bathes, the poore and Religious persons: yea, for that respect they set Captiues at libertie, as is read
 that Auicenna did; some giue Bookes to publike vses; some, other things. Ben-Sidi Aali saith, it is Mohameds precept, that the third part of mens goods bee bestowed on publike vses. And if a man die intestate, they say other dead men will chide him. When they are dead, the bodie is washed, the Nose, Eyes, Mouth, and Eares stopped with cotton; better apparell is put on, white shirts, and Tulipants. Then is the bodie carried to the buriall place without the Citie with a great troupe; the Santones or Religious going before, then the men promiscuously, after the Corps; followed by women howling, lamenting, shricking, till they come to the Graue. There are those Garments taken away, and the Corps shrowded in a white sheet, and put into the Graue with the face to the South. After the couering with  Earth, many Prayers are made, and much Almes is giuen to the poore to doe the same.
Mescuites, or Moschees, and their Ceremonies in them.Touching the Easterne Customes. Ben-Sidi Aali hath written of the structure of Mescuites. Before them is a large floore paued with Marble, in the midst is a square Lauer, where they which come to pray vse to wash themselues. After this is a great Hall without Images or Pictures, the Walls bare, not shining with Gold or Gems: the Pauement matted, on which the vulgar sit; the Rich vse Carpets spread for them by their Slaues. From the Roofe hang many Lampes, which are lighted in Prayer time, and that being ended, are put out. These Churches are for the most part round and couered with Lead; and haue adioyned high Towers which serue for Steeples, with foure Windowes open to the foure Windes; whereon the Priests at set-times ascend, and with a strong voyce call men to Prayers. Which being ended,  and their Legall washing being done, all of them leauing their Shooes on a rew at the threshold of the Gate or Porch, they enter with great silence. The Priest beginneth the Prayer, and all follow, and whiles hee kneeleth they doe so, and rise when hee stands vp, and imitate him in the eleuation or depression of the voyce. None yauneth, cougheth, walketh, or talketh, but in great silence, after Prayers they resume their Shooes and depart. No woman may come to the Mescuites at these set houres, if there bee any men, nor may haue any societie of men, except the Priest, which directeth and goeth before them with his voyce in their manner of praying, as saith the said Author.
Mosleman women dis-respected. Hence some ascribe to the Turites falsly, that women haue no soules. Easterne attireThey are permitted not to enter the Mescuites, but to stand at the doore, and must bee gone quickly before the men haue done their Prayers. He addes that the womens Church  is the inner part of their owne house. Such is their dis-respect of women; notwithstanding, Mohameds promises in his Alcoran, that many, say they, enter not Paradise, but may stand at the doore with Christians, and see the glorie of the men.
The Garments of the East are commonly long, some flit on the right and left hand, some whole. The vpper Garment hath wide sleeues. Their head-tire is a Tulipant but differing, of Princes white and fine, artificially wreathen, rather long then round: of their Cadies and Mufeis very large, of fiftie or sixtie Els of Calico round and wreathed; of Citizens lesse, of Serifs or Mohameds posteritie greene: of Souldiers and Seruants long and white. Christians vse not white nor round ones: the Maronite Patriarke and his Suffragan Bishops we are a huge Tulipant, round and blue, with a blacke hood vnder it: other Priests lesse, and no hood.  The women are pompous, but co^ming abroad we are a couering made of Horse-haire before their face, that they may see and not be knowne, not if their owne Husbands meet them; neither if they did know, would they salute, it being a shame for a woman to bee seene speaking with a man. Their Chaines, Brooches, and other Ornaments, and Paintings of their Eyes, Browes, and Fingers ends, I omit. Both men and women are so addicted to neatnesse, that they are very carefull lest any drop of vrine spot their clothes in making water or going to stoole,A note for trauellers in these parts, not to prouoke them without liberty in vrine, etc. a cause of quarrell often to Christians. and would then thinke themselues vncleane. They therefore then sit downe (like women) and wash; or if no water may bee had, wipe with three stones, or a three cornered stone, as Ben-Sidi Aali in his Chapiter of washing warneth. They thinke it vnlawfull to spit or pisse on a brute creature. In food they abstaine from strangled and  bloud; and Moslemans, from Swines-flesh. They loue Iunkets: they breake bread and cut it not. Their Table is a round piece of Leather, to which they come with washing and Prayers promised. They vse not Forkes, but Spoones of Wood of diuers colours, and where they need not them, three Fingers, as Ben-Sidi Aali warneth. Pewter and Porcelane is in much vse, but other Vessels of Plate or Gold, saith hee, Mohamed forbade, saying, The Deuill vsed such, the common drinke is water; the better sort adde Sugar, sometimes Amber and Muske, etc.




CHAP. VI. Of the Pilgrimage to MECCA.
WE haue heard of the antiquitie of this Pilgrimage in the former Chapter, deriued from Adam, who was shauen and circumcised for that purpose: and the Alcoran nameth Abraham the founder of the Temple, etc. Pittie it were, that the last of the Prophets should not honour that which was first instituted by  the first of men. If wee will rather beleeue that Arabian before mentioned, we shall finde another originall; namely, That whereas two Nations of the Indians, called Zechian and Albarachuma, had vsed to goe about their Idols naked and shauen, with great howlings, kissing the corners, and casting stones vpon an heape, which was heaped vp in honour of their gods, and that twice euery yeere, in the Spring, and in Autumne: the Arabians had learned the same of the Indians, and practised the same at Mecca, in honour of Venus (casting stones backe betweene their legs, the parts of Venus) in the time of Mahomet. Neither did Mahomet abrogate this, as he did other Idolatrous Rites: onely for modesties sake they were enioyned to gird a piece of linnen about their Reines. Petrus AlphonsiAp. Breidenbach. an ancient Author, who of a Iew had become a Christian, thus relateth this Historie. The Ammonites  and Moabites erected two Idols, one of white stone called Mercurie, in honour of Mars: the other of blacke, called Chamos, in honour of Saturne. Twice a yeere these men ascended to worship them; when the Sunne entred into Aries, in honour of Mars, and then at their departure they cast stones (as before is said:) when the Sunne entred into Libra, in honour of Saturne; at which time they sacrificed naked, with their heads shauen. The Arabians also worshipped them: Mahomet did not abolish them, but placed the Image of Saturne in a corner, with his back-part forwards; and buried the Image of Mars in the ground, and laid a stone ouer it. These stones he permitted them to kisse, and with shauen crownes, and naked backes to cast stones backwards betweene their legs, which they say, is done to scarre away the Deuill. This is suffered to bee done at Mecca in honour of Venus.Sup. cap. 5. But wee  haue alreadie heard, that Venus was the ancient Arabian and Seracenicall Deitie, to whom they performed such Rites of old.
Mecca, or (as they call it) Macca, signifying an Habitation, containeth in it about sixe thousand houses fairely built, like those of Italy: Other walls it hath not, then such as Nature hath enuironed it with; namely, With high and barren Mountaines round about. SomePilgrimage to Mecca. M. Hak. tom. 2. report, That betweene the Mountaines and the Citie are pleasant gardens, abundance of Figs, Grapes, Apples, Melons, and that there is store also of Flesh and Water. But it seemeth, that this is of later industrie, not of Natures indulgence, if it be true. For Lud. BarthemaVertoman. lib. 1. cap. 14., or Vertoman, being there in the yeere 1503. saith, That the place was accursed of GOD, as not bringing forth Hearbs, Trees, Fruites, or any thing, and besides, hauing  great scarcitie of water, and is serued with these things from other places. It is gouerned by a King (tributarie, then to the Soldan, now to the Turke) called the Seriffo, lineally descended from their great Seducer, by his daughter Fatima (the onely issue of this libidinous poligamous Prophet) married to Hali. All of this kindred are called Emyri, that is, Lords, cloathed with (or at least, wearing Turbants of) greene, which colour the Mahumetans will not suffer other men to weare.
The number of Pilgrimes which resort hither, is incredible. From Cairo commeth a Carouan of deuotion, some to Mammon, some to Mahomet, either for trade of Merchandize, or for Superstition, and another yeerely from Damascus: besides those which come from the Indies, Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, etc. Lud. Barthema saith, That (at his being at Mecca) of the  Carouan of Damasco wherein he went, were fiue and thirtie thousand Camels, and about fortie thousand persons: of that of Cairo were threescore and foure thousand Camels, and now in these times about fortie thousand Camels, Mules, and Dromedaries, and fiftie thousand persons, besides the Arabian Carouan, and of other Nations.
This Mart of Mecca is much impaired, since the Portugales haue intercepted the Indian commodities, which by a Carouan from thence, were wont to be brought hither.
Let me desire the Reader to haue patience, and goe along on this Pilgrimage, with one of these Carouans, thorow these Arabian Desarts to Mecca and Medina: and because that of Cairo is the chiefe, wee will bestow our selues in it, and obserue what Rites they obserue before they set forth: what by the way, and at the intended places of their deuotion.Alcorr. Italie.  Touching the necessitie whereof; they thinke, that they which goe not once in their liues, shall, after death, goe to the Deuill. Yea, some, for deuotion, plucke out their eyes after so holy a sight.

The moneth Ramazan (or Ramadham, the ninth moneth in their Kalendar, containing thirtie daies, as you haue heard) is their Lent; falling sometime high, sometime low, being that whole moneth, during which time the Pilgrimes and Merchants resort to Cairo from Asia, Greece, Barbarie, etc. After theirPilgrimage to Mecca. Hak. Lent ended, they obserue their Easter, or Feast, called Bairam, three dayes. Twentie dayes after this Feast, the Carouan is readie to depart. Against this time, they assemble themselues at a place, two leagues from Cairo (called Birca) attending the comming of the Captaine. This Captaine of the Corauan, whom they call Amarilla Haggi, is renewed euery third yeere; and to him the Grand Signior, euery voyage giueth eighteene Purses (each containing sixe hundred twentie fiue Duckats of gold) for the behoofe of the Carouan, and also to doe Almes vnto needfull Pilgrimes. He hath foure Chausi to serue him, and foure hundred Souldiers, two hundred Spachi, mounted on Dromedaries,  and as many Ianizaries riding on Camels. The Chausi and Spachi, the Captaine maintaineth at his owne charges: The Ianizaries haue their prouision from Cairo. He hath eight Pilots for guides; which Office is hereditarie.
They carrie sixe pieces of Ordnance to terrifie the Arabians, and to triumph at Mecca. The Merchandize that goeth by Land, payeth no custome; that which goeth by Sea, payeth ten in the hundred. At the Feast, before the Carouan setteth forth, the Captaine, with his Retinue and Officers, resort vnto the Castle of Cairo, before the Basha, which giueth vnto euery man a Garment, and that of the Captaine is wrought with Gold, the others according to their degree. Moreouer, he deliuereth vnto him the Chisua Tunabi, or Garment  of the Prophet; a Vesture of Silke, wrought with these letters of Gold, La illa ill'alla Mahumet Resullala; that is, There are no gods but God, and Mahomet is the Messenger of God. After this, he deliuereth to him a Gate, wrought curiously with gold; and a couering of greene veluet, made in manner of a Pyramis, about nine palmes high, wrought with fine gold, to couer the Tombe of the Prophet Mahomet, and many other couerings besides of gold and silke to adorne it. The two former are for the house of Abraham in Mecca.
Then the Captaine hauing taken his leaue, departed accompanied with all the people of Cairo, in manner of a Procession, with singing, shouting, and a thousand Ceremonies besides, and passing the gate Bab. Nassara, laieth vp, in a Mosquita the said Vestures very safely. This Ceremonie is performed with such publike resort, that it is not lawfull for any man  to forbid his wife the going to this Feast: for shee may, vpon such a cause, separate her selfe from her husband, and lie with another man. The Camels which carrie the Vestures, being adorned with cloth of gold, and many little bels, the multitude streweth flowers and sweet water on them; others with fine cloth and towels touch the same, reseruing these for reliques. Twentie daies after this Feast, the Captaine, taking the vestures out of that Mosquita, repaireth to Birca, where his Tent abideth some ten daies. In this time, they which meane to follow the Carouan, resort thither, and amongst them, many women attired with trifles, tassels, and knots, accompanied with their friends, mounted on Camels. The night before their departure, they make great feasting and triumph, with discharging their Ordnance, Fire-works, etc. shouting, till, at the breake of day vpon the sound of a Trumpet, they march  forward on their way.
From Cairo to Mecca is fortie daies iourney, trauelling from two a clocke in the morning till the Sun-rising: and then hauing rested till noone, they set forward, so continuing till night, obseruing this order till the end of their voyage, without change; exceptL. Bar. wi^h the Carouan of Damasco, trauelled two and twentie houres of foure and twentie. at some places, where, in respect of water, they rest sometimes a day and a halfe to refresh themselues. The Carouan is diuided into three parts; the fore-ward, the maine battell, and the rere-ward. The fore-ward containeth about the third part of the people; and amongst these, the eight Pilots, a Chausi, and foure knaues, with bulls sinewes, which punish offendors on the soles of their feet. In the night time they haue foure or fiue men goe before with pieces of drie wood, which giue light: they follow the Starre, as the Mariners. Within a quarter  of a mile followeth the maine Battell, with their Ordnance, Gunners, and fifteene Archers, Spachi; The chiefe Physician, with his Ointments and Medicines for the sicke, and Camels for them to ride on. Next goeth the fairest Camell that may be found in the Turkes Dominion, decked with cloth of gold and silke, and carrieth a little chest, made of pure Legmame, in forme of the Israelitish Arke, containing in it the Alcoran, all written with great letters of gold, bound betweene two tables of Massie gold. This chest is couered with silke, during the voyage; but at their entring into Mecca and Medina, it is couered with cloth of gold, adorned with Iewels. This Camell is compassed about with Arabian Singers and Musicians, singing alway and playing vpon Instruments. After this follow fifteene other most faire Camels, euery one carrying one of the abouesaid vestures, being couered from top to toe with  silke. Behinde these, goe the twentie Camels, which carry the Captaines money and prouision. After followeth the Standard of the great Signior, accompanied with Musicians and
 Souldiers, and behinde these, lesse then a mile, followeth the rere-ward, the greatest part Pilgrimes; the Merchants for securitie, going before: for in this voyage it is needfull and vsuall, that the Captaines bestow Presents, Garments, and Turbants vpon the chiefe Arabians, to giue him free passage, receiuing sometimes, by pilferings some damage no^withstanding. They passe by certaine weake Castles in the way, Agerut, Nachel, Acba, Biritem, betweene which two last is the Riuer of Iethro, and the Ponds of Midian, where Moses sate down. At Iebhir, the first Towne subiect to the Seriffo of Mecca, they are receiued with much ioy, and well refreshed with the plentie which that place yeeldeth. They finde other filthy Commodities also more then plentie, which fact (they hold) purgeth them from a multitude  of sinnes, and encreaseth their deuotion to prosecute the voyage. The next day they goe towards Bedrihonem, in which place groweth shrubs, whereout issueth balme. Hereby they lodge one night, in memory of a victory here obtained against the Christians, at the earnest prayers of their Prophet, dreaming of Drums, heere still founded. by Angels, as they passe. The next morning by Sun-rising, they arriue at Bedrihonem, where euery one washed himselfe from top to toe, couering their priuities with a cloth, and their shoulders with another white one; and they which can goe in this habite to Mecca, merit more; they which cannot make a vow to offer a Ram at the Mountaine of Pardons. After this washing, it is not lawfull for any man or woman to kill a Flea or Lowse with their hands or nailes, till they haue accomplished their Vowes at that Mountaine.
 This night they come within two miles of Mecca. The next morning they march on, and the Seriffo meeting them, resigneth his gouernment to the Captaine, during his abode there: and the Captaine giueth h m a garment of cloth of gold, with other Iewels. After this, hauing eaten together vpon Carpets and Hides, they take with them the gate and garment abouesaid, and goe, attended but with few, to the Mosquita, and there cause the old to bee pulled downe, and put the new couerture on the house of Abraham: and the old vesture is the Eunuches which serue in the said Mosquita, which sell it deare to the Pilgrimes, euery little piece being accounted a most holy Relique. And well may it be so, for (can you doubt of it?) putting the same vnder the head of a man at his death, all his sinnes must, by vertue heereof be pardoned. They take away the old doore, which is the Seriffoes fee, and set in  place the new. Thus after some Orisons, the Captaine returneth to his pauilion, the Seriffo remaineth in the Citie.
That you may be the better acquainted with this Mosquita, and house of Abraham, you are to know,Description of the Mosquita at Mecca. that in the middest of the Citie is the great Mosquita, built (they say) in the time when their Prophet liued. It is foure-square, euery square halfe a mile, being in all the circuit two miles, in manner of a Cloyster: The galleries round about are in manner of foure streets; these streets being separated from each other with Pillars, of Marble some, and some of Lime and Stone. In the middest of all separate from the rest, is the house of Abraham. This Mosquita hath fourescore and nineteene gates, and fiue steeples, from whence the Talismani call the people to their deuotion. And the Pilgrimes, which are not prouided of Tents, resort  hither, men and women lying together; their House of Prayer becomming a den of Theeues. Barthema saith, that this Temple is round, like the Coliseo at Rome. That at euerie entrance is a descent of ten or twelue steps, on both sides wherof stand Iewellers, which sell gems onely. Within, it is vaulted, gilded, and odoriferous, beyond what can be spoken: for there are foure or fiue hundred men which sell powders to preserue dead corpses, and other sweets. It seemeth, that since his time the temple and house of Abraham are altered. ThisThe house of Abraham described. house is foure-square, made of speckled stone, twentie paces high, and fortie in circuit. And vpon one side of this house, within the wall, there is a stone of a span long, and halfe a span broad, which stone (they say) fell downe from heauen; a voice from heauen at the same fall, being heard, that wheresoeuer this stone fell, there should be built the house of GOD, wherein hee  will heare the praiers of sinners. Then was the StoneOf this stone see sup. c. 2. as white as snow, but now, through the kisses of sinners, it is become so blacke as it is. The entrance into this house is small and high. There are without this house one and thirtie pillars of brasse vpon square stones, sustaining a threed of Copper, reaching from one to another, on which are fastened many burning Lampes. The founder of these was Solyman. Being entred into this house through that difficult passage, there stand two pillars of Marble at the entrance: in the middest are three of Aloes-wood, couered with tyles of India, of a thousand colours, which serue to vnder-prop the Terratza, or roofe. It is so darke, that they can hardly see within for want of light; nor is it without an euill smell. Without the gate fiue paces, is the Pond Zunzun; that blessed Pond which the Angell shewed to Agar for her sonne Ismael.
 Of their Feast Baraim is said alreadie: About sixe daies after they be come hither to Mecca, they celebrate another Feast called Bine Baraim, that is, the great Feast, which is also called, The Feast of the Ram. In those daies space they prepare themselues hereunto with due
 ceremonies. First, departing from the Carouan, guided with such as are skilfull in the way, they goe twentie or thirtie in a companie walking thorow a street, which ascendeth by little and little, till they come vnto a certaine gate, whereon is written in Marble, Babel Salema; that is, the gate of Health. And from this place is descried the great Mosquita, and twice saluted, saying, Peace to thee, Messenger of God. Then proceeding on their way, they finde an Arch on their right hand, whereon they ascend fiue steps, vpon which is a great void place made of stone: after descending fiue other steps, and proceeding the space of a flight-shoot, they finde another Arch, like vnto the first; and this way, from the one Arch to the other, they goe and come seuen times, saying alwaies some of their prayers, which (they say) the  afflicted Hagar said, whiles she sought and found not water for her sonne. After this Ceremonie, thy enter into the Mosquita; and drawing neere vnto the house of Abraham, they go round about it other seuen times, alwaies saying, This is the house of GOD, and of his seruant ABRAHAM. This done, they goe and kisse that blacke stone abouesaid; and then goe they to the Pond Zunzun, and in their apparell, as they be, wash themselues from head to foot, saying, Tobah Allah, Tobah Allah, Pardon Lord, Pardon Lord; drinking also of that muddie vnsauourie water: and thus returne they, cleansed from all their sins. Euerie Pilgrime performeth these Ceremonies once at the least; the deuouter sort often.
An hundred yeeres since these Ceremonies were somewhat different, after BarthemaesVertoman. lib. 1. cap. 15. A. D. 1503. relation. On the three and twentieth of May, the people (before day) compassed that house  of Abraham seuen times, alway touching and kissing euery corner. Ten or twelue paces from this house was another, in manner of a Chappell with three or foure gates, and in the middest thereof a pit of brackish water, threescore and ten yards deepe. Thereat stand sixe or eight men, appointed to draw water for the people; who after their seuen-fold Ceremonie come to the brink, and say, All this be for the honor of God, and the pittifull God pardon me my sins. Then doe those other powre vpon them three buckets full of water, from the top of their heads to their feet, be their garments neuer so costly.
The CarouanThe Pilgrims going to the Mountaine of Pardons. hauing abode at Mecca fiue dayes, the night before the euening of their Feast, the Captaine with all his company, setteth forwards towards the Mountaine of Pardons, called Iabel Arafata, distant from Mecca fifteene miles. This Mountaine, or small  Hill rather, is in compasse two miles, inuironed round about with the goodliest Plaine that a mans eye hath seen, and that Plaine compassed with high Mountains. Vpon the side towards Mecca, there are many pipes of cleare fresh water, wherewith the people refresh themselues, and their cattell. Adam and Eue, when they were banished Paradise, after they had beene separated fortie yeeres, one in Nubia, and the other in India (as you heard before) met at this pleasant place, and here inhabited and built a little house, which they call at this day Beyt-Adam, the house of Adam.
Hither come also the same day the other Carouans of Arabia and Damasco, and all the inhabitants for ten dayes iourney round about, so that at one time here is to be seene aboue two hundred thousand persons, and three hundred thousand cattell. Now all this company meeting together, the night before the Feast, the three Hostes cast themselues into a triangle,  setting the Mountaine in the middest, and fill Heauen and Earth with shouting, singing, hallowing, gun-shot and fire-works all that night. The next day being their Feast, in silence they attend their sacrifices and prayers onely. And in the euening, they which haue horses, mount thereon, and approach as nigh vnto the Mountaine as they can: others make the best shift they can on foot, giuing euer vnto the Captaine of Cairo the chiefe place, the second to the Captaine of Damasco, and the third to the Captaine of Arabia. And being all approached, there commeth one of the Santones mounted on a Camell well furnished, who at the other side of the Mountaine ascendeth fiue steps into a Pulpit made for that purpose, and there maketh a Sermon to the people. The Contents whereof, are the benefits which GOD  hath bestowed on them deliuerance from Idolatrie, giuing them the house of Abraham, and the Mountaine of Pardons: adding, that the mercifull GOD commanded his Secretary Abraham, to build him an house in Mecca, wherein his successours might be heard, at which time all the Mountaines in the world came together thither with sufficiencie of stones for the building therof, except that little low hill, which for pouertie could not goe to discharge this debt: for the which it became sorrowfull, and wept thirtie yeeres, at the end whereof God in compassion said vnto it, Weepe no more, my daughter, comfort thy selfe: I will cause all those that goe to the house of my seruant Abraham, that they shall not be absolued from their sinnes, vnlesse they first come to doe thee reuerence, to keepe in this place their holiest Feast. And this I haue commanded to my people by the mouth of my friend and Prophet Mahomet. This said, he exhorteth them to the loue of God, to prayer, and almes. The Sermon  ended, at the Sun-setting they make three prayers: first for the Seriffo, second for the grand Signior, the third, for the people: to which prayers all with one voyce, cry Amin la
 Alla, Amin Ia Alla; Be it so Lord. Barthema addeth to the Sermon the Cadi or Santones exhortation to weepe for their sinnes, and knocke their breasts, with inuocation of Abraham and Isaac, to pray for the people of the Prophet; and reporteth further, that there were killed on the first day more then thirtie thousand Rams, or Sheepe toward the West, and giuen to the poore; of which there were thirtie or fortie thousand. Thus hauing had the Santones blessing, and saluted the Mountaine of Pardon, they returne the way they came, in the middest of which way, is a place called Mina: and a little from thence foure great Pillars, two on each side of the way. If any passe not thorow the middest of these, he loseth all the merit of his Pilgrimage. And from the Mount of Pardons till they be passed these pillars,  none dare looke backeward, for feare lest his sins, which he hath left in the Mountaine, returne to him againe.
Being past these Pillars, euery one lighteth downe, seeking in this sandie field fiftie or threescore little stones, which they binde in an handkerchiefe, and carry to that place of Mina, where they stay fiue dayes, because at that time there is a Fayre, free and franke of all custome. And in this place are other three Pillars not together, but set in diuers places. Monuments of those three Apparitions, which the Deuill made to Abraham, an toBarthema saith Isaac. Ismael his sonne: for they now a dayes make no mention of Isaac, as if he had neuer beene borne. They say, that when as Abraham at Gods command went to offer his sonne Ismael, the deuill dehorted  him from the same: but seeing his labour lost, he went to Ismael, and bid him pittie himselfe. But Ismael tooke vp stones and threw at him, saying, I defend me with God from the Deuill the offender. These words the Pilgrimes repeate in their visitation of these Pillars, hurling away the stones they had gathered. From hence halfe a mile is a Mountaine, whither Abraham went to sacrifice his sonne. In the same is a great den whither the Pilgrimes resort to make their prayers, and there is a great stone separated in the middest by the knife of Ismael (they say) at the time of this sacrifice. Barthema reporteth that heere at Mecca he saw two Vnicornes: which I mention, because since that time I haue not found any Author which hath testified the like sight. They were sent to the Seriffo for a present by an Aethiopian King.
 The Carouan departing for Medina, as soone as they come in sight thereof (they call the place The Mountaine of Health) they alight, and going vp the hill, shout with loud voyces and say, Prayer, and health be vnto thee, O Prophet of God, Prayer and health be vpon thee, O beloued of GOD. They proceed on their iourney; and lodge that night within three miles of Medina, and the next morning are receiued with solemnitie of the Gouernour. MedinaDescription of Medina: the word signifies the people. is a Citie two miles in circuit, with faire houses of lime and stone, and a square Mosquita in the middest, lesse, but more sumptuous then that of Mecca. This is called Medina Tal Nabi, that is, the Citie of the Prophet; in Barthemaes time, it contained about three hundred houses, and was very barren, one garden of Dates excepted: but now they haue store of fruits. This Temple is square, an hundred paces in length; fourescore in breadth.  It hath in it an Ile made Arch-wise, supported with foure hundred Pillars, and supporting (as he saith) three thousand Lampes. In one part of this Mosquita was a Librarie of fortie fiue Mahumeticall bookes. Also within the same (in a corner thereof) is aIn Barthema it is said that it was a graue (fossa) vnder the earth: and there were also Hali, Othman, Bubecher, and Homor, with the bookes of their ordinanes and Sects. Tombe built vpon foure Pillars with a Vault, exceeding in height the Mosquita: being couered with Lead, and the top all inameld with gold, and an halfe Moone vpon the top, wrought within verie artificially with gold. Below there are round about great yron staires ascending vp to the middest of the Pillars, and in the middest lyeth buried the bodie of Mahumet (not in an yron chest attracted by Adamant at Mecca, as some affirme.) Or to say the truth, neither here nor at Mecca can they shew this Seducers bodie. For the Captaine of that Carouan of Damasco, in which Barthema went on this Pilgrimage, offered to the chiefe Priest of that  Mosquita, three thousand Saraffi of gold, to shew him the bodie of the Nabi or Prophet; that (saith he) being the onely cause of my comming. The Priest answered proudly: How can those eyes, wherewith thou hast committed so much euill in the world, see him by whom GOD hath created Heauen and Earth? The Captaine replied, True Sir, but doe me that fauour, to let me see his bodie, and I will presently plucke out mineWhich some are reported to doe indeed after their so holy pilgrimage-sights, not further polluting their eyes. eyes. The Priest answered. O Sir, I will tell you the truth. It is true, that our Prophet would die heere to giue vs good example: for hee might haue died at Mecca, but such was his humilitie for our instruction: and presently after hee was dead, he was carried by the Angels into heauen. And where (saith the Captaine) is Iesus Christ the Sonne of Marie? The Priest answered, At the feet of Mahomet.
 In the night time by some fire-workes in the steeple, they would haue gulled the credulous people with opinion of miracle, vsing out-cryes in the night, saying, Mahomet would rise againe: and when the Mamalukes could see no such light shine forth of Mahomets Tombe as they rumoured, they said, It was because they were slaues, and weake in the faith, and could not see heauenly sights.

To returne to the discouery of this supposed Sepulchre: Ouer the bodie they haue built a Tombe of speckled stone, a brace and halfe high, and ouer the same another of Legmame, foure-square in manner of a Piramis. Round about the Sepulchre there hangeth a curtaine of silke, which hideth the Sepulture from their sight that stand without. Beyond this in the same Mosquita are other two Sepulchres of Fatma and Hali: (who yet, as some say, was buried at Massadalli, neere Cusa: others say, hee neuer died, but his comming is still expected.) The attendants on these Sepulchres are fiftie Eunuches, white and tawnie, of which, three onely of the eldest and best esteemed white Eunuches, may enter within the Tombe; which they doe twice a day to light the Lampes, and for other seruices. The other attend on the Mosquita, and those two other Sepulchres: Where euery one may goe and touch at his  pleasure, and take of the earth for deuotion, as many doe. The Captaine with great pompe presenteth that Pyramid-like Vestment (whereof you haue heard) for the Tombe, the Eunuches taking away the old, and laying on the new: and after this, other vestures for the ornament of the Mosquita. And the people without deliuer vnto the Eunuches, each man somewhat to touch the Tombe therewith: which they keepe as a Relique with great deuotion.
Here is a stately Hospitall built by Cassachi, or Rosa, the wife of great Soliman, richly tented, and nourishing many poore people. A mile from the Citie are certaine houses, in one of which they say Mahomet dwelt, hauing on euery side many Date-trees, amongst which there  are two growing out of one stocke exceeding high, which their Prophet, forsooth, grafted with his owne hands. The fruit thereof is alway sent to Constantinople for a Present to the Grand-Signior, and is said to be the Blessed fruit of the Prophet. Also there is a little Mosquita, wherein three places are counted holy. The first, they affirme their Prophet made his first prayer in, after hee knew God. The second is that, whither he went when he would see the house of Abraham. Where when he sate downe to that intent, the Mountaines opened from the top to the bottome, to shew him the house, and after closed againe as before. The third, is the middest of the Mosquita, where is a Tombe made of Lime and Stone fouresquare, and full of sand, wherein they say was buried that blessed Camell which Mahomet was alw^y wont to ride vpon. Euen still (as one Mr. Simons a Merchant and beholder thereof reported  to me) they haue a superstitious custome at Cairo, of carrying the leg of Mahomets Camell (as they affirme) in a Coach, the women in zeale of their blinde deuotion, hurling their Shashes to receiue thence some holy and blessed touch, for their Mahumeticall edification: as the Papists ascribe no small holinesse to the touch of our Ladies Image at Loretto with their beades, or other implements of their superstition, as my friend Mr. Barkley, an eye-witnesse, hath told me. Maruell much we may, that the Souldiers which crucified Christ, and parted his garments by lot, and Iudas which kissed him, and the Deuill also which carried his bodie out of the wildernesse, and set it on a pinacle of the Temple, did not from such holy touches acquire much holinesse. But here a good intent was wanting, which though the Mahumetans haue, yet a Camels leg is not so holy as our Ladies Image; Grant it: but they pretend  Tradition and Deuotion no lesse then these: and otherwise, there is as little warrantThey pretend visions and miracles, etc. But haue not Antichrist and all Idolaters their miracles? faith hath euer relation to the word of God. for that house and Image of our Ladie that they are true, as of the other. Blessed VIRGIN! whom all generations call blessed, and iustly admire for that holinesse, which with thankefulnesse to God, and charitie to man, wee are to imitate; then these stones and blockes should thus vsurpe thy name, and (in a worse sacriledge) diuine worship, yea more then those holies of diuine institution, which were so farre from conueyingAgg. 2.12, 13 holinesse by touching, that being themselues touched by any vncleane thing, they receiued thence infection of vncleannesse. And if Christ himselfe should thus be honoured, where, in all the Christian world are such Vowes, Pilgrimages, and Deuotions in his name, as here to the supposed Ladie of Loretto? As if they would rather be Mariani then Christiani in their Religion. But who brought vs now to Loretto? Nay, who can but in reading the one, thinke of the other, both being  frequented so generally in Pilgrimages, Offerings, and I know not what superstitions? Only in this is Loretto worse, that it abuseth more holy names of God, and his Saints, to like vnholy holies. But of this subiect, that Reuerend and learned Deane, Dr. Sutcliffe hath largely and learnedly written, both in confutation of that impious Pamphlet ofCaluino-Turcismus Giff. Turec. Papismus, D. Sut. Giffords Caluino-Turcismus, and plainely paraleling the Mahumetans and Turkes in verie many points of their Religions. To him I referre the industrious Reader. Yea, the verie Narration of the Saracenicall and Turkish Rites by vs in this Booke, shall bee sufficient to them which know the Popish, in many things to discerne and acknowledge the Kindred, and like hellish descent both; like Sampsons Foxes, hauing their tayles knit together with fire-brands, which  both fill and emptie the world with their flames; howsoeuer their heads looke contrarie, one toward Christ, the other toward Mahomet. That which I speake of Popish, I vnderstand of that which our Aduersaries maintaine by authoritie (not from Scriptures, or the ancient
 Councels and Fathers, but) from the Popes pretended Supremacie and visible Monarchie, as Head and Vice-God in the Church; the Alcoran, whereof is his Decretals, Extrauagants, Consistorie, Constitutions, and such Canons asBecause at Trent nothing might bee decreed, but what was first sent and ordered from Rome: hence grew th^s Prou^rbe. their holy Ghost sent from Rome in a boxe, lately thundered at Trent besides, and against the Canonicall Scripture, which holy men of God writ as they were moued by the holy Ghost. But let vs backe to Medina. On the other side of the Citie are Tombes of the holy Mahumetans, Abubachar, Ottoman, Omar, which Bartema saith, were buried in the same Temple with Mahumet, and all vnder the earth. A daies iourney from Medina is a steepe mountaine, hauing no passage but one narrow path, which was made by Hali: who fleeing from the pursuing Christians, and hauing no way of escape, drew out his  sword, and diuided this mountaine, and so saued his life. The Captaine at his returne toWhen the Soldans raigned in Egypt, they had a Ceremonie after the Pilgrimage, to cut in pieces a C^mel which had carried their Alcoran in great solemnitie to the Soldans Pala^e: euery particle of the be^st, and of his furniture being esteemed, and reserued as a holy Relique: the same is now performed (saith De^sa) at Constantinople. The like w^s in Beniamins dayes at Bagedat: and I know not what Camel superstition is often ment oned in the Alcoran. M^cca and the Temple. R^be like, to the house at Loretto in Ang^l l^gends. The blacke stone. Zam Zam, Ismaels W^ll. Cairo, is with a sumptuous Feast receiued of the Basha, and presented with a garment of cloth of gold: he againe presenteth the Alcoran, out of the chest to the Basha to kisse, and then it is laid vp againe. By this time your pilgrimage hath more then wearied you. I haue made bold to trouble you a little longer, with this argument of Mahomets Meccan Pilgrimage, out of the Maronites collection from Arabike Authors.
Mecca chiefe Citie of Arabia Deserta, is called also in the Alcoran, Becca, the holy Citie of the Moslemans, both for Mahomeds reuelations there had, and for the Temple especially, called by them Kabe, or, The Square House, which they fable, was first built by Angels, and often visited by Adam himselfe: and lest it should bee destroied by the Floud, was lifted vp  to the sixth Heauen, called Dar-assalem (The habitation of peace) after the Floud, Abraham built another house like to the former, by the shadow thereof sent from heauen to him. Thus writeth Iacub Ben-Sidi Aali. This is a Chappell, not very large, of square figure; open with foure Gates, by one of which the Ministers haue accesse; the other are opened but once in the yeere. It glittereth all with Gold, and is couered with vests of Gold, an encompassed with elegant Iron-worke, to keepe off neere commers. No man may enter it but certaine Elders, which haue long beards to their breasts, and remaine there night and day. Neere to this Chappel is a large marble Floore adorned about with eight huge Lights, and sixe and thirtie Lamps of Gold, perpetually burning. Three pathes leade thereto whereon men and women  goe bare-foot to the Chappel, which they compasse seuen times with great reuerence, mumbling their deuotions; kisse the corners, sigh and implore the aide of Abraham and Mohamed. Round about all this space is a stately building of very elegant structure, as it were a wall; in which are numbred sixteene principall Gates to goe in and out, where hang innumerable Lamps and Lights of incredible greatnesse. Within this space betwixt the rewes of Pillars are Shops of Sellers, of Gemmes, Spices, Silkes, in incredible store from India, Arabia, Aethiopia: that it seemes rather the Mart of the World, then a Temple. Here doe men kisse and embrace with great zeale a certaine stone, which they call Hagiar Alasuad, or, The Blacke stone, which they say, is a Margarite of Paradise, the light whereof gaue lustre to all the Territorie of Mecca. Before this, saith Iacub Ben-Sidi Aali, Mohamed commanded to weepe, to aske God pardon for sinnes, and to crie with sighs and teares for ayde against their enemies.  After they haue visited that Chappel, and the Stone, they goe to another large Chappel within the Temple, where is the Well, called Zam Zam; which is (saith the said Au^hor) the Well which flowed from the feet of Ismael, when hee was thirstie and wept: which Hagar first seeing, cried out Zam Zam, in the Coptite or old Aegyptian Tongue; that is, Stay, stay. There are many which draw water thence and giue to the Pilgrimes, who are commanded to wash therewith their bodie and head three times to drinke thereof, and if they can, to carrie some of it with them, and to pray God for health and pardon of sinnes. To this building is added a Noble Schoole or Vniuersitie, A. H. 949. by Solyman who adorned it by his costs by maruellous structure, and endowed it with reuenues.
After these visitations, all the Pilgrimes goe to a certaine Temple on a Hill, ten miles from  the Citie, and flocking in great numbers, buy according to their abilitie, one or more Rams for sacrifice. And because some are of opinion, that the Mohamedans haue no sacrifices, we will relate what Iacub Ben-Sidi Aali hath written of their ceremonies.Mahumetan sacrifices. Dhahhla (so the Arabs call a Sacrifice) is a killing of beasts in the worship, and for the offering of God, and they are Lambs of sixe or seuen moneths at least; Camels of fiue yeeres, Bullockes of two yeeres. The males are to be chosen before females, and those cleane, white, infected by no naturall or violent defect, fatte, corpulent, horned. Euery man must kill his owne Sacrifices, and rippe them with his owne hands, except in vrgent necessities, and then he may substitute others to doe it for him. For euery one before they eate any thing, are bound to eate some peace of the Sacrifice; the rest, if they can, to giue cheerefully to the poore. They which are admitted to these Oblations, let them offer one Ram for themselues, another  for the soules of the Dead, another for Mahomed, that in the day of Iudgement he deliuer them from calamities. These Sacrifices are offered to God in imitation of Abraham,Lying Tradi^^on. which would haue offered his sonne Ismael to God; who going out of the Citie with him to a certa^^e Hill; called Mena,
 where he would haue offered him to God: but when the sword could not cut his necke, a white Ram appeared betwixt his hands, fat, and horned, which he sacrificed to God in stead of his sonne.
Territorie of Mecca.Whiles the Pilgrims are heere busied in their sacrifices, Beduine Arabs assault the Carauans, and robbing them, flee to the Hils, and inaccessible refuges, so swift as if they did flie. And although all Armes are forbidden in the Territorie of Mecca (which containeth on the East sixe miles, on the North twelue, on the West eighteene, on the South foure and twentie, in which respect Mecca and Medina are called Atharamain) yet they cease not to infest, and Pilgrims are here forced to Armes. This Territorie is barren for want of water and raine, hath very few Herbs and Plants, or other pleasures of Groues, Gardens, Vines, or greene obiects; but is roasted with the Sunne, both land and people. And this haply is the cause that no  man may breake a bough if they finde any Tree.Balsam brought from Gilead to Cairo, thence to Mecca. Only the shrubs of Balsam, brought hither from Cairo thriue well, and are now so propagated, that all the sweet liquor of Balsam is carried onely from this Citie, thorow all Regions in great plentie. Heere are store of Pigeons, which because they are of the stocke of that which came to Mahomeds eare (as the Moslemans fable) no man may take or scarre them. A certaine Scerif enioyeth the dominion of this Citie, and all the Land of Medina by inheritance, called Alamam-Alhascemi, that is, the Captaine or chiefe Hascemee,Scerif of Mecca. descended of Hascem great Grand-father of Mohamed; Who were neuer depriued of their dominion by the Ottoman or Soldan. Yea, the Ottoman calls not himselfe the Lord of Mecca and Medina, but the humble seruant. Yet this Scerif notwithstanding his reuenues and gifts by Pilgrims and Princes, through the Beduines spoiles, and  his kindreds quarrels seeking the Soueraigntie, is alway poore. Therefore doth the Ottoman bestow the third part of the reuenues of Egypt, and to protect the Pilgrims from the inuasions of the Arabs.
MedinaMedina. is called The Citie by Antonomasia, and Medina Alnabi, that is, The Citie of the prophet:Mohameds birth and life. because Mohamed, when he was forced to forsake his Countrey Mecca, betooke himselfe to this Citie, then called Iathreb, and was made Lord thereof. It is an errour that he was borne here, for he was borne and brought vp at Mecca.


CHAP. VII. Of the Successors of MAHOMET, of their different Sects, and of the dispersing of that Religion, through the World.
MAHOMET hauing with Word and Sword published his Alcoran (as you haue heard) his followers after his death succeeding in his place, succeeded him in tyrannie. Eubocar, surnamed Abdalla, vndertooke the defence of that  faithlesse Faith and Kingdome, and that (as his Predecessor had done) partly by subtiltie, partly by force. For when as Mahumets Disciples had buried their new Religion, with their old Master, except a few of his kindred, hee applied his wits to recall them; and whereasArab. Nob. ref. Hali, Mahomets neerest kinsman and sonne-in-law disagreed from him, and was perswaded by the Iewes to professe himselfe a Prophet, with promise of their best aide and assistance: Eubocar (or Ebuber) reconciled him, and as the Arabian Chronicle witnesseth, conuerted many Infidels, and slue the gaine-sayers. He raigned one yeere, and three moneths and thirteene dayes. The next successour Aomar (saith the same Author, LeoLeo. l. 1. termeth him Homar) ordained their prayers in the moneth Ramazan, and that the Alcoran should be read through, which he caused to be written out, and vnited in one booke: He conquered Egypt by Hanir his Captaine; after that Damasco, Ierusalem,  Gaza, and a great part of Syria were subdued. He raigned ten yeeres and sixe moneths.Odmen. 12. Hali. 4. ye. Alhacen fiue m neths and twenty dayes. Moaui 17. yeeres. Iezid. three yeeres eight moneths, who say that the Prophet commanded not to blame, but to pray for and to obey rulers, though wicked: for yee shall haue mer^y, and they punishment. Odmen or Ozimen succeeded, and raigned twelue yeeres, and after him Hali; and next to him his sonne Alhacem; and then Moaui the great Conquerour, etc. These foure Eubocar, Aomar, Ozimen, and Hali, are the foure great Doctors of the Mahumetan Law: and Mahomet before his death prophesied that they should succeed him, and of their worthinesse.
But as Mahomet had pretended the name of Gabriel, to the dreames of Sergius, and other Apostata's of the Christians and Iewes, disagreeing both with the truth and themselues: so it was not long, that this vntempered mortar would hold together these buildings. For  theRef. Ara. Nob. Alcoran being (according to diuers Copies thereof) read diuersly, was cause of different  Sects among them. Ozimen, to preuent the danger hereof, commanded that all the Copies of their Law should be brought and deliuered into the hands of Zeidi and Abdalla:
 who conferring their Copies, should make one booke, and where they dissented, should read according to the Copie of Corais. Thus these two according to the Kings Edict, to stablish an vniformitie in the reading of the Alcoran, hauing out of all those Copies framed one to be Athenticall, burned all others. Yet were they deceiued of their hopes, partly, because Hali, Abitalib, and Ibenmuzod, would not bring in their bookes, of which that of Hali was the same which Mahumet had left, and was after by the Iewes altered, putting out and in at their pleasure: and partly, because that booke, which they had thus culled out of the rest, to remain Canonical, was lost, and of the foure Copies which they had written therof, by fire and negligence al perished. Eletragig would haue vsed the like policie after; but this many-headed serpent,  which could not in the shel be killed, much lesse in his riper growth could be reformed.
Those foure Doctors aforesaid, emulous of each other, intending their owne priuate ends, sowed the seeds then, which fructifie in their venemous multiplication till this day,G. Bot. Be^^ Curio call^th the^e Sects Mel^ei, followed in Afric^: Asafij professed in Arabia and Syria; Arambeli, in Armenia and Persia; Buani^^, in Al^xandria and Assyria; and all foure are followed in C^iro. lib. 5. 1. Hali or Halli was Author of the Sect Imemia, which was embraced of the Persians, Indians, and of many Arabians, and the Gelbines of Africa. Ozimen, or Odmen, began the Sect Baanesia or Xefaia, and hath in diuers Countries his followers. Homar founded the Anesia, followed of the Turkes, Syrians, and in Zahara in Afrike. Ebocar (otherwise called Ebuber, or Abubequer) taught the Sect Melchia, generally possessing Arabia and Africa. These are holden as Saints in the Saracene Kalender, asSca^. E. T. l. 4. Scaliger testifieth, who had one in Semiarabike and Persian,  wherein ouer against the 27. of December was written, the death of Phetima) she was the daughter of Muhamed) God haue mercy on her. Against the 10. of Ianuary, the death of Abu-Boker; God haue mercy on him: and so of the rest. Against the 16. of Nouember, the beginning of the fast Caphar: so they call the Christians: and on the 25. of December, the birth of Iesus. On the 17. of Ianuary, the birth of Moses: Which I mention to shew what honor they ascribe to them or rather that dishonor, which in this co^fusion of light with darknes, the Prince of darknes in the form of an Angel of light, doth vnto them. Fro^ these 4. in proces of time arose other68. S^cts Sarrac. 68. Sects of name, besides other pedling factions of smaller reckoning. Amongst the rest the Morabites haue bin famous; liuing for the most part as Heremites, and professing a morall Philosophie, with principles different from the Alcoran. One of these not many yeers since, shewing  the name of Mahomet in his brest (there imprinted with Aqua fortis or some such like matter) raised by a great number of Arabians in Afrike, and laid siege to Tripolis: where being betraied by one of his Captaines, his skin was sent for a present to the grand Signior. These Morobites affirm, that when Hali fought, he killed a 100000. Christia^s with one stroke of his sword, which was a 100. cubits in length. The Cobtini are a sect ridiculous. One of them shewed himselfe riding in the Country of Algier, on a Reed, reyned and bridled as a horse; much honoured, for that on this Horse, this Asse had (as he said) rid an 100. leagues in one night. R. Moses AegyptiusMoreb Neb. l. 1. c. 70. and l. 3. c. 18. and 24. writeth of two Sects of Moores, the one called Seperatists, the other Intelligents, or Vnderstanders, both followed in their opinions by many Iewes. These later were of opinion, that nothing in the world commeth to passe by chance or accident, neither in generall nor particular, but all are disposed by the will and intent of God, as well the fall of a leafe, as the  death of a man. The Seperatists in a contrary extreme, allow to man and beast a freedome, and that God rewardeth all creatures according to their merits or demerits: his prouidence extending it selfe to the fall of the leaues, to the way of the Ants: and if one be borne defectiue, it is better for him, then if he had bin perfect, and so if any aduersitie befall him; for his reward shal be the greater in the world to com: yea, the beast which is slaughtered, and the Ants, Flea, or Louse shall not lose his reward from the Creator: the Mouse also which hath not sinned, and is killed of the Cat, shall there be recompenced. (Now beasts pray for their soules, and Fleas and Lice prey vpon their bodies which hatched this beastly lousie Diuinitie.) The Intelligent beleeueth, that it is conuenient that men be punished in this life, and for euer in hell, because the Creator would: the Seperatist thinketh that vniust; and that whatsoeuer is punished in this  life, shall be rewarded in the next, because such is the Creators wisdome. Neither may we beleeue the Rabbine, who reciting 5. differing opinions concerning the prouidence of God: first, of the Epicures, which exclude it wholly: secondly, of Aristotle: that it descended not beneath the Moon: thirdly, of the Intelligents: fourthly, of the Seperatists: fiftly, his own, which he attributeth to the law of Moses, that euery man hath free-wil, and all good befals him in reward, al euil for punishme^t, and what measure any man meteth, shal be measured to him again: but for other creatures, beasts, plants, and their operations, as of a spider catching a fly, and the likeGod is a co-worker in euery worke, of whom, and in whom all things are and moue: and not a sparrow nor a haire from our head falleth to the ground, without diuine prouidence. Vid. Zanch. de Nat. D. 5. c. 1. he attributeth with Aristotle vnto chance, and not to diuine prouidence, which he appropriateth in things below vnto man. These opinions he ascribeth; that of Aristotle to Iob, that of the Seperatists to Bildad, that of Sophar to the Intelligents, that of Eliphaz is the same with his own: and  then let him with Eliphaz sacrifice to exipiate it. I. Leo. l. 3. writeth, that one Elefacin had written at large of the Mahumetan sects: of which he reckoneth 72. principall (which agreeth with our former number) euery one accounting his owne to be good and true, in which a
 man may attaine saluation. And yet Leo there addeth, that in this age there are not found aboue two.But two principall factions Mahumetan, at this day. One is that of Leshari; which in all Turkie, Arabia and Africa is embraced: the other Imamia; currant in Persia and Corosan (of which in his proper place more.) So that by Leo's iudgement, all which follow the rule Leshari or Hashari, are Catholike Mahumetans; although of these the same Author affirmes, that in Cairo and all Egypt are foure Religions different from each other, in Spirituall or Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and also concerning their Ciuill and Canon Law; all founded on the Mahumetan Scripture in times past, by foure learned men, diuersly construing the generall rules to such particulars, as seemed to them fitter for their followers; who disagreeing in opinion, agree in affection, and conuerse together,  without hatred or vpbraiding each other. As for those other Sects, it seemeth that they are, for the most part, long since vanished: and those differences which remaine, consist rather in diuersitie of rule, and order of profession, then in differing Sects and Heresies of Religion: except in some few, which yet remaine, of whichI. Leo. l 3. Leo thus reporteth: Fourescore yeeres after Mahumet, one Elhesenibu Ahilhasen gaue certaine rules to his Disciples, contrarie to the Alcoran principles, but writ nothing. About a hundred yeeres after Elharit Ibnu Esed of Bagaded writ a booke vnto his Disciples, condemned by the Calipha and Canonists. But about fourescore yeeres after that, another great Clerke reuiued the same doctrine, and had many followers; yet hee and they were therefore condemned to death. But obtaining to haue triall of his opinions by disputation, he ouerthrew his Aduersaries, the Mahometane  Lawyers: and the Califa fauoured the said Sect, and erected Monasteries for them. Their Sect continued, till Malicsah, of the Nation of the Turkes, persecuted the same. But twenty yeeres after it was againe renewed, and one Elgazzuli (a learned man) writ seuen bookes, reconciling these Sect ries and the Lawyers together: which reconciliation continued till the comming of the Tartars: and Asia and Afrike was full of these Reformers of their Law. In old time none but learned men might be admitted Professors hereof: bu^ within these last hundred yeeres euery ignorant Idiot professeth it, saying, That learning is not necessary, butWhat difference herein, betweene the Mahumetane and our Seperatist. the holy Spirit doth reueale to them which haue cleane hearts, the knowledge of the truth. These contrary to the Alcoran sing loue-songs and dances, with some phantasticall extasies: affirming themselues to be rauished of diuine loue. These are great gluttons: they may  not marry, but are reputed Sodomites.
The same our Author writeth of some which teach, that by good workes, fasting, and abstinence, a man may attaine a Nature Angelicall, hauing his minde so purified that he cannot sinne, although he would. But he must first passe through fifty degr^es of Discipline: And although he sinne before hee be past these fifty degrees, yet GOD doth not impute it to him. These obserue strange and inestimable Fasts at the first; after they liue in all pleasures of the world. Their rule was written in foure volumes, by a learned and eloquent man, Esschrauar: and by Ibnul-farid, another Author, in exact and most le^rned Verse. That the Spheres, Elements, Planets, and Starres, are one God, and that no Faith nor Law can be erroneous, because that all men (in their mindes) intend to worship that which is to bee worshipped. And  they beleeue that the knowledge of GOD is contained in one man, who is called Elcorb, elected and partaker of GOD, and in knowledge as GOD. There are other forty men amongst them, called Elauted, that is,Tronchi. Dunces, because of their lesse knowledge. When the Elcorb or Elcoth dyeth, his Successour is chosen out of these: and into that vacant place of the fortie, they chuse one out of another number of seuentie. They haue a third inferiour number of a hundred threescore and fiue (their Title I remember not) out of which they chuse, when any of the threescore and tenne die. Their Law or Rule enioyneth them to wander through the World in manner of Fooles, or of great Sinners, or of the vilest amongst men. And vnder this cloke many are most wicked men, going naked without hiding their shame, and haue to deale wi^h women in the open and common streets like beasts. Of this base sort  are many in Tunis, and farre more in Egypt, and most of all in Cairo. I my selfe (saith our Author) in Cairo, in the street called Bain Elcasraim, saw one of them with mine eyes, take a beautifull Dame comming out of the Bath, and laid her downe in the middest of the street, and carnally knew her, and presently when hee had left the woman, all the people ranne to touch her clothes, because a holy man had touched them. And they said, that this Saint seemed to doe a sinne, but that hee did it not. Her husband knowing of it, reckoned it a rare fauour and blessing of GOD, and made solemne feasting and gaue almes for that cause. But the Iudges, which would haue punished him for the same, were like to bee slaine of the rude multitude: who haue them in great reputation of sanctitie, and euery day giue them gifts and presents.
There are another sort that may be termed Caballists: which fast strangely, not doe they  eate the flesh of any creature, but haue certaine meates ordained and appointed for euery houre of the day and night, and certain particular praiers, according to the dayes and months,
 numbring their said Prayers: and vse to carry vpon them some square things, painted with Characters and Numbers. They affirme, that the good Spirits appeare, and acquaint them with the affayres of the world. An excellent Doctor, named Boni, framed their rule and prayers, and how to make their squares: and it seemeth to me (who haue seene the worke) to be more Magicall then Cabalasticall. One booke sheweth their prayers and fastings: the second, their square: the third, the vertue of the fourescore and ninteene names of GOD, which I saw in the hand of a Venetian Iew at Rome. There is another rule in these Sects, called Suuach; of certaine Hermites which liue in Woods, and solitary places, feeding on nothing but hearbs and wilde fruites, and none can particularly know their life, because of this solitarinesse.  Thus farre Leo.
Beniamin TudelensisIn Itiner^ric. Assassines, of these see l. 2. c. 22. telleth of a Nation, neere to Mount Libanus, which hee calleth Hhassissin, which varied from the ordinary sort of Ismalites, and followed a peculiar Prophet of their owne, whose word they obeyed, whether for life or for death. They called him Hheich al Hhassissin: his abode was at Karmos. They were a terror to all about them, sawing asunder euen the Kings if they tooke any. They warred with the Frankes (the Christians which then held Ierusalem) and the King of Tripolis. Their dominion extended eight dayes iourney. Zachuth mentioneth oneA. Zach. Chro. Serac. Baba, which about the 630. yeere of the Hegira, fained himselfe a Prophet sent of God, vnder which colour hee gathered together a great Armie, wherewith he filled all Asia with slaughter and spoile, slaying Christians and Ismaelits without  difference: till Giatheddin King of Gunia, ouerthrew and destroyed him and his Host.
Besides the former; they haue other Heremites of another sort; one is mentioned by Leo,Leo lib. 4. who had fiue hundred Horse, a hundred thousand Sheepe, two hundred Beeues, and of offerings and almes, betwixt foure and fiue thousand Duckets, his fame great in Asia and Afrike, his Disciples many, and fiue hundred people dwelling with him at his charges; to whom he enioyneth not penance, nor any thing: but giueth them certaine names of God, and biddeth them with the same to pray vnto him so many times a day. When they haue learned this, they returne home: he hath a hundred Tents for strangers, his Cattell, and Family: hee hath foure wiues, besides slaues, and (by them) many children sumptuously apparrelled. His  fame is such, that the King of Telensin is afraide of him: and he payeth nothing to any: such veneration haue they towards him, reputing him a Saint. Leo saith, hee spake with him, and that this Heremite shewed him Magick-bookes, and he thought that this his great estimation did come, by false working of the true science; so the Heremite termed Magicke.
But these Heremites we cannot so well reckon a Sect, as a Religious Order; of which sort there are diuers in these Mahumetane Nations, as in our ensuing discourse shall appeare: To returne therefore to the consideration of the meanes vsed to preuent the varietie of Sects among them: The Caliphs sought to remedie these inconueniences by their best policie.Io. Bot. Ben. Moaui, about the yeere of our Lord 770. assembled a generall Councell of their learned men to consult about an Vniformity; but they disagreeing among themselues, hee chose six men of the most learned, and shut them vp in a house together with their Scriptures, commanding  them that out of those Copies disagreeing (as you haue heard) they should chuse that should seeme best. These reduced the Doctrine of Mahomet into six bookes; forbidding any on paine of death to speake or write otherwise of their Law. But because the Arabians of subtle and piercing wit, which studied Philosophy in the Vniuersities of Bagdet, Marocco, Cordoua, and other places, could not but spie and discerne the mad folly of the law, so palpable to any reasonable iudgement: ItFr. Richard. cap. 13. was therefore ordained, that the Phylosophy Lecture should be taken away, and in place thereof they should read the Alcoran; prouiding, for all these Students of their Law, their expences out of the publike charge, and inhibiting all further studie in Philosophy: insomuch that they now (saith our Author, who himselfe was a Student in that Vniuersity) repute him not a good Saracen, who  is addicted to that studie. This Frier Richard mentioneth another Prophet, named Solem, had in estimation with these Babylonians, which was after slaine by the Tartars. He and Cardinall Cusanus affirme, that the Saracens of the East differ in their Alcoran from those of the West,This difference is in the Latine translation, not in the Arabike, as Erpenius hath obserued. making the first fiue Chapters but one; and that they differ in the exposition thereof, and in the same Schooles or Vniuersities, one Sect condemneth another.
But in these times the Mahumetane Professors are chiefly distinguished by the seuerall Nations; of which are foure principall: the Arabians, Persians, Turkes, and Tartars (to which wee may adde the Mogore, as a fifth; whom the Iesuites, in their Epistles, report to halt from his former Mahumetisme, and to incline to Gentilisme.) Of all these, the Arabians are most zealous in their superstition; the Persians most agree to Reason and  Nature; the Tartars are more Heathenish and simple, the Turkes are the freest and most Martiall. The Arabians account it their peculiar glory, that Mahumet was of that Nation, and that Mecca and Medina are there seated: and therefore haue laboured in the dayes of
 their former puissance by the sword; since, by their traffique and preaching, to spread their Mahumetisme through the World. Their first Seducers had possessed Syria and Palestina: Homar had added Egypt, and in a short time their Successors had preuailed in Asia, Afrike, and Europe, as weSup. c. 2. haue before shewed. All Mahumetans are called by vs Saracens, which Erpenius in his Annotations on his Ioseph, saith, is a name to them vnknowne (so is China to the Chinois, Peru, to the Peruans, etc.) but giuen them by others. They call themselues Muslimos, or Muslemans, of a word which signifieth Beleeuers (as one would say in their sense, Catholike and Orthodoxe beleeuers.)
They haue beene such in Armes: and in diligence of Preaching they haue beene as forward, and so continue. Seuen hundred yeeres since, Perimal raigning in Malabar; they there  sowed their Tares:Io. Bot. Ben. and the more easily to take those Ethnikes in their net, they tooke their daughters in marriage; a matter of much consequence, in regard of their wealth, and practised of them to this day. They were Authors of great gaine vnto them by their trades and traffique for Spi^ery: and were suffered to inhabite, and plant Colonies amongst them. By their meanes, Calicut, of a small thing, became a great and rich Citie. And Perimal himselfe was peruerted by them to their faith: who zealously inclined to their perswasions, resolued to end his dayes at Mecca, and put himselfe on the voyage, with some ships of Pepper, and other things of price, but perished by tempest in the way. From Malabar they passed to the Maldiuae, and Zeilan, Somatra, Iaua, Molucca, the Philippinaes, and in the Continent to Cambaia, Bengala, Siam, Malucca, Ior, Pam, and the huge Kingdome of China, preaching and  planting their superstitions, as in the particular Histories of these Nations shall further appeare. They are in this respect so zealous, that euen the Arabian Mariners will stay behinde in the Countries of the Ethnikes, there to diuulge this their Sect: and in the yeere 1555. one of them pierced as farre as Iapon, there to haue laied their Leauen: but the Portugalls in these Easterne parts, treading in the same steps, by their traffique and preachings, haue much hindered their proceedings. The Tartars, Persians, and Turkes, require longer and seuerall discourses in th^ir due place; and first, we will speake of them which are first in this ranke, the greatest of all Mahumetane States, the Turkes.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Turkish Nation: their Originall, and Proceedings.

@. I. Of the Turkish Name, and first Originall.
ALthough some may thinke, that I haue beene so tedious, in the relation of the  Mahumetan opinions and superstitions, that, to speake any thing more, would seeme but as powring water into a full Sea: Yet, because there is in this World nothing certaine, but vncertaintie; it being diuine prerogatiue to be yesterday, to day, the same for euer: and that this Saracenicall Religion hath sustained her chances and changes, according to the diuersitie of times and places where it is and hath beene professed: so doe I hold it fit, as wee haue seene the foundation, to behold also the frames and fabriques thereon builded, and from that Fountaine (or sinke-hole rather) of superstitition, to lead you along the gutters and streames thence deriued. And because the Turkes are preeminent in all those things, which this profession accounteth eminent, it is meetest to giue them the first place heere, which elsewhere  take it: and after we haue set downe a briefe Historie of that Nation, and the proceedings of their state, to ascribe their theorie and opinions, and then their practice and rites of Religion. But before we come to the discouerie of their Religion, it is not amisse to search the beginning and increase of this Nation.
The name of Turkes signifies (saith Chitraeus) Shepheards, or Heard-men: and such it seemeth was their ancient profession, as of the rest of the Scythians vnto this day. NicephorusLib. 18. c. 30. (and before him Simocatta, from whom Nicephorus borroweth it) speaketh of the Turkes, and placeth them about Bactria: their chiefe Citie he calleth Taugast, which is supposed to be the worke of Alexander. Their Religion, hee saith, at that time was to worship  the Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth, which they adore, and sing Hymnes to. They acknowledge God the maker of Heauen and Earth, to whom they sacrifice Horse, Kine, and Sheepe: they haue Priests which diuine things to come. The Prince of Taugast, they called the sonne
 of God: They worship Images. The Prince spendeth the night with seuen hundreth women. The Tartars haue now possessed the same Countrie; but long before, the same rites, as you may reade in our Historie of them. To deriue them (as some doe) from Troians and Iewes, is somewhat farreTurci quasi Teucri. Richer. de reb. Turc. and Mart. Barletius de Scodrensi expug. lib. 1. mention, this opinion, and Andr. a Lacuna. fetched: nor is there much likelihood that they should receiue their name of TurcaLonicer. Chr. Turc. to. 1. l. 1. a Persian Citie: the name is ancient, and applied byPom. Mela. l. 1. c. vlt. Plin. l. 6. c. 7. Mela and Plinie to a Nation of the Scythians, and their original is accounted Scythian by theLaon. Chalcondyl. lib. 1. Io. Bapt. Egnatius. Nic. Euboic. Sagun. Ep. Knolls, etc. most and best Authors. Beniamin Tudelensis calleth them alway by the name Togarma. There are which bring a long Genealogie from Noahs Arke, vnto the Ottoman Family: herein disagreeing, while some wil haue Magog, others Tubal the Author of their Nation. LeunclauiusI. Leunel. hist. Musulm. reciteth  and refuteth the same. He writeth the name Iurki, alleaging Herodotus for his Author: and citeth many Authors to proue, that they descended of the Vnui or Vngri, which were called Turkes, of which there were two sorts, one Westerly in Pannonia, another Easterly neere Persia, called by the Persians Magores, he concludeth, that the Vnni or Iurchi came from Iuchra or Iuchria (whence the name Iurchi might easily be deflected to Iurchi) beyond Tanais; and first after they had forsaken their owne Countrie, settled themselues neere Moeotis, from whence they passed to Chazaria, and some went Westward to Pannonia, some Eastward to Armenia, and thence into Persia.
Many probable Arguments might bee brought, to proue that they descended of the Scythians,  whose wandering shepheardly-life, both the name, and their practice (in old times, and in some places still) expresseth. The first Expedition and militarie employment, which I haue read of the Turkes, (except what the feare of them compelled the Persians vnto, as in their Historie wee shall after see) wasP. Bizar. hist. Pers. lib. 5. vnder Varamus a rebellious Persian, aboue a thousand yeeres since, when Cosroes was King of Persia, and Mauritius the Roman Emperour: at what time many of them were slaine, and many taken, which confessed, that famine had forced them to those warres, for which cause they marked themselues with a blacke Crosse; a Ceremonie which they said they had learned of the Christians, thinking thereby to expell hunger. This hungrie Nation hath since beene a greedie and insatiate deuourer of  Nations. Another expedition of theirs (which some reckon the first)Knoll. Turc. Hist. was in the yeere 755. or after another account 844. at which time, passing through the Georgian Countrie, then called Iberia, they first seized on a part of the greater Armenia, which their posteritie holdeth at this day, called of them Turcomania. In this wide and spacious Countrie they romed vp and downe, without certaine habitation, a long time with their Families and Heards of cattell, like the ancient Scythian Nomades; and the Tartars, and the same Turcoman Nation at this day. Their language also, as Megiserus in his Turkish Grammar sheweth,Hieron. Megisarus Ling. Tu^c. Institut. literae sunt ijs 31. hath great affinitie, with the Tartarian, as also with the Persian (neere whom, and sometimes, as now will appeare, amongst them, they liued.) But from the Arabike it differeth altogether. Yet in their holies they most vse the Arabike, by reason of the Alcoran written in that language: likewise they vse the Arabike Letters and Prickes. The beginning of their greatnesse is thus  by Christian Historians related.


@. II. Of the Turkish Kingdome in Persia, and their other Conquests.
WHen as the Saracens Empire grew now vnweldie, through her owne greatnesse, and the Soldans, which were wont to conquer for the Chaliph, began now to share with him in his large Dominion: Mahomet (then Sultan, or Soldan of Persia) was for this cause hardly beset with the Chaliph of Babylon; assailed also on the other side by the Indians. He sought to strengthen himselfe against these enemies,  with the new friendship of these Turkes, of whom hee obtained for his aide three thousand hardie Souldiers,Hist. Musulman. lib. 1. Theodor. Gaza de Orig. Turcar. Epist. Io. Bapt. Egnat. de Orig. Turc. But see also sup. c. 2. which is more likely. For I read not of Pisasiris in all the Catalogue of their Chalifs. Mirkond writes of many Turkish incursions into Persia before this. vnder the conduct of Togra Mucalet, the sonne of Mikeil, a valiant Captaine, and chiefe of the Selzuccian Tribe or Familie, whom the Greekes commonly call Tangrolipix, and some Selduc, or Sadoc. By the helpe of this Tangrolipix Mahomet the Persian Sultan ouercame Pisasiris the Caliph. The Turkes, after this warre, desiring leaue to passe ouer the Riuer Araxis to their Country-men, were both denied, and threatned, if they againe should seeke to depart. Whereupon they withdrew themselues into the Desart of  Carauonitis; liuing there, and thence making roades into the Countries adioyning. Mahumet sent against them twentie thousand men, which by a sudden surprize in the night, Tangrolipix defeated, and furnished himselfe with their spoiles. And now durst Tangrolipix shew his face in the field, where his Armie was increased by the resort of lawlesse persons, seeking after spoile. Mahomet on the other side, impatient of his losse, put out the eyes of the Captaines,
 which had the leading of the Armie, and threatned to attire the Souldiers, that had fled, in womens apparell; and raising another great Armie, set forward against Tangrolipix, who was now fiftie thousand strong, and was presently made stronger by those threatned Souldiers, who fled from their Lord vnto him. They met at Ispahan (a Citie of Persia) and there Mahomet falling with his Horse, brake his necke: vpon which mischance both Armies comming to agreement, by common consent proclaimed TangrolipixTangrolipix first Sultan amongst the Turkes; An. Do. 1030. some call him Tangrolipix and some Tancroipix. Sultan in his stead; and so made him King of Persia, and the Dominion thereunto pertaining, which was done Anno 1030.
Tangrolipix opened the passages of Araxis to the rest of his Countrie-men, whom hee exalted  to the highest places of command, so bridling the Persians, and he and his receiuing in their new Conquests the yoke of the Mahumetan Religion. Ambition inciting him to further exploits, he warred also vpon Pisasiris the Chaliph: and after diuers ouerthrowes, slue him, and seized on his state. Hee sent Cutlu-Muses his Kinsman against the Arabians, by whom hee was discomfited: whereat aggrieued, hee went against them himselfe, but with like successe. Hee sent Asan his brothers sonne to inuade Media, who in that enterprise was slaine: he sent againe Habraime Alim his brother, with an Armie of an hundred thousand men, who tooke prisoner Liparites Gouernour of Iberia (who came to aide the Emperours Lieutenant in Media) whom Tangrolipix frankely set free, and sent his Embassadour to the Emperour, proudly demanding him to become his subiect.  
Such haps, and such hopes had Tangrolipix, the first Turke that euer was honoured with a Diademe. His sonneKnolles Turkish Historie. G. Tyr. see sup. l. 2. c. vlt. and successour Axan tooke Diogenes the Emperour of Constantinople prisoner in the field: But Cutlu-Muses, with his Cousin Melech (who in his Fathers dayes had fled into Arabia) rebelling and taking armes against him; as Axan was readie to ioyne battell with them, the Caliph (who retained the highest place still in their superstition, although dispoyled of his Temporalities) setting aside all his Pontificall formalitie, whereby he was bound not to goe out of his owne house, thrust himselfe betweene these Armies: and with the reuerence of his place, and person, together with his perswasions, moued them to desist, and to stand to his arbitrement: which was, that Axan the Sultan should still enioy his Dominions entirely: And that Cutlu-Muses, and his sonnes aided by him, should inuade  the Constantinopolitan Empire, and should be absolute, and onely Lords of whatsoeuer they could gaine thereof. There was neuer any thing to that impietie more commodious, nor to our Religion more dangerous. For by this meanes Cutlu-Muses, with his sonnes in a short time conquered all Media, with a great part of Armenia, Cappadocia, Pontus, and Bithynia; which their designes were much furthered, by treasons and dissentions in the Greeke Empire. Axan the Sultan also gaue to his Kinsman Ducat and Melech, the gouernement of Aleppo, and Damasco, with the adioyning parts of Syria, by that meanes to encroach vpon the Egyptian Caliph, which accordingly they in short time did.
But these their haughtie attempts were stayed, and being now in the flowre, were cut sh^rter by that fortunate ExpeditionThe memorable Expedition of the Christian Princes into the holy Land. Historia belli sa^ri G. Tyrij. and many others write at large of these W^rres vide Gesta Dei per Francos. see also sup. l. 2. vlt. of the Christian Princes of the West, agreed vpon at  the Councell of Claremont, and performed by Gualter Sensauier; Peter the Hermite, first and principall mouer hereof; Godfrey, Duke of Lorraine, with his two brethren Eustace and Baldwin, of the honourable house of Buillon; Hugh, surnamed the Great, brother to Philip the French King; Raymond and Robert, Earles of Flanders; Robert of Normandie, sonne to William the Conquerour; Stephen de Valois, Earle of Chartiers; Ademar the Popes Legate; Bohemund Prince of Tarentum, and others, conducting, as the most receiued opinion is, three hundred thousand Souldiers, in defence of the Christian Faith, against the Turkes and Saracens, which both ouerthrew the Turkes in the lesser Asia, and recouered also the holy Land. The Principalitie, or (as some stile it) the Kingdome of Antioch was giuen him by common consent to Bohemund Prince of Tarentum; the Kingdome of Ierusalem, to Robert: who  (hearing of his Fathers death) refused it, in hope of England; and Godfrey of Buillon was saluted King.
The Turkes and Saracens, seeking to recouer that which they had lost, lost also themselues; a hundred thousand of them being slaine in one battell: the like successe had the Turkes after against Conrade the Emperour, at Meander: leauing for trophees and triumphall arches to the Christians, huge heapes, or hills rather, of their bones. Hereunto helped the dissentions among the Turkes, and diuisions of their state among diuers brethren. The Egyptians also paied tribute to the Christians: which Dargan the Sultan detaining, hee was by Almericus, the King of Ierusalem ouerthrowne in battell. Noradine the Turke, King of Damasco, sent thither also Saracon to aide Sanar the Sultan (before expulsed) to recouer his state from this Dargan: but hee hauing won certaine Townes, kept them to himselfe, so that  Sanar betooke him to the patronage of Almericus, who ouerthrew Saracon in battell, and after besieged and tooke Alexandria, and Pelusium, seeking also to conquer Egypt to himselfe:
 but indeed (as the euent proued) so subuerted his owne state. For Sanar sought helpe of Saracon, and for feare of both their forces, Almericus left Egypt. Saracon, moued with ambition, treacherously slew the Sultan, and by the Caliph was appointed Sultan, the first of the Turkes that euer enioyed the same, to whom Saladine his Nephew succeeded. Hee (not respecting the Maiestie of the Caliph, as the Sultans before had done) strucke out his braines with his Horse-mans Mace, and rooted out all his posteritie; the better to assure himselfe, and his Turkish successours in the possession of that Kingdome, vnder whom it continued to the time of the Mamalukes. Noradine also the Turke being dead, the Nobilitie disdaining the gouernement of Melechsala his sonne (yet but a youth) betrayedDamasco betrayed to Saladine. that state vnto  Saladine. And thus did he hem in the Kingdome of Ierusalem on both sides: and not long after, Aleppo was betraied vnchristianly into his hands by a traitor, which gouerned the same for the Christians: Neither was it long, before he had (through discord and treason amongst the Christians) obtainedIerusalem lost againe, Anno 1187. Ierusalem it selfe, Anno 1187. and after Ascalon, and Antioch also: Neither could the Christians of the West euer recouer the possession of that Kingdome; the cause continuing the same, which before had lost it, viz. dissention and treacherie, as the examples of Richard and Edward (first of those names) Kings of this Land doe shew.
About 1202. yeeres after Christ, the Tartars (of whom in their due place) hauing conquered East, West, North, and South, among others, ouerthrew that Togrian Kingdome of the  Turkes in Persia, one hundred and seuentie yeeres before founded by Tangrolipix. The Turks which remained (driuen to seeke shelter from this violent storme) fled out of Persia into Asia the lesse: where Cutlu-Muses his successours (their Country-men) enioyed some part of the Countrie. And there many of them arriuing vnder the conduct of Aladin, the sonne of Cei Husreu, descended also of the Selzuccian Fam^ly in Persia, taking the opportunitie offered by the discord of the Latines, with the Greekes, and the Greekes among themselues, seized vpon Cilicia, with the Countries thereabout: and there first at Sebastia, and afterward at Iconium, erected their new Kingdome, bearing the name of the AladinHist. Musul. man. l. cunclauij lib. 1. Kings or Sultans.
 The Tartars, vnder the conduct of Haalon, sent by Mango the great Cham, hauing conquered and starued the Chaliph of Babylon (as is before) ouerthrew the Turkish Kingdome of Damasco, and racedAn D. 1200. Aleppo; the other arme of this faire and farre spreading Tree, being surprized by the Mamaluke slaues, who after Haalons departure, recouered Syria and Palaestina, and were againe with great slaughter dispossessed of the same by CassanesHaiton. A^men. a Tartarian Prince, who repaired Ierusalem, and gaue it to the Christians of Armenia, and other the Easterne Countries. But Cassanes retyring into Persia to pacifie new broiles, the Sultan recouered the same; the Christians of the West neglecting the iust defence thereof, specially through the pride and contention of Boniface the Pope (contrarie to his name) filling a great part of Europe with faction and quarrells.


 @. III. Of the Ottoman Turkes, their originall and proceedings.
THe Turkes in Asia paid tribute to the Tartar Cham, till (succession in the bloud of Aladin failing) this Kingdome was diuersly rent, euery one catching so much as his might could bestow on his ambition. The greatest of these sharers wasKnolles Turkish Historie. one Caraman Alusirius, who tooke vnto himselfe the Citie Iconium, with all the Countrie of Cilicia, and some part of the frontiers of Lycaonia, Pamphylia, Caria, and the greater  Phrygia, as farre as Philadelphia: all which was after him called Caramania. Next neighbour and sharer to him was Saruchan: of whom Ionia Maritima is called Saruchanili. The greatest part of Lydia, with some part of the greater Mysia, Troas, and Phrygia fell to Carasius, called of him Carasi-ili: some part of Pontus, and the Countrey of Paphlagonia fell to the sonnes of Omer, which Countrey is called Bolli. These all were of the Selzuccian Family. But the foundations of farre higher fortunes, were then laid much lower by diuine prouidence, exalting Ottoman of the Oguzian Tribe or Family, who then held one onely poore Lordship, called Suguta in Bythinia, not farre from Olympus, giuen before to his father Erthogrul in meed of good seruice: which he increasing, by winning somewhat from the weaker Christians his neighbours, afterwards erected into a Kingdome, which hath deuoured so  great a part of the world, as is at this day subiect to the Turkish greatnesse. When the Tartars chased (as is said) the Turkes out of their Persian Kingdome, which Tangrolipix had there established, one Solyman a Turke (of the Ogusian Tribe) reigned in MachanLeunol. histor. Musul. l. 2. Iac. Boiss^rdi Vitae and Icones Sultan Turc. His pedigree is thus reckoned, Oguzan, Oguzez, G^okolpes, Versaiobes, Tectomur, ^laces Ago, Bakis Aga, Bosunger, Oicoluces, Bainder, Cusulbuga, Cabiel^es, Soleimen some m^ke Ottoman to bee of base parentage: but not so probably. ouer a
 small Realme, which for feare of those Tartars he also forsooke, and with a thousand of his people, fled, and seated himselfe in a part of Armenia, about Erzerum; and after, vpon some better hopes, resolued to returne againe into Persia, but in seeking to passe the Riuer Euphrates, was drowned, and his followers dispersed, following their ancient Trade of wandring Heards-men. Hee left behinde him foure sonnes, Tencur-Teken, Iundogdis, Ertogrul, the father of Ottoman, and Dunder. The two eldest returned into Persia. The two youngest stayed, and with them foure hundred Families, with their Tents and Carts, their moueable Houses. And insinuating into the Sultan Aladins good liking, by sute and desert, this Ertogrul was rewarded, as yee haue heard, being made Lord of Suguta, and Warden of those Marches: and liued there in securitie, till he was of great yeeres, and had seene much  alteration in that state. He died Anno 1289. hauing liued ninetie three yeeres. And him succeeded by common consent, as Lord ouer the Oguzian Turkes, his sonne Ottoman, saluted therefore by the name of Osman Beg, or Lord Osman. Hee firstLaon. Chalcondyles lib. 1. Abraham Zacuthi hath written a Chronicle of these Turkes, together with the Saracens, translated by Ios. Scal. Can. Isag. lib. 2. see P. Iovius, Knolls, etc. got into his subiection a great part of the Castles and Forts of the greater Phrygia; equally protecting his Subiects, both Christians and Turkes: he conquered Nice, the name whereof is reuerend for the first Generall Councell of Christendome; and Aladin the second, Sultan of Iconium, sent vnto him a faire Ensigne, a Sword and Robe, with ample Charters, that whatsoeuer he tooke from the Christians, should be his owne: and that publike prayers should be said in their Temples for his health, which was of him humbly accepted, and such prayers made by one Dursu,  whom hee had appointed Bishop and Iudge of Carachiser, Anno 1300. Neapolis was made his seat Royall. Hee fished so well in the troubled streame of the Greeke Empire, that hee subdued the most part of Phrygia, Mysia, and Bythinia; and Prusa after a long siege was yeelded vnto his sonne Orchanes, and made the Royall seat of the Ottoman-Kings, where Ottoman himselfe was buried 1328. His sonne Orchanes succeeded: Aladin his brother contenting himselfe with a priuate life,ORCHARIES. who after built two Mahumetan Churches, and another at Prusa. Orchanes also erected in Nice a sumptuous Temple, appointing a Preacher to preach to the people euery Friday, and two faire Abbies: in the one of which, hee with his owne hands serued the strangers and poore the first-dinner. Hee was the first that builded Abbies among the Turkes, followed herein by most of his Successours. Hee got Nicomedia, and the  Townes adioyning. He also wonne all Charasia, and at his returne built a Church and Abbey at Prusa, placing therein religious men, sought out with all diligence. His sonne Solyman, first of the Turkes that had possessed any foot in Europe, crossed the Hellespont, and wanne the Castle Zemeenic, and after that Maditus, receptacles for the Turks, which came ouer in multitudes, hee transporting Christians into Asia, to dwell in their roome. And after,Anno 1358. he wan Gallipoli, spoyling the Countrie, and winning from the Greekes, who were negligent in preuenting or remedying this danger. But Solyman dying with a fall, his old father Orchanes liued not two moneths after; a Prince very zealous in his superstition, who besides building diuers Churches, Abbies, Colledges, and Cells, allowed Pensions to all such as could in the Church say the booke of Mahomets law by heart, and competent maintenance to the Iudges  that they should not sell justice.
AmurathAMVRATH., which succeeded, exceeded him in his blind zeale. Hee kept in awe the Turkish Princes in Asia, and wanne many Townes and Castles in Thracia: and amongst others, Adrianople the seat Royall of the Turkish Kingdome, vntill Constantinople was after subdued. This was done 1362. Hee ordained, that euery fifth captiue of the Christians, aboue fifteene yeeres old, should bee taken vp for the Turkish King, which were distributed among the Turkish hus-bandmen in Asia, to learne the Turkish Language, Religion, and Manners; and after two or three yeeres, choice was made of the better sort, to attend vpon the Princes person, and for his warres, called Ianizars, that is, new Souldiers: which Order after grew to great account, and is yet a principall pillar of the Turkish greatnesse. He ouerthrew Aladin the Caramanian King, which made the other Princes of the Selzuccian  Family to submit themselues vnto him. And busying himselfe in his new Conquests in Europe, after a great victorie obtained against Lazarus, Despot of Seruia, as he viewed the slaine carkasses, was slaine of a wounded and halfe-dead Souldier; who comming staggering (as it were) to beg his life, stabbed this great Co^queror, with a dagger, hidden vnder hisAn. Do. 1390. garments.
BaiazetBAIAZET. his sonne and successour, oppresseth most of the Mahumetan Princes in Asia, inuadeth Valachia, besiegeth Constantinople eight yeers, ouerthroweth the King of Hungarie in battell, subdueth the Caramanian Kingdome, and amidst his aspiring fortunes, is byLaz. Soranzo, Ottom. part. 2. saith it should be written Tamurchan, which signifieth King Tamur, as Leuncla interprets, who yet affirmeth, that Tamur lanc, or leng, signifieth lame Tamur, for his leg was broken. There is a history of Tam, translated out of Arabike into French, and thence into English, containing a ful and happily more true discourse of his life, differing much from our common reports, which Pet. Perand. Leunc. Iouius in their Treatises thereof, Io. and Phil, Camerarius, c. Maiolus, and almost all the Turkish Historians haue written. Tamberlane depriued of his Kingdome and libertie, shut vp and carried about in an yron Cage; against the barres whereof he beat out his braines, Anno 1399.MAHOMET. Mahomet his sonne  (after much warre with his brethren) wholly possesseth the Ottoman Kingdome, both in
 Europe and Asia, almost quite ouerthrowne before by Tamerlane. Hee tooke the Caramanian King, and his sonne Mustapha prisoners, who became his Vassals, as did also the V^lachian Prince: he died 1422.AMVRATH, II. Amurath his successor winneth Thessalonica, the greatest part of Aetolia, inforceth the Princes of Athens, Phocis, and Boeotia, to become his Tributaries, oppresseth the Mahumetan Princes of Asia, subdueth Seruia, spoileth Hungarie. Hee after retired himselfe to a Monasticall life in a Monasterie, which yet the affayres of State forced him to leaue againe.A History of Scanderberg. MAHOMET. II. He inuading Epirus, at the siege of Croia dyed, 1450.
MahometLeon. Chiens, Archiep. Mytyl. de cap. Cons^ant. was there saluted Sultan in the field, a man equally vnequall and troublesome to the Christian and Mahumetan Princes. He wanne Constantinople the twentieth of May,  1453. the taking whereof, is by Leonardus Chiensis,Is. Ruth^n. ep. Io. Ram. de rep. Turc lib. 3. declared in a Treatise composed of that vnhappie argument, and likewise by CardinallBern de B^e^denbach de cap. Hydrunt. Isidorus Ruthenus. Hee wanne Trabezond, the Imperiall seat of another Christian Empire;BAIAZET. II. Anno 1460. Hence hee was called Emperour (a name not giuen to the Turkish Kings.) He burnt Athens, Anno 1452. Hee obtained Epirus and Mysia, Anno 1436. and did much harme against the Soldan and Mamalukes. He conquered Euboea and Illyricum, in the yeere 1474. ouerthrew the Persians; and in the last act of his bloodie life, he tooke (by Achmetes his Captaine) Otranto or Hydruntum in Italy, with no small terrour to all Italy. Hee was sir-named Great, and is said to haue conquered two hundred Cities, twelue Kingdomes, and two Empires: which he lest to Baiazet his sonne,  Anno 1481. His other sonne Zemes was forced to flee into Italy, where a great summe of moneyFo^tie thous^nd Dukets y^er^ly. was yeerely allowed the Pope to keepe him for his owne securitie, and for loue of his brother, whom Alexander the Bishop is reportedG^^^^^d. hist. Iac. Boissurdi Iacon^t. to poyson, as some thinke, by composition with the grand Seignior. He had some warres against the Mamalukes, some against the Christians, more vnnatural against his brother, but most most vnnatural and monstrous against his sonne Selym. His conquests were in Cilicia, Caramania, and Peloponnesus.
Selym,SELYM. not content to haue thrust his father out of the Throne, aspired to a further effect of aspiring ambition, depriuing him of life, from whom himselfe had receiued it. To this end he corrupted a Iew, Baiazets Physician (whom Knolles calleth Hamon; butMenauino l. 3. c. 22. relateth all this at large. Menauino, an eye-witnesse, nameth him Vstarabi) who with the powder of beaten Diamonds poysoned  him; and for reward, when hee claymed Selyms promise, had his head stricken off in the Tyrants presence. So much did he hate the Traytor, whose treason he so much loued. The body of Baiazet was embalmed, and interred at Constantinople, in a beautifull Sepulchre, neere to the Meschit, which himselfe had built, and Priests were appointed, which should euery day pray for his soule. Two of his Pages did Selym put to death, for wearing blacke and mourning apparell for their Masters death: and three others (whereof Menauino was one) hardly, by intreatie of Selyms daughters, and some Bassaes, escaped.
This Viper, that spared not his father, proceeded with bloudie hands to make an end of the rest of his Ottoman-kindred, beginning with fiue sonnes of his brethren, and adding the remnant, as hee could bring them into his power. And hauing thus founded his Throne in bloudie cruelties of his owne at home, no maruell if abroad his proceedings were no lesse  cruell and bloudie towards his enemies. Of whom, the first which offered himselfe (after his domesticall warres appeased) was Ismael theHenricus Ponia de g stis Sophi. cont. Turc. Sophie: who with thirtie thousand Persian Horse-men gaue battell to Selym (notwithstanding his three hundred thousand Turks) where was fought in Armenia, neere Coy, a terrible and mortall battell betwixt them: the Turkes at last (very hardly) preuailing, by helpe of their great Ordnance: but so little cause had they to reioyce of their victorie, that this is reckoned among the dismall and disastrous dayes, termed by the Turkes, The onely day of Doome. The nextAnno Dom. 1515. yeere he entred againe into the Persian Confines, and there tooke Ciamassum, ouerthrew Aladeules, the Mountaine King, who raigned in Taurus and Antitaurus, and slew him. But his most fortunate attempts were against Campson Gaurus, the Egyptian Soldan, and his forces of Mamalukes, whom by his multitudes (notwithstanding their fame and valour, not inferiour to any Souldiors of the world) hee  ouercame; the Soldan himselfe being left dead in the place, August. 7. 1516.
Neither had Tomumbeius his Successor any better successe, but succeeded as wel in his fortune, as to his Scepter, who by treason of his owne, and power of his enemy, lost both his life and Kingdome; all Egypt and Syria therby accrewing to the Ottoman. Selym from thenceforth purposing to turne his forces from the Sunne-rising against the Christians in the West, came to his owne Sunne-set, the period of his raigne and life: a miserable disease (as an angrie Pursuiuant) exacting and redemanding his bloudie cruell spirit, an implacable officer of  that implacable Tyrant to Tyrants, and Prince of Princes, Death, who at last conquered this Conquerour; or rather (if hisLicet ossa iacent, animus bella quaerit. Phi. l. on^cer. tom. 1. lib. 1. Epitaph written on his Tombe say true) conueied him hence to seeke new Conquests. His disease was a Canker in the backe, (eating out a passage for his viperous soule) which made him rot while he liued, and become a stinking burthen to himselfe and others. He died in September, 1520. hauing before bequeathed bloudshed and desolation
 to the Christians, and ordained Solyman, his sonne and heire, executour of that his hellish Testament: And further, to excite him thereunto, had left him the liuely counterfeit of himselfe, with sundrie bloudie Precepts annexed: His title therein written, was, Sultan Selym Othoman, King of Kings, Lord of all Lords: Prince of all Princes, Sonne and Nephew of God. Wee may adde, Heire apparant to the Deuill, that breathed his last in bloud, resembling him that wasIoh. 8.44. a Murtherer from the beginning.



CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the Turkish Warres and Affaires: together with the succession of the Great Turkes, till this present yeere 1616.

@. I. Of SOLYMAN the Magnificent.  
SOLYMAN,SOLIMAN. sir-named the Magnificent, succeeded his Father Selym in place, and surmounted him exceedingly in exploits. Belgrade, (which ominous name, did presage happinesse vnto him in his Warres and proceedings) was the beginning of his Conquests, wonne by the Turkes, August. 29. 1521.See the History at large in Hakl. to. 2. and Iacob. Fontanus Brugensis. Rhodes receiueth him on Christmasse day, 1522. but withall exileth both Cheere, Christmasse, and Christians. Hee inuadethMart. Fume. Hist. of Hun. lib 1. Melchior Sciterus de bello Pannonico. Hungarie, and in the field discomfiteth and killeth Lewes, and slayeth, or captiueth two hundred thousand Hungarians in that expedition, 1526. Hee entereth Hungarie the second time, 1529. and (after some butcheries therein) marcheth to Vienna in Austria, where he lost fourescore thousand  of his Turkes, and then with shame and anger returned. In the yeere 1532. he returneth with an Armie of fiue hundred thousand men; to whom Charles the fifth opposed himselfe, and the Christian forces, in greater numbers, then hath in many ages been seene, mustering in his Armie, at Vienna two hundred and threescore thousand men, whereof fourescore and ten thousand Foot-men, and thirtie thousand Horse-men were old Souldiers, to whom Solyman did not, nor durst not, bid battell. Poore Hungarie rues in meane while, whether he getteth or loseth in Austria, being made his thorow-fare as he went and came.
After this he trieth his successe against the Persian, where hee taketh Tauris and Babylon, with the Countries of Assyria and Media, Anno 1534. each of which had sometimes beene Ladie of the World. At incredible costs he prepared a Fleet in the Red Sea, 1537. and taking Aden and Zibyth, two petie Kingdomes in Arabia, by his forcesDam. a Goes Diensis oppugnatio. besieged Dium, a Castle  of the Portugals in the East-Indies, but without his wished successe. For the Portugals still retaine their Indian-Seas and Traffique, and not onely freed that their Castle from Turkish bondage, but had meanes to fortifie it better, by the Ordnance, which the Turkes in their hastie flight had left behinde.Turkish Historie. Kn. A more dangerous plot did Solyman meane while contriue against Christendome, preparing his forces to inuade Italy, and to that end was come to Aulona, an Hauen in Macedonia, with two hundred thousand Souldiers, where Barbarussa, and Lutzis Bassa, his great Admirall, met him with his Fleet, to transport his Armie. But Solyman, first employed these Sea-forces on the coast of Italy, and tooke Castrum; his Horse-men (which he had sent ouer in great Palendars) carried away the people, cattell, and substance,  betwixt Brundusium and Tarentum, fortie miles space; all the countrey of Otranto terrified with feare of a greater tempest. But the Venetians turned it from the rest of Italy, vpon themselues (notwithstanding their league) by vnseasonable exacting of that Sea-courtesie, the vayling of the bonnets, or top sayles of some Turkish Gallies vnto them, as Lords of that Sea; for which neglect some of them were sunke.Andrew d'Oree, a famous Sea-Captain. Auria also, the Emperours Admirall, had surprised some of the Turkes stragling Fleet, and after held cruell fight with twelue great Gallies, full of Ianizaries and choice men, whom he ouerthrew and tooke. But the Ianizaries that were left, cast their Scimaters ouer-boord, least such choice weapons should come to the Christians hands. Solyman conuerting his forces against the Venetians, for the indignities mentioned, had almost fallen into the hands of the Mountaine-Theeues, which liued in the Acroceranian Hills: who in a strange resolution had conspired to kill him in his Tent, and had almost (to the wonder of the world) in a night, by vnknowne wayes, suddenly effected it, had not the cracking of a bough discouered their Captaine, who in a tree was taking view
 of the Campe, how to bring to passe his desperate designes. This their Captaine, (by name Damianus) was, after confession hereof, torne in pieces, and those wilde Mountainers (liuing on robberie, without Law or Religion) were, like wilde beasts, hunted to destruction.
The Turkes inuaded Corfu, whence they carried sixteene thousand of the Islanders captiues. They likewise, in their returne, committed great spoyle in Zante, and Cythera, sacked Aegina, Paros, and other Ilands in the Archipelago; bringing Naxos vnder tribute. Barbarussa sacked Botrotus, a Venetian Citie: The like did Vstrif to Obroatium, and the Castle of Nadin. Nauplium also, and Epidaurus were besieged. But Ferdinand (who had entituled himselfe King of Hungarie, after Lewis his death) receiued a greater disgrace in Hungarie, by the Turkish forces, then befell the Venetians in all their losses: Cazzianer (the Generall of the Christians) shamefully flying and betraying his associates to the Turkish crueltie. The next yeere 1538. Barbarussa chaseth the Christian Fleet, in which the Emperours, Venetians, and the Popes forces were ioyned.
In the yeere 1541. Solyman againe inuadeth Hungarie, professing himselfe Protector of the young King, which Iohn, late King of Hungarie (who had held long warres with Ferdinand, about that Title) had left behinde him his heire and successor. But vnder colour of protection, hee maketh himselfe Lord of Buda, the chiefe Citie, turning the Cathedrall Church into a Meschit: and maketh Hungarie a Turkish Prouince, bestowing Transyluania) and what he pleased, on the Orphan. Two yeeres after he reentereth Hungarie, and taketh Strigonium: turning the Christian Temples into Mahumetan, sacrificing there for his victorie, as he had done at Buda. Hee entred also intoIoan. Martini Stellae ep. ad frat. Alba Regalis, (where the Hungarian Kings lye entombed) another chiefe Citie of that Kingdome, and slew the Magistrates. I speake not all this while of the spacious Countries in Africa; which, from the Riuer Muluia, hee added to his Dominions: the Kingdomes of Algier, Tremisen, Tunes, Tripoly, etc. being annexed to his Turkish Soueraigntie. Howbeit Tunes, by ayde of Charles the Emperour, somewhat recouered her selfe, but breathed out againe her last gaspe of libertie, in the daies of Selym his sonne. And thus wasSolyman as vnnaturall to his ^hildren, as Selym was to his father Baiazet. Solyman victorious and happy; otherwhere victorious and vnhappy, when he was forced to d^rreine battell against his owne bowels, and hauing murthered Mustapha his eldest sonne (the hopefullest branch in Turkish estimation, that euer grew out of the Ottoman stocke) hee warred against Baiazet, another of his sonnes; whom, with foure of his children, he procured to be done to death in Persia. And after much domesticall trouble, in his seuenth Expedition into Hungarie (his Fleet in the siege of Malta, being before, with great disgrace repulsed) he dyed at the siege of Zigeth, the fourth of September, 1566.


@. II. Of SELIM the second, and AMVRATH the third.
SELYM, the onely sonne, which the bloudie father had left aliue, succeeded in the Throne, not in the prowesse and valour of his father. Neither hath any Turkish Sultan since his dayes, led their forces in person, but committed it to their Deputies and Generals; except once, when Mahomet the third, had almost lost his Armie and himselfe. Yet did this Selym, by his Bassaes, make him Lord ofOf the wars of Cyprus, see the Relations of Nestor Martiningo in Hakl. tom. 2. part. 1. Cyprus, and also of the Kingdome of Tunis. But this sweet meate was sourely sauced, by his exceeding losse in the Sea-fight betwixt Hali Bassa, Admirall of the Turkes,Our gracious Soueraign King Iames, hath written a Poem of this battell. and Don Iohn of Austria, Generall of the Fleet set forth by the Pope, Spaniard, and Venetian, 1571. wherein an hundred threescore and one Gallies were taken, fortie sunke or burnt, and of Galliots, and other small vessels were taken about threescore. The Turkish Admirall was then slaine. Wittily did a Turke descant vpon this losse of the Turkes, and their gaine of Cyprus, comparing this to the shauing of a mans beard, which would grow againe: that, to the losse of an arme, which, once cut off, cannot bee renued. Lastly, Tunes came in, and Selym went out of this Turkish Soueraigntie, both in manner together, 1574.
Amurath his heire, began his Empire, with the slaughter of his fiue brethren. The mother of Solyman (one of that number) slew herselfe with a dagger, for anguish of that losse. He in viewing a new Gally, by the breach of a Peece, hardly escaped death, thirtie of his company being slaine. And because the Plague was exceeding hot, hee by deuotion sought to appease diuine anger: and therefore prohibited all vse of Sodomie, Blasphemie,Michael ab Isselt. Com. Anno 1575. and Polygamie, and himselfe put out fiue hundred women out of his Seraile. In a priuate habite hee visited the Markets, and hanged vp the hoorders of corne. He by the Tartars inuaded Polonia: and Henry of France, secretly leauing that Kingdome of Polonia, hee wrote vnto him to chuse Stephen Battor for their King; in which letters he called himselfe, God of the Earth, Gouernour
 of the whole World, Messenger of God, and faithfull seruant of the great Prophet: which wrought so much with the Nobilitie, that either they would not, or durst not doe otherwise, howsoeuer Maximilian had beene before by many of them chosen.
TamasMinadois Historie of the warres betwixt the Turkes and Persians, translated by Abraham Hartwell in nine books, relateth these things at large. the Persian (at the same time dying) bequeathed his Crowne to Ismael his sonne, whom Aidere his brother seeketh to depriue, but is therefore himselfe depriued of that ambitious head, which he sought to adorne with the Crowne; and Ismael adding the slaughter of eight his younger brethren, ascendeth the Throne, which, together with his life, hee lost by vnnaturall trecherie of Periaconcona his sister, the foure and twentieth of Nouember, 1577.
Mahomet his brother succeeded in this troublesome State, which Amurath the Turke (in  these troubled waters) thought fit time for himselfe to fish for. Hereunto also helped the hatred and ciuill broyles in Persia, for the head of Periaconcona, presented to Mahomet, with the haire disheuelled on a Launce, and for other vncouth and bloudie spectacles; Sahamal and Leuent Ogli (two Georgian Lords) seeking also innouations. Amurath therefore, in the yeere 1578. sent Mustapha Bassa, which had lately conquered Cyprus, with an Army of an hundred and tenne thousand into Persia: who, in the first battell he had with them, slew fiue thousand, and tooke three thousand Persians: and to strike that Nation with terrour, commanded a bulwarke to be framed of those heads: but by an exceeding tempest, which lasted foure dayes together (whereby the Heauens seemed to melt themselues in teares for the Persians losse, and with lightnings, to shew that indignation against the Turkes, which in their  thundering Dialect they aloud vttered) there grew such horror to their mindes from aboue, and such sicknesse to their bodies, from those putrified carkasses beneath, that Mustapha was forced to remoue, missing forty thousand of his first Musters. After hee had fortified the Armenian Castle of Teflis, his Armie being driuen to shifts for lacke of victuals, ten thousand of his forragers were slaine by the Persians, who were recompenced with like slaughter by Mustapha, that came vpon them whiles they were busie about the spoyle, and spoyled the spoylers. In passing ouer the Riuer Canac, he lost fourescore thousand Turkes, which the Riuer seemed to take for Custome (as it had many of the Persians in the late conflict) whereof his violent current was a greedy and cruell exactor. Mustapha erected a Fortresse in Eres, and tooke Sumachia, chiefe Citie of Siruan (Derbent offering her selfe to the Turke) and then  returning into Natolia. But Emir Hamse Mirise, the Persian Prince recouered, after his departure, both Eres and Sumachia, slew and captiued the Tartars, thirtie thousand of whom were newly come to the Turkes ayde. He rased Sumachia, euen with the ground. The next yeere Mustapha fortified Chars in three and twentie dayes, wherein they were hindered with Snowes, on the fiue and twentieth of August, although it standeth in fortie foure Degrees. Anno 1580. Sinan Bassa was chosen Generall for the Persian Warre; who, as hee departed from Teflis, lost seuen thousand of his people, besides such as the Georgians and Persians, together with the spoyle carried away. This was earnest, the rest was but sportfull shewes of warre, in trayning his Souldiers; after which he returned. In 1583. Ferat Bassa was sent Generall: but little was done, till Osman Bassa, a new Generall, 1585. tooke Tauris, the ancient  E^batana (as Minadoi is of opinion.) But the Persian Prince carried with indignation, reuenged this losse on the Turkes with his owne hands, slaying Caraemit Bassa, Generall in the place of Osman then sicke, and gaue his head (as opima spolia) to one of his followers: and afterwards at Sancazan slew twentie thousand Turks. Osman dyed of sicknesse; and the Persian Prince (the Morning-starre of that Easterne State) was soone after murthered. In that dismall yeere 1588. Ferat tooke Genge: fifteene thousand houses, seuen Temples, and fiue and twentie great Innes were burned in Constantinople, the tumultuous Ianizaries not suffering the fire to be quenched. An Impost was leuied of the subiects, to satisfie the pay due to the Souldiers for the Persian warre, which raised these stirres. Yea, the Priests disswaded the people from those new payments, and perswaded them to maintaine their ancient Liberties,  shut vp their Meschits, intermitted their Orisons: and the great Turke was forced to call in his Mandates, and deliuer the Authors of that counsell, (wherof the Beglerbeg of Grecia was one) to the Ianizaries furie, who made Tennis-balls of their heads. In the 1592. Wihitz, chiefe Citie of Croatia, was yeelded to the Turke. The next yeere Siseg was besieged, but relieued by the Christians, who slew eighteene thousand Turkes, and tooke their Tents; yet was it soone after taken by the renewed forces of the Turkes. Sinan tooke Vesprinium in Hungarie, and Palotta, but their losse was farre greater then their gaines; which continuing, and a broyle of the Ianizaries added thereto, broughtTo this Amurath was M. H^reborn her Majesties Embassador: and after M. Barton, of which see H^k. to. 2. part. 1. There also, pag. 293. you may read of the Turkes officers, reuenues, payme^ts, forces, etc. Also the letters of the Great Turke to the Queen, and of the Sultannes^e, and of Sinan Bassa, and many other things worthy ob eruation. That Trade into Turkie, then begun, stil continueth, renued by the kings Maiestie that now is. Amurath into malancholy and sicknesse, whereof he dyed, the eighteenth of Ianuarie, 1595. Transyluania, Valachia, and Moldauia, hauing before reuolted from him to Sigismund, who was entitled their Prince. This Amurath, in a letter to Queene Elizabeth, entituleth himselfe, By the Mercie of God free from all sinne, with all height of Grace made possessor of great blessednesse, aboue the 72. Lawes of the world.



@. III. Of MAHOMET the Third.
MAHOMET his sonne succeeded: who inuiting his nineteene brethren to a Feast, sent them to learne his fathers death in the other world, accompanied thither with ten of Amuraths women, from whom issue was feared, which, with drowning them he preuented. Much adoe he had with his Ianizaries at home, much losse in his Dominions abroad, for which cause he sent for Ferat Bassa out of Hungarie, and strangled  him, and sent Sinan his emulous corriuall in his roome, whom the Transyluanian Prince ouerthrew in battell, and after chased him ouer a Bridge (which he made a mile in length for his Armie to passe ouer Danubius) with great losse of his people. His Bridge the fire and water diuided betwixt them; and the conceit of this ill successe (as was thought) procured his death soone after. In the yeere 1597. Mahomet in his owne person enterprised these warres, and not farre from Agria, on the sixteenth of October, fought a cruell battell with the Christians, wherein (had not Couetousnesse, rightly called the root of all euill, hindered) had beene atchieued the most glorious victorie against those Barbarians, that euer Christendome was blessed with. MahometMahomets Armie was reported to be six hundred thousand, saith M. Wrag. apud Hakl. tom. ^. himselfe for feare, seeing his Ordnance (an hundred fourescore and tenne  great Peeces) taken, and his men slaine in multitudes, fled with Ibrahim Bassa towards Agria, shedding teares by the way, which he wiped off his bloudie face with a piece of greene silke, supposed to be a piece of Mahomets garment, carried with him as a holy Relique. But whiles the Christians were now halfe Conquerours, by greedie turning to the spoile, their victorie was wholly lost, and twentie thousand of them slaine, who had slaine threescore thousand Turkes. Mr. Barton the English Embassador, was present in the fight, and Mr. Thomas Glouer also, who in a large iournall of this Expedition, testifieth that the great Turk was in great feare; but being animated by some about him, he tooke his bow and arrowes, and slew three Christians therewith. Those former reports hee mentioneth not. Not long after, the Bassa of Buda was taken, and the Bassa of Bosna, with some thousands of Turkes slaine,  Anno 1599. Yet did not all his losses in the West, by the Christians vexe the Great Sultan so much, as a rebellionThe long and dangerous rebellion in Turkie by Cusabin, the Scriuano, etc. See Knol. Turkish Historie. raised in the East, which many yeeres continued. Cusabin Bassa of Caramania rose in armes against his Master, and hauing now done great matters, his Souldiers before false to their Prince, became now also false to him: hee flying, was after taken and tortured to death. His rebellion out-liued him, and was maintained by one, called the Scriuano, who ouerthrew Mehemet Bassa in the field, and the second time, in the yeere 1601. ouerthrew him with his Armie of fiftie thousand, and foraged all the Countrey almost as far as Aleppo, proclaiming himselfe the defender of the Mahumetan faith, and soon after gaue the Bassa a third ouerthrow. The Turkes Embassadour, sent into Persia to demand the Sophies sonne in hostage, for the assurance of the peace betweeneThis Embassage is otherwise, and perhaps more truly related by Sir A. Sherly then present. those two Monarchs was for his proud message put to the Bastinado, and grieuously threatned, sent backe to the  Grand Signior. The Scriuano's proceedings was much furthered, by the dissentions betweene the Ianizaries of Aleppo and Damasco: but death stayed him, not his rebellion, which a younger brother of his prosecuted, against whom Hassan Bassa was sent, but lost himselfe and his Armie. The Rebels besieged Angole, and forced them to giue two hundred thousand Duckets to buy their peace. Meane while the Ianizaries, after their insolent manner, in a mutinie forced Mahomet to commit the Capi-Aga, one of his greatest Officers, and some others, to whom the successe of these Rebels was imputed, to their cruell execution. The Rebels sacked Burze, one of the chiefe Cities, the Turkes Store-house for his Warres and and Treasurie for his reuenues; and the great Shaugh of Persia had taken Corberie also from the Turkes. The Gouernour of Babylon inclined now also to the Rebels. Mahomet not able with force to preuaile, by faire meanes sought to winne them, and gaue them their demands,  making Zellalie one of their Chiefetaines, Bassa of Bosna. Whereupon his men of warre entered into a resolution, to depriue him of the State, and to inuest therewith Mahomet his eldest sonne: about which an Astrologian being consulted, promised all happie successe: (vnhappie foole, that knew not his owne approching ruine, which Mahomet executed on him, together with young Mahomet the Prince, and fiftie other conspirators.)
He sent forth a Fleet of gallies against the King of Fesse; which hauing encountred with a tempest, was forced with a great losse to retire to their former Port. The chiefe rebel making shew he would come into Europe, as Zellaly had done, Mahomet sent certain gallies to receiue  him, but hee receiued them, and possessing himselfe of the gallies, slew the men, and mocked the Sultan. Hassan, a great Bassa, ioyned himselfe also vnto them, about such time as TaurisTauris recouered by the Persians was againe recouered by the Persian. All these disasters draue Mahomet to his deuotions for refuge, accounting these crosses to be inflicted for his sinnes, and therefore appointed
 publike Prayers in all the Mosques of his dominion, and sent two Priests bare-headed and bare-footed to Mecca, on pilgrimage to pray for him. But not Mahomet either had no eares to heare this, or else was so farre entreated, as to be better acquainted with this great Sultan in the place of his eternall residence, whither (about the yeere 1603.) Mahomet the TurkeOf the disposition of this Mahomet, his cruelties, forces, power, gouernement, etc. see Soranzo his Ottomanus. was by death soone after sent. His sonne Achmat succeeded; for his eldest was strangled in his sight. He was buried in a faire Chappell, by himselfe for that purpose built, about fiftie foot square, with foure Turrets or Steeples: in the middest is his Sepulchre, in a great Coffin of white Marble: his Turbant at his head, two exceeding great Candles of white Waxe, (standing but neuer burning) the one at his head, the other at his feet. The  floore is couered with Mats, and faire Carpets on them. Round about are like Tombes for his wiues and children, but not so great and faire. Diuers such Chappels there are neere to the Temple of Sophia, as of his father Amurath, with his fiue and fortie children, entombed about him, and of the other great Sultans, two Selyms, Solyman, Baiazet, Mahomet, each hauing a faire Hospitall for the reliefe of the poore adioyning. Some of the great Bassaes imitate the same. No other Turkes are buried in the Cities, but in the fields, with stones laid ouer, or set vpright, fashioned with some resemblance of the head, which beareth ensigne of his dignitie, and whether it be a man or woman, with letters engrauen further to testifie the same.


@. IIII.  Of ACHMET.
ACHMATAchmat. set a sure guard about his brother, and to preuent the insolencie of the Ianizaries and Souldiers, distributed amongst them two millions and a halfe, and being fifteene yeeres old, was crowned Emperour. He is said in behauiour and resemblance much to resemble Mahomet the Great, first Conquerour of Constantinople. At the same time the warres in Transyluania had procured such famine, that rootes, herbes, leaues of trees were their food: yea, a mother is said to haue brought backe into her  wombe (by vnnaturall meanes satisfying Nature) her six children: two men to eate their mother: others to cut downe malefactors from the gallowes, and eate them. Horses, Dogs, Cats, and such like were rarities to the poore, and dainties beyond their reach. And if the State can be made worse, theeues by robberies, and Souldiers by continuall spoyles, in taking away their goods, adde to their miseries. Cicala Bassa is sent against the Asian Rebels, and receiueth an ouerthrow: the second time he reneweth his forces, with renewing his fortunes, namely, the losse of thirtie thousand of his men. The Persian recouered the Countrie of Sirvan, and the Citie of Arusta, with the Countrie thereabouts, and all that from the daies of Solyman had beene taken from them, except two or three places. Hassan Bassa is sent against the Christians in Hungarie, assisted with the Tartars, alwayes readie to helpe the  Turkes, both because they are linked in marriages, like in conditions, and that huge Empire, for want of heires male of the Ottomans, is entailed to the Tartar Cham: pay and spoile are no small motiues also to fetch them into these Expeditions. Cicala Bassa is sent against the Persians, but defeated with all his power by the Persian.
In Hungarie they doe more with their money, to maintaine rebellions, then with open force. In the yeere 1605. a tumult arose among the Ianizaries in Constantinople, and fiue hundred shops and ware-houses, with two hundred Iewes, and other persons to whom they belonged, were burnt: the Ianizaries enriched themselues with the spoile. The Iewes haue made them Vaults, made fire-free to preuent the like danger from the Ianizaries, who are thought purposely to fire them sometimes, and alway haue the office to quench it, or pull  downe houses in neere danger, which they willingly protract, or performe in places fittest for pillage: Ignis ruina extinguitur: the remedie no lesse then the disease. Hungarie is at once vexed with forraine and ciuill warres: the mutinous Christians doing more harme then the Turkes, and the people flee into Polonia, or the Mountaines for refuge. The Rebels take great Townes, yea, they spoyle Stiria and Austria. The German name growes odious to the Hungarian. Botscay, chiefe of the Rebels, is assisted by the Turkes, and called Prince of Transyluania; all Hungarie in manner following his ensignes. But the Rebels in Asia, and the Persian exploits, detained the Turkes from making vse of these occasions, else likely to haue swallowed Hungarie and Austria both: yet Pesth was before taken by them, and now Strigonium. Cicala Bassa is againe ouerthrowne by the Persian, and with three hundred flieth to Adena. The Bassa of Trebezond is sent to succour him, but is discomfited, and almost all his  Armie slaine. Achmat enraged, causeth Cicala Bassaes house at Constantinople, full of wealth and treasure, to bee rifled. Adena is yeelded to the Persian. The Bassaes of Damasco and
 Aleppo had before fallen out, and taken armes. Damasco had ouerthrownCiuill warres betweene the Bassaes of Aleppo and Damasco. Aleppo in the field, besieged him, and forced him to composition. Now againe, Aleppo ouerthroweth him, and the Bassaes of Tripolis and Gazara his companions, with their Armie of threescore thousand men; tooke Tripolis; the Bassa whereof againe hee ouerthrew, and added to his garlands Damasco, the treasurie of the Turks reuenue, and chief Citie of Syria. The Beglerbeg of Natolia sent his Lieutenant with a great Armie against him, but to their own ruine. He intercepted a Ship laden with the tributes of Egypt. The Persian sent him, in token of loue, a present worth fiftie thousand Crownes. Achmat is hereby forced to peace with the Christians, and to recall his forces out of Hungarie for this employment, Anno 1606. The Emperour  yeeldeth satisfaction to the Discontents in Hungary, with free vse of religion to all, and Transyluania to remaine to Botscay and his heires male for euer.
A fire at Constantinople kindled in a Iewes house by the Tartars, burnt many houses and Iewes, and foure millions of goods. Achmat in great magnificence went to his Moschee, to render thankes to Mahomet for a peace concluded with the Emperour. Hee now looketh Eastward with his power, and as Master Henrie ^ello in his letter from Constantinople, dated April 2. 1606.) testifieth of him, he would needes at first be a Souldier, but the last Winter, hauing felt the cold windes from the tops of the hils in Bursia, which are all the yeere long couered with snow, and receuing some hurt in his stomacke by drinking those cold  waters, hee proued stomack-sicke to this expedition also, and giuing ouer his enterprise against the Rebels, is become one of Venus Knights, therein surmounting his Grand-father Murad, or Amurath. Anno 1607. hee sent the Visier Bassa, with an hundred and thirtie thousand against the Rebels, who preuaileth more by discreet appeasing of them, then by force. The Bassa of Aleppo three times withstood his whole forces; the fourth time fleeth towards Persia with his treasure. Aleppo is left to be taken, and the Garrison put to the sword: But the Bassa himselfe obtained pardon, with restitution of his goods taken from him in Syria. Another fire arose at Constantinople, and consumed two millions of goods, and 3000. houses to the ground. The Duke of Florence doth much harme to the Turks by the sea, 1608. The rebels make new commotions in Asia. Matthias the Arch-Duke standeth outwith his forces  against the Emperor, and commeth with his army toward Prague, obtaineth the Crowne and Royalties of Hungarie by composition, comes King to Vienna; but the Protestants refuse to sweare alleageance, till free vse of Religion in Austria by King Matthias was granted. Hee was crowned at Presburg. And in the yeere 1612. the Emperour Rodolph being dead, he was chosen in his place. Anno 1610. the PersiansA. Iansonij M. Gallobelg. ouerthrew the Turkes in diuers battels, wherein many thousands of them were slaine. In the yeere 1613. The TurkeM. Gallobelg. G. Arthus. had prouided a great Army at Adrianople, to passe into Transyluania, and his Garrisons began some stirs in Hungarie, and a new warre was there feared: but new occurrents in Asia altered that course. For the people in Natolia rose againe in rebellion, committing spoile and rapine: and in Arabia a certaine Rebell vsurped the title of a King, and gathering together aboue fiftie thousand followers, had possessed himselfe of Aden, a commodious Citie for the Indian Merchandize,  and fitly seated for the command of the Red-sea. The Persian King put his Embassadour to death, because hee had capitulated with the Turke, that his Master vnder colour of gifts should pay him a yeerely tribute: and sent the Turkish Legate, which was sent with the Persian Legate, backe to Constantinople, hauing first cut off his hands, and put out his eyes. Heereby the Turke was forced to employ his forces this way, which he had intended for Transyluania: and by the Bassa of Buda hath promised to keepe peace: hath sent also his Embassadour into Poland with a great present to the King, swearing by his God, his Horse, and Sword, to conserue the peace. This yeere also about Aprill was a great fire at Constantinople, which burned two thousand houses: the Merchants meane while labouring to conuey and saue their goods,The Citizens dare not quench the fire; an office belonging to the Ianizaries, which are thought purposely to set them sometimes on fire. Merc. Gall. Ianson. the Bassa Nassuffensis pretended, that a certaine Merchant of Aleppo (whom vpon that occasion hee found there weaponed) intended violence against  him, and confiscated his goods (the chiefe cause of the quarrell) which amounted to an hundred thousand Chekins: which I mention, to shew the miserie of Turkish subiection.
In September the Duke of Arragon (hauing intelligence that the Turkish Admirall had departed from Constantinople with seuentie Gallies, with intent to send aide against the Rebells in Syria) with his Nauie of ten Sicilian Gallies fell vpon ten of the Turkish, and tooke seuen of them, with three Bassaes, and the Beg of Cyprus: freeing out of seruitude a thousand Christian slaues. These at Palermo went in procession with Oliues in their hands, the Turkes also following chained: and the Beg of Cyprus (when a huge summe was not accepted  for his ransome) killed himselfe.
Of the Emir of Said or SidonL. 2. c. vlt. wee haue spoken elsewhere. Hee about the same time came with three Gallies to Liuorno, bringing with him his foure wiues, tenne children and much treasure. Hee presented the Great Duke at Florence a Turkish sword richly set with
 stones, and the Dutchesse with two Pearles esteemed at 60000. Crownes. Newes also came from Cyprus, that the Bassa of Damasco making an expedition against the Emirs sonne which he had left in Sayd, was by him ouerthrowne and forced to flee, leauing 20000. slaine in the field. The Emirs request was assistance of shipping. These broiles in Syria continuing, forced the Turke to seeke peace with the Emperour; the sonnes of Emir hauing slaine the Bassa of Damasco,Ianson. and Arthus in MM. GG. and receiuing succour from the Persian. The Heiducks also in Hungary in the yeere 1614. hauing done the Turkes much scathe: besides the vprores in Transyluania, where the Prince Gabriel Bathore was by a wile of the Imperials brought into an ambush and slaine, and Gabriel Bethlin Gabor obtaining to succeed, was by the Turke assisted, molested  by the Imperials. The Persian also dispossessing the Georgians of most of their country for taking part with the Turke: and the sonne of the Bassa Nussuffensis before mentioned, (who was lately strangled after the manner of the Turkish execution of their Great ones) arose in rebellion, and committed much spoile by fire and sword in Asia: the Cossaks being as troublesome in the European frontiers. All these things forced him to seeke conclusion of a peace, to which purpose the twelfth of May, 1615. Achmet Chiaia his Embassadour entred Vienna, with rich Presents to the Emperour, and obtained a confirmation of the same for twentie yeeres ensuing.
G. Sandys.The Turkes strength at Sea is so small, that the Florentine with six Ships onely, hath these three yeeres kept the bottome of the Streits in despight of them, the whole Armado not daring  the onset: the Admirall employing the Pyrats of Tunis and Algiers, who by our fugitiue Pyrats are instructed to the spoile of Christian Merchants. One cause of this weakenesse is their want of slaues for their Gallies, thorow their peace with Christendome.


HONDIVS his Map of the Turkish Empire.
map of the Ottoman Empire
TURCICUM IMPERIUM





@. V. Of Sultan ACHMETS Person, Family, Gouernment, and Greatnesse of State.
SVltan Achmet is now Ann. 1616. eight, or twentie nine yeeres old, of a iust stature inclining to be fat, readie sometimes to choke as he feeds, some purposely attending to free him from that danger. He is full faced, and (which they esteeme a great beautie) great eyed. A little haire he hath on his lip, lesse on his chin. He is an vnrelenting punisher of vice. For Sodomie he caused some of his Pages to be drowned. He is now building a magnificent Moschee for the health of his soule, all of white Marble, himselfe first breaking the earth, and working three houres in person. Hee hath not so few as foure thousand which feed and liue in the Seraglio, besides fiue hundred Capagies, who wait by fifties at euery gate. He hath three thousand Concubines and Virgins for his lust, as Mr. Knolles; Mr. Sandys saith, seldome so few as fiue hundred Virgins in a Seraglio by themselues attended by Women and Eunuchs, taken in warre, or from their Christian Parents. They haue their purgations and dyets much like the Persian custome in the time of Esther. When it is his pleasure to haue one, they stand ranked in a gallery, and shee prepareth for his bed  to whom he giues his handkerchiefe, then deliuered to the Aga of the women. Shee that beares the first sonne is honoured with the title of Sultana. He had but two sonnes and three daughters, A. 1610. and yet is that way vnsatiably addicted. He cannot make a free woman his Concubine, and therfore Roxolana procuring vnder colour of deuotion her freedome of Solyman, forced him to marry her, doting still on her. This also hath married the mother of his younger sonne (the mother of the eldest being dead) called Casek Cadoun, that is, the Lady without haire, nature both gracing and shaming her. His eldest sonne is about twelue yeeres old. He is much delighted with pleasures of the field, for which in Graecia and Natolia he hath fortie thousand Falconers: his Hunts-men are not much fewer. And whereas their Religion bindes them once euery day to practise some mutuall trade, as his father did,  making of arrowes: This Sultan euery morning after his deuotions maketh horne-rings, which they weare on their thumbs for the better drawing of their bowes.
His OfficersThe chiefe Officers of the Turke, and his other instruments of priuate and publique seruice: see Knolls and Ordinat. Politiae Turcicae, etc. are thus deliuered: the Capi Aga, by whom hee speakes to such as haue suites to him; Treasurer of the houshold, Cup-bearer, Steward, Ouer-seer of his women, and principall Gardner. These six are in great place: he hath Mutes (persons borne deafe and dumbe) which attend him; he hath fifteene hundred gelded men, from whom their priuities are wholly cut, and they make water thorow short quills of siluer, which to that end they weare on their Turbants. H^s Visier Bassa^s, or Priuie-counsellers, whereof there are nine at Constantinople, and were wont to be much fewer, are now thirtie. The rest of them are in their charges, or Beglerbegs places abroad. They sit euery Saturday, Sunday, Munday,  and Tuesday, in the Diuano or Counsell-hall. The Aga is Captaine of the Ianizaries. The Chiauses are his Pursuiuants. The Spahi his guard of Horse-men. The Ianizaries are his best Foot-men, who in their child-hood are taken from their parents, and brought vp in all hardnesse, and in the rules of their Religion. Then are they put to Schooles, where vnder most seuere Masters they are taught the vse of diuers weapons, and such as proue fit are enrolled for Ianizaries. Of whom in all are fortie thousand, and about sixteene thousand with their Aga, attend the Grand Seignior his person at Constantinople, where they are employed as Constables, Clerkes of the Market, Warders of the Gates, Sergeants for Arrests, to guard Embassadors, and other Offices. The Aga is the third place in repute through the Empire:M. G. Sandy. to  whom iealousie makes too much loue of the Ianizaries, fatall. The Ianizaries call the Great Turke Father, he reposing greatest trust in them they acknowledging no dependance but on him. In their marches they carry certaine dayes prouision of victuall with them, which is no great cumber, being a small portion of Rice, with a little Sugar and Hony. The most of them that attend the Court, haue their being in three large Seraglios, where the Iuniors reuerence their Seniors, and all obey their Commanders with much silence. Some are married (a breach of their first institution) and liue in priuate houses. Many of them vndertake to guard such Christians as will be at the charge, both about the Citie and in their trauells, from violence and inciuilities, wherein they a^e most faithfull. This appeared in one of them of late, stricken by a swaggering Englishman, as they trauelled through Morea, whom yet with much patience and fidelitie hee brought safe to Zante. They are all of some trade: receiue  but fiue Aspers a day (to which pension his eldest sonne is admitted from his birth) two grownes yeerely, one of violet the other of stammell: they beare in their hand a great tough reed tipped with siluer, wherewith they strike such as displease them. No justice may bee
 publikely administred on them: but priuately are by their Aga corrected, and sometimes throwne into the Sea in the night. They are most tumultuous when the Emperour is dying, or dead: for which cause it is by all industrie concealed from them till the next bee established, who must bestow a largesse present, and encrease their pensions an Asper a day. They haue lately admitted (besides Renegados) naturall Turkes, of which one is now Bassa of the Port, which was neuer before knowne.
He hath also in pay, others, called Topegi, six thousand which are Gunners; and twelue thousand Gebegi, which haue charge of the powder and shot in the Armies. He hath Seminaries for the training vp of those younglings, the one sort of which are called Ieheoglani,  whereof are fiue thousand, which neuer goe out of the Seraglio in sixteene or twentie yeeres, neuer see any but their Officers, where they are trained vp to future seruice. The Gemoglani (who are also tithed children of the Christians) are brought vp with some more libertie, and to base offices of husbandrie, and such like, and may also proue Ianizaries. Of these are twentie thousand. The Ian^zaries and tithed children, with his Timariots, are the maine pillars of his Empire. HisSome say there are in all a million ^euery one finding as m^ny horse, as his f^rme doth double the ye^rely value of 60. Sultan ^s; readie to b commanded by their S^macks, these by their Bassas: some Sanziack commands 5000. Timariots. Timariots, which hold land in Fee, to maintaine so many Horsmen in his seruice, are in Europe two hundred fiftie seuen thousand; in Asia and Africa foure hundred sixtie two thousand.
He hath thirtie or fortie thousand Achingi, Hindes of the Country, which serue on horse. backe, without other pay then what they get by foraging; but of small reckoning: as are  also the Azapi which serue on foot (yet properly belonging to the Gallies) whose best seruice is, with their dead bodies to fill vp ditches, to make way for the Ianizaries, and to wearie the Enemy with multitude. Many voluntaries also attending the Campe, in hope to succeed the slaine Spahi or Ianizaries. When they march, the Tartars scowre the Countrey two dayes iourney before, then follow the Achingi, and after them the Timariots, next the Iemogla^s, after them the Ianizaries, then the Chauses on horse-backe: the Sultan followes with the Officers of his Court, and Archers of his Guard foot-men, the stipendary Spahi marching on either side of him. His Coaches which carry the Pages and Eunuchs come after, and then the carriages and Voluntaries. The Royall Standard is a horse tayle tied to the end of a staffe. The Ianizaries haue woodden modells of Elephants, boots, swords, and the  like, borne before them.
Beglerbeg signifieth Lord of Lords; of which were wont to be two; one in Europe, another in Asia: but by Solyman increased, that though Romania and Natolia haue still the chiefe titles, yet in Europe are foure others; in Asia before these Persian warres, nine and twentie, in Africa foure, in all nine and thirtie, which are as Vice-royes, and haue their Begs or Sanzacks vnder them. His Admiralls place is as great by Sea. If these great ones doe iniustice, the oppressed will sometimes in troupes attend the comming forth of the Emperour, and by burning straw on their heads, or holding vp torches prouoke his attention: who being brought by his Mutes deliuer their Petition, which often turnes to the ruine of the other. Bribery is but lately knowne, yet now the best Aduocate. Euery Bassa keepes a Diuan  or Court of Iustice in his Prouince: the chiefe is at Constantinople foure dayes of the weeke in the Seraglio, whence is no appeale but to the Musti. The Great Visier Bassa is President of the rest: in three dayes all causes are determined. All they haue for assurances of purchases, is a little schedule, manifesting the possession of the Seller, which vnder-written by the Cadi frustrates all after-claimes: and as for law-querks they are vnknowne. Rebellions rarely happen, both because the greatest Commander submits his necke to the Executioners bow-string, sent with Commission by the Tyrant enclosed in a boxe: neither may any hope for partakers in resisting, where one mans fall is anothers rising: their kindred and alliance not so much as knowne to themselues: to haue had eminent parents is argument of neglect; of ruine to be beloued: and for wealth they are but spunges, all which a greedie life hath sucked, being strained at their death, except what the Grand Signior pleaseth to bestow  on their posteritie. Neither may any slaue promise much to himselfe, where damnable policie strangleth the Imperiall bloud, if males: and the issue of the females by their slaues (for so is the greatest Bassa giuen by the Sultan, when made husband to his sister or daughter) rarely attaine aboue the degree of a priuate Captaine. This great Empire may be coniectured to grow neere a period, in respect it hath lately decreased Eastward, and in the Sea-forces: their discipline is neglected, and not exacted to ancient rigour: their late Emperours effeminate: the bowells of the State much infested with rebellions, and it hath alreadie been a long-liued Tyrannie, out-liuing the wonted period. It may seeme the greatest Empire now in being: yet is that of China farre exceeding in reuenues, in naturall situation for defence,  in Prouinces better vnited, and better peopled; not inferiour in that kinde of policie which preuents alienations and rebellions: but in Souldiery not to bee compared, except we say herein he hath full recompence, that hee is strong enough in that kinde, which cares
 not to conquer, nor need feare to be conquered. The Persian hath not so vast Countries subiect, but better subiection, and himselfe a better Commander, and his Souldiers better disciplined and experimented. The Mogoll is great, wealthy, and mightie,The Persians and Mogol haue no power by sea. but Asia is not comparable to European valour. But compare the Turkish greatnesse to that of some of the first Califas, which stretched from India to Spaine, France, and Barbary; or to the Tartarian; which awed more in Asia, then euer Turke possessed in the Vniuerse, perhaps twice told (for proofe read our Tartarian Relations) and yet they pierced as farre as Austria in Europe, ouer-running Russia, Polonia, Hungaria, and making Italy to quake with the rumour of their armes: or to the Roman, which held almost all the Turke hath, when it was better worth  the holding, besides, this Westerne World which the Turke knowes not. Herein, I thinke, the Turke ouer-matched beyond comparison; nor any whit exceeding the power and possessions of Alexander; no, nor the Persian greatnesse before him, except in martiall discipline, wherein they now also degenerate. Thus much of Turkish affaires of state: if we adde also this Summa totalis for a conclusion, that the Turke commands on the Sea-coast (after some mensStates of the World, pag. 939. Arithmetike) 11280. miles in Asia, Afrike, and Europe, and the superficies of all his Dominions come to a million two hundred three thousand, two hundred and nineteene miles euery way square. Let the Author answer it, if the summe be transcendent. The Turkes reuenues, besides his Timariots, are esteemed but fifteene millions of SultaniesThe Turkes haue but two sorts of coyne. The Sult me equ^ll to the Veni e Z^^cene, and the Asper or silu^^, of which 120. make a Sultani^ about eight shilling^ six pence.: which  may seeme strange in so huge an Empire. But tyrannie in wasting and desolating Nations, and Lording ouer euery mans estate (none willing to toyle for that whereof he hath no certaintie, nay, which may procure him the greater danger) hath caused thin habitations (I except the Cities) and poor inhabitants. To this his reuenue may be added his taxes, customes, spoyles, and extortions: as the greater fish preying on the smaller, and pray to the greatest; so here, the great ones spoyling others, and themselues spoyled of all with their liues, or else necessarily leauing him their heire at their deaths.


 @. VI. An Appendix touching the succession of MVSTAPHA twice, and of OSMANS murther, and other ciuill, vnciuill late Combustions.
ACHMET before heThis is taken out of a booke written of th^t argument. Achmet reigned about fifteene yeeres. died, to make all sure, resolued to strangle his brother Mustapha, and according to custome will leaue no Competitors in such an Empire. For which purpose a Guard of Capagies attend at the Iron gates of the Seralio, and the Mutes are placed in a roome accordingly. Thus is Mustapha to be dispatched, but see how the stronger arme puts out the strong men? The same night Achmet had a dreame or fearefull vision, which some of the Deruices would needs presume to rumor abroad,  in this manner; that he thought, as hee was entring into the seuen Towers, the Princely prison of his predecessors, his brother kneeled downe before him, and cried out, Oh when shall we leaue this horrible custome of shedding innocent bloud? Looke among all the heathens, and see, how quickly they loathed and cast away that crying Sin of sacrificing of humane flesh? But in stead of reply^ng he drew his Semiter to strike off his head, had not one (as hee conceited) held it fast, that hee could not strike; whereupon hee demanded angerly, What art thou? I am the good Genius of Mustapha, and will not suffer him to perish, therefore leaue: and very shortly shall strange things happen in the Empire. Achmet contrary to all expectation the next morning after his Dreame, sent for him into the roome of State, where he lay on a stately Pallet, with all his Vice-Roys and Bashaws groueling on the ground, and the principall Mustie kneeling before him reading on a booke. It should seeme that glad tidings  came first to the Citie; For he was taken out of the prison with great respect and obseruation: he was admitted to his galley with high Ceremonies, and yet solemne countenances: hee was accompanied on the Sea with thousands of boats, and ten thousand of weeping eyes: hee landed at the Emperours owne Caska, with great respect and modest stilnesse: hee walking through the Garden of Cypres trees, and at last came to an Iron gate, where his owne company left him, except two Bashawes, who led him by the armes: the gate opens and he must through a Guard of Cupogies; they bend to the ground, and yet looke cheerefully:  they brought him into the roome where the Mutes stood; whose presence did more appale him then the rest, but that hee saw the crueltie confirmed, and their very sight was worse then an vnreuersable iudgement: but when he perceiued no violent hands laid vpon him, and that he must yet goe further, he was the more astonished, and the more vexed to endure such a procrastination.

At last he came where the Emperour lay sicke on his Pallet, before whom his prostitution was as the ordinary slaues: but contrary to all expectation he bad him rise, and commanded certaine Persian Carpets to be spread, and rich Cushions to be laid; on which, according to their manner, hee sate crosse legg^d by him, and when the Muftie had raised the Emperour vp a little, with a faint voyce he discouered an vnlooke for louing heart, and bequeathed to him the succession.
He had no sooner done, but he began to faint, and so read them all a lesson of mortalitie by opening a booke, wherein they saw death writ in Capitall letters, and himselfe sinking  past recouery, which made them recouer new Spirits, and presently bring his brother out into the Sophia, where the principall Muftie proclaimed Mustapha Emperour, intimating to the Ianizaries the charge of Achmat, to the discharging their duties: and the pleasure of Mustapha to giue them a larges, which equalling the bountie of other Princes, ouerswayed nicer exceptions, and so with great acclamations they ratified the Election, and cried out, Liue and raigne great Mustapha. Thus is Mustapha Emperour, and they had two yeeres triall of his disposition, whereby they found him harmelesse (if innocent in both senses) Encomions of no great and stirring Spirit.
Scander, and Mehemet Bashaw take the young Osman after this out of the Seralio, and present him to the Ianizaries, a comely sweet young youth of nine or ten yeere old, demanding withall, if such an heire of the Othoman Family were to bee reiected without cause, or  why they should bring an harmelesse Prince (as they reputed Mustapha) into the danger of vsurpation, and differing no further from a Traytor, but that it was not imputed to him, as for Achmats Will? Empires are not so translated, and what could they tell, but priuate men for their owne ends had wrought vpon his weaknesse, making a diseased tongue speake that, which a healthfull heart, and perfect sense would not consent to: For it was probable, that a Father would disinherit his children for any brother in the world: Besides, there was no triall or cause either of insufficiencie, or disabilitie, and therefore they could not beleeue it. Last of all, for any thing they saw, Mustapha himselfe was not stirring or strong enough to play the Steeres-man in such an high built Ship, considering the Seas were tempestuous, and many dangerous shores and rockes were to be passed by.  
These speeches to the turbulent Ianizaries, were like fewell to fire, and the presence of the louely youth, made them amazed at their inconstancie: so that by way of penitencie and satisfaction, they quickely altered the acclamation of Liue Mustapha, into the cries of, God saue young Osman, and so without further disputing, hee was aduanced into the Throne, and brought into the Seralio, when Mustapha least thought of the alteration. But now there is no remedie, hee must needs bee deposed, and sent prisoner once againe into the seuen Towers.
Now doth Osman begin his Phaetons flourish, and runneth the course of pleasures with his youth, spending foure or fiue yeeres in wantonnesse and iollitie, while his Bashawes spent the time in couetousnesse and ambitious ouer-ruling others: yet not without carefull  ouer-looking the Ianizaries, and prouident preuenting their discontents, and turbulent disposition: but all doth helpe; for they ouer-accustomed to actiue imployment, and liuing vpon the spoile of forraine Nations, as much as the Emperours entertainment, cried out to the warre, and when answer was made, that the Persians had contracted a new league, and the Emperours of Germanies old couenants were not yet determined or ended. They presently replyed, the indignities which the Russians had offered vnto their neighbors the Tartarians, were not to be endured, for they need goe no further then the piracies of the blacke Sea, and the iniuries of the Cossacks and Polonians: Nay, why should they not march to the expugnation of Loepolis, and the foraging of the Countries of Moldauia and Bogdonia, and so forward to teach Poland a better lesson, then to displease the Othoman Family and  mightinesse.
The Bashawes knew there was no replying, nor now the fire was kindled no other quenching it, then letting it consume to cinders, whereupon they presently answered, they were glad that the Souldiers were so memorable of the glory of the Empire, and so readie to imploy themselues for the dignitie of the Nation, and therefore they would not by any meanes hinder them, or the cause: But they should finde the Emperour as carefull to satisfie their demands, as they were willing to augment his Greatnesse: so that if they would giue way vnto time for the preparing of all things fit for the Armie, and the sending for the Tartarians to accompany them in the iourney, the Emperour should goe in person into the field, and Poland soone finde, what it was to exasperate such a Maiestie.
The King of Poland sent to the Emperour, to the French King, to the Pope for assistance;  as also to hisThe Polish Emb. Oration is printed. Maiestie of England with intimation of the terrour, and his well deliuered discourse made such impression on his Maiesties Princely heart, that he had a present supply:
 In a word, his Armie was soone readie, and his Cossacks prepared: by the end of Iuly hee was encamped in the fields of Bogdonia, and within eight dayes entrenched with twentie Peeces of Ordnance mounted: but the Cossacks quartered by themselues, and after their accustomed manner lying between two Riuers, were the more emboldened to make their daily excursions vpon the Tartars: For hauing a bridge in the reare of their Campe, with which the Turkes were vnacquainted, they quickly transported their men, and as quickly endamnified their enemies.
When the Grand Signeur was made acquainted with the forwardnesse of these Polonians, and vnderstood they were alreadie encamped, and expected his comming, hee was too  young to apprehend any feare, and not old enough to lay the blame of his retardance where it was: therefore they made the more haste, when he vnderstood the occasion, and so according to former preparation, the establishment of diuers Gouernments, the ordering the Prouinces, the settling the great Citie, the mustring his Gallies, the guarding of his Castles, and the watching of the Blacke Sea: the Tartars vnited themselues to his Armie, and both together made a bodie of 200000. which with all magnificent preparation hee presented in the same Fields, and within sight of the Polonians, where hee pitched his Imperiall Tent. The Tartars thought to haue made but one battell, and day of triall of the businesse, but when they came to passe ouer Riuers, and assaile Trenches; they knew not what to say, and lesse to doe, though the Ianizaries came as a second vnto them; whereupon they retreated,  and were altogether appauled to be so disappointed: Both they and the Ianizaries were glad to retire with losse, and the yong Emperor vnacquainted with the war, was yet acquainted with Oathes and Curses, to chide both himselfe and Fortune. At the last the Bashawes seeing no remedie, and finding so great obstacles of their attempt, proiected the preseruation of the Emperours person; but it may bee to secure their liues, and so entrenched themselues, being (as they said) the first time that euer so great an Armie of Turkes was enclosed within walles.
The Polonians also endured both hunger and cold, slacknesse of payment, and their entertainment came many times short: The Noble Generall died in the Campe, the Prince lay sicke of a Feuer, their horse miscarried, and other lamentable effects taught them extraordinary patience,  which made them attend good conditions of peace, and secret workings of more nimble spirits. A Priest of Moldauia was set on worke to go among the Polonians, and by way of generall complaint against the outragious effects of warre, to enlarge the happinesse of peace, and inferre what a blessing it were to procure the same: whereupon hee was brought to the young Prince of Poland, and Commanders of the Armie, with whom hee at last preuailed so well, and so farre, that they sent a solemne Embassie to the great Turke, as hee lay entrenched in the fields, to entreate a peace, and desire the renouation of the antiqua pacta, which had beene euer betweene the two Nations. The Turke had learned his lesson so well, that he seemed to make the matter strange and of great humiliation,Of these and other occurrents in the Polish warres, are tractats and letters printed. if hee should consent thereunto, and rather a courtesie granted, then a necessitie imposed, and so deferred  them awhile, till at last (as if he had beene ouer-wrought by the intercession and mediation of his Bashawes) he was contented to capitulate the matter, and after many meetings, and a great deale of conference, Articles were drawne and confirmed, with a kinde of solemnitie, and proclaimed by sound of trumpet in both the Campes, and so brake vp the Campe with a kinde of murmuring and repining.
The Great Turke tooke easie iourneys toward Adrinopolis, where he discharged the Tartars, and sent most of his Ianizaries before hand to Constantinople. Sigismond King of Poland raised his Armie, and rewarding the Cossacks, dismissed them home againe into their Countrey: he went in person to Leopolis, from whence (by this time Osman was come to the Great Citie) hee sent a solemne Embassadour to be there a Leiger, as it had beene in former  times.
By Christmasse, Osman comes home, and had the accustomed acclamations of the people, with all the Ceremonies of his returne, whereupon he goes in great pompe to the Sophia, and had the vsefull Guard of his Court Ianizaries to attend him: but within short space many fearefull accidents appalled them all. First, they were astonished at a blazing Comet. Secondly, they were afrighted at a great fire hapning amongst the Iewes, which they presaged ominous to the gouernment. Thirdly, a sore Earth quake made their hearts quake for feare:Another Earth quake had happened in their Polish expedition S. T. R. but this is vsuall in those parts, by reason of the ascending vp the Hills, and many Cauerns vnder ground. The Sea also swelled extraordinarily. And a great dearth hapned. These might bee concurring Symtomes: the disease was Osmans great spirit, emulous of his  Ancestors glory, and ambitious to adde the rest of Europe to their Conquests; but hereto his owne auarice, and the decrepit, or at least that vndisciplined age of that Empire were agreed correspondent; and this first disastrous Polonian attempt, filled him with repining indignation.
 He is said to vndertake that warre against the will of his Souldiers, and without the aduice of his Viziers, and his gaines to be the losse of 100000. horses for want of fodder, and 80000. men for want of fighting, to which hee could neuer incite his Ianizaries, though he hazarded thereto somewhat farre his owne person. Hereupon he complained hee was no King, subiect thus to his owne slaues, which would neither fight in war, nor obey in peace, without exacting new bounties and priuiledges.
Delauir Bassa,Delauir Bassa. a man of great courage, lately called from the Easterne parts was suddenly made Vizier; and wrought vpon the Kings discontent, giuing him counsell to prouide a new Souldiourie about Damasco, and from the Co^rds in stead of these degenerate Ianizaries, and of them to entertaine 40000.A new militia. for his Guard, and that the Begh-lerbegh of euery Prouince  should traine vp some of the inhabitants in Martiall discipline, with which men of new spirits and hopes hee might be able to doe something. Osman extreamely pleased with this deuice consented and left all to his discretion. Hereupon it was concluded that the King should pretend to goe in person against the Emirde Zaida; and after interceding against that, a pilgrimage to Mecca was pretended. May seuen, 1622. he began to passe his Tents to Asia side with great store of treasure, to the defacing of his Palace, and of Churches. The Ianizaries had secret intelligence, and vpon a word giuen met at the Hippodrome, and thence ranne to the Seraglio in tumult, taking order to stop the passage by water. There they cried out for the King; who appearing, they first demanded his continuance in the Citie: Secondly,  the chiefe Officers to be deliuered to them; Delauir the great Vizier, the Hoia or Confessor, the Tre^surer, the Gouernour of the Women, the Cadileskar, or Chiefe Iustice, and others as enemies to the State, and authors of that iourney. Hee granted the first, but stucke at the second, and they returned discontent.
Mustapha restored.The next day they renewed the mutinie, slew the Vizier and the Gouernour of the Women, and not finding the King, they called for Mustapha before deposed, a man esteemed holy (or frantike) and fitter for a Cell then a Scepter. Him they found almost starued in a Vault, where in the beginning of these tumults hee had beene put; who first feared death, and the next thing was hee begged water; whom they presently proclaimed Emperour.
Osman consulted with Huzein Bassa, late Vizier in the Polish warre, and the Aga of the  Ianizaries, both faithfull to him: sent to haue strangled Mustapha in the Seraglio, but a new vproare happened, and hee was remoued and guarded. The next day the King, with the Mufti went to them, where after much intreatie, their hearts somewhat relenting, yet with new furie possessed, they slew Huzein Bassa, and the Aga; the Mufti was conueyed away secretly; and Osman led to Mustapha, pleads for his life, and at last is cast into the Seuen Towers prisoner.
Osmans brethren and death.Daout Bassa, the new Vizier, enquires and findes that Osman had two brothers liuing, one about twelue, the other seuen yeeres old, and thereupon goes to the prison with a packe of executioners, which finde him new falne asleepe, and by their intrusion awaked and discontent.  At first they are amazed, and hee made shew to defend himselfe, till a strong knaue strooke him on the head with a battle axe, and the rest leaping on him strangled him with much adoe. And soone after they mourned for their dead King, as freshly as they had raged vnseasonably, this being the first Emperour they had betrayed, and hauing set vp one, which in all likelihood they must change for disabilitie.
New broiles.The first of Iune following, the Capiaga had receiued secret order to strangle Osmans brethren, which going to doe, they cry out, and he by the Pages was slaine. The Ianizaries mutinie afresh, and will haue account of this treason, whereof the King denies knowledge; so did Daout (who was suspected) but to please them is degraded, and Huzein Bassa late Gouernour of Cairo put in his place.
Const. Lett. Febr. Daout strangledThere is later report of the said Daout, to bee strangled in the same place where hee had  caused Osman to die. Neither can wee expect otherwise then monstrous and portentuous births, after such viperean conceptions.





CHAP. X. Of the Opinions holden by the Turkes in their Religion, and of their Manners and Customes.
HOw the Turkes from so small beginnings, haue aspired to this their present greatnesse you haue seene; bought indeed at a deare price, with their temporall Dominions accepting of a spirituall bondage, becomming the Lords of  many Countries, and withall made subiect to those many Mahumetan superstitions. The occasion and chiefe cause of Sects in the Saracenicall deuotions, yee haue heard in the fourth and seuenth Chapters: to which wee may adde here out ofObser. l. 3. c. 4. Bellonius. He saith, that besides the Alcoran, they haue another booke called Zuna, that is, the Way, or Law, or Councell of Mahomet, written after his death by his disciples, but the readings thereof being diuers and corrupt, the Caliph assembled a generall Councell of their Alphachi, or learned men at Damasco, wherein six Commissioners were appointed, namely, Muszlin, Bochari, Buborayra, Annecey, Atermindi and Dent, to view and examine these bookes, each of which composed a booke, and those six bookes were called  Zuna; the other copies (being two hundred Camels-lading) were drowned in the Riuer; those six onely made authenticall, esteemed of equall authoritie among the Turkes, with the Alcoran, and after by one of their Diuines contracted into an Epitome; which booke was called the Booke of Flowers. But this Zuna, being not Vna (one as the Truth is) but full of contrarietie, hence haue risen Sects amongst them, the Turkes differing from other Mahumetan Nations, and diuided also amongst themselues.

@. I.  Of their Eight Commandements.
ANTHONYMendu. lib. 1. MENAVINVS (who liued a long time in the Turkish Court) saith, that the Booke of their Law is called Musaph, or Curaam, which Georgiouitz reckoneth another booke; not the Alcoran: it is in Arabike; and they hold vnlawfull to translate it into the vulgar. If any like not of Georgiouitz his opinion, but thinke it to be the Alcoran (for al is but the Article, and the name little differs, as before is shewed) I could thinke it likely that this containeth some Extracts and Glosses thereof; or is to their Alcaron, as our Seruice booke to our Bible; hauing some sons and proper methodes, but grounded on the other. Some things I finde cited out of the Curaam,  that are not in the Alcoran, as that of the Angels mortalitie, which perhaps may bee the mistaking of the Interpreter. The ignorance of the Arabike hath caused much mis-calling of words and names. They haue it in such reuerence, that they will not touch it, except they be washed from top to toe: and it is read in their Churches by one with a loud voyce, the people giuing deuout attendance without any noyse: nor may the Reader hold it beneath his girdlested; and after he hath read it, he kisseth it, and toucheth his eyes with it, and with great solemnitie it is carried into the due place. Out of this booke are deriued eight principall Commandements of their Law. The first is, GOD is a great God, and one onely God, and MAHOMET is the Prophet of God: this Article of the Vnitie (they thinke) maketh against vs, who beleeue a Trinitie of Persons: in detestation whereof, they often reiterate these words,The Turkes vse to repeate one word of their prayers so often, and with such continued feruor, that sometime they fall down with wearines, or seeme rauished in a trance and deuout extasie.  Hu, hu, hu, that is, He, he, he, is onely GOD, who is worthy to be praised for their limbes, health, etc. and for that he hath prouided sustenance for euery one fortie yeeres before his birth.
The second Commandement is, Obey thy Parents, and doe nothing to displease them in word or deed: they much feare the curses of their parents. 3. Doe vnto others, as thou wouldest bee done vnto. 4. That they repaire to the Meschit or Church at the times appointed; of which after. 5. To fast one moneth of the yeere, called Romezan, or Ramadan. 6. That they giue almes to the poore liberally and freely. 7. To marry at conuenient age, that they may multiply the sect of Mahomet. 8. Not to kill. Of these Commandements is handled at large in Menauino, and in the bookePolicie of the Turkish Empire, Biddulph. of the Policie of the Turkish  Empire, and in others.
Their times of prayer, according to the fourth precept, areSome say that the Turks now vse to resort to their Oratories but three times a day, and Busbequius saith foure, omitting that in the night Busbeq. Epist. 1. They measure the time of prayer by houre-glasses of water. Some say si^, and the deuouter sort, seuen. in the morning, called Salanamazzi,
 before Sun-rising: the second at noone, called Vlenamazzi. The third, about three houres before Sun-set, called Inchindinamazzi. The fourth at Sun-set, Ascannamazzi. The fifth, two houres within night, before they goe to sleepe. Master Sandys nameth seuen times of prayer enioyned daily: the first Tingilnamas, two houres before day, not mentioned by Septemcastrensis; and another Giumanamas at ten in the morning, duely obserued on the Fridayes by all, at other times by the more religious. When the Priest calls to prayer, they will spread their garments on the earth, though they bee in the fields, and fall to their deuotions. Moreouer, I haue seene them conioyntly pray in the corners of the streets, before the opening of their shops in the morning. They spend but a part of Friday (their Sabbath) in deuotion, and the rest in recreations: but that so rigorously, that a Turke had his eares nayled  to his shop-boord for opening it too soone. Their seruice is mixed with Songs and Responds. They neuer looke backe till they come to the salutation of Mahomet; whom they expect to come againe, and thinke it will be behinde them: They hearken to the Priest reading the Alcoran, or Legend, or intermixing instructions and expositions, with such attention and such steadie postures of bodie, as if they were intranced. They number their often repetitions of the names of GOD, with short ciaculations of prayer and praise vpon beades. If they finde a paper in the streets, they will thrust it in some creuise of the adioyning wall, lest the name of GOD may be therein, and prophaned. Of their publike prayers you shall see more after. They which meane to goe to prayer, goe first to the house of Office, and there purge their bodie: they wash their priuie parts: and then going thence, wash their hands,  their mouth, their nose, their countenance, and their wrists, each of them three times, and after their eares and neckes, saying a certaine Psalme, and then wash their feet to the midlegge, saying another Psalme; and after all this, with a graue pace, walke to Church: without these washings they hold their prayers vnprofitable, Septemcastrensis saith, That for this cause of washing they cut their nayles, and all their haire; except on their heads and beards (which yet they combe, and bestow curious paines about, that the water may have free passage to all parts) yea for this cause he thinketh they obserue Circumcision, that nothing be left couered and vnwashed. They haue three kindes of washings: the first of all the body, no part being left free, called Zcoagirgmeg, which is necessary after any pollution.  The second is called Tachrias, of the priuities and hinder parts after stoole, vrine, or breaking of winde. The third, Aptan, or Abdas, in the instruments of the fiue senses, beginning at the hands, from thence the wrists to the elbowes, then the mouth and nostrils; then all the face; with the eyes; then the eares, and from thence to the feet, which he washeth as hie as the ankles. This is not necessary before euery Prayer, except some vncleannesse happen, but may serue for all day.
Their Almes, enioyned in the sixth Commandement, are publike or priuate. Their publike Almes is a sacrifice (if we may so call it) or offering of some beast once euery yeere. For whereas of old they should haue giuen a certaine pension of money to the poore; namely, two in the hundreth, Mahomet vpon their complaint eased this heauy burthen, and conuerted it  into this sacrifice. This beast must bee cut in pieces, and giuen to the poore; neither must they themselues eate of it, yet may each man eate of his neighbours offering: and this sacrifice ought to be of the fairest and best Horse, Veale, or Mutton. The place for this sacrifice is called Canaara: where are many Butchers, which cutting the throat thereof, say; In the name of him which hath made heauen and earth, and all things else; this sacrifice be to his honour and worship, and let his infinite bountie accept the same. They vse the like vpon occasion of vowes, if any of their house be sicke. As for their priuate Almes, they hold it necessarie: hauing a vaine conceit, that it freeth them from all imminent misery, which (they say) together with the Almes, turneth from them to the poore man; whence it commeth that the poore are so full of diseases. But for all this charitable Precept, many poore people die amongst them for want of reliefe: andBiddulph. if the poore pay not their head-money to the  King yeerely, they are beaten, and their women and children sold to pay it: and yet I haue seene (saith Mr. Sandys) but a few beggers amongst them: sometimes you shall meet with couples chained together, begging to satisfie their Creditors.
Marriage ought to be sought (they say) for procreation, not for lust. They which liue vnmarried (after fit time,Menauino. which is about fiue and twentie yeeres of age) are not iust, nor please GOD. Their Law enioyneth them to performe their marriage-ceremonies, with praiers and praises, and modest shamefastnesse; and they ought to learne each other to read, if either partie be ignorant. But their marriage is now farre degenerate from that ancient simplicitie:The Turkes can marry and vnmarry themselues at their pleasure. M. G. Sandys. l. 1. For if a man like a young woman, hee buyeth her of her Father, and then enrolleth  her in the Cadies booke; the marriage following with all B^cchanall solemnities. Many women are inuited by the Brides mother the night before, when after the feasting they bathe her, and the next morning tricke her in her richest ornaments, tying on her silken
 buskins with knots easily not vnknit (which the Bridegroome must vntie, though with his teeth,) after that with much solemnitie, his companions on horsebacke, riding two in a ranke, and conducted by the Sacdich, who is neerest of his kindred haue fetched her home: The Bride being deliuered with her face close couered, set astride on horsebacke, with a Canopie ouer her, and receiued of him at his doore, thence led (if shee be of qualitie by an Eunuch to the Bride-chamber. The guests honour him with Presents, yet come not in. The Father also giueth onely some pieces of houshold, carryed openly by particulars through the streets. Now hee is to entertaine the Wiues with an equall respect: alike is their dyet, apparell, yea and beneuolence (vnlesse they consent to change or giue turnes) or else they may complaine to the Cadi, and procure a diuorce: but the husband may put away his wiues at pleasure, who may marry vnto another within foure moneths after, except shee proue with childe, and then shee must stay so long after her deliuerie. But if hee will haue her againe, hee must buy her; and if after the third diuorce, another is first to lye with her, as a punishment for his leuitie. They will sell some of them, or giue them to their slaues. The wiues giue him the reuerence of a Master. They are at no time to deny him their embracements, whom hee toucheth not againe, vntill they haue beene at the Bath. They hold their chastisement, which they receiue from him, as an argument of affection. They intermeddle not with houshold affaires: onely it is required of them to content their husbands, to nurse their owne children, and to liue peaceably together, which also they do without iealousie or enuy. They are exceeding beautifull, for the most part ruddy, cleere and smooth as the polished Iuory; tender and soft, as frequenting the Baths daily, and neuer open to the weather: but wither quickly. Great and blacke eyes are the greatest fayre to the eyes of a Turke. They sit not at Table with their husband, but waite and serue them; and then they dine by themselues, admitting no mankinde with them aboue twelue yeeres old. And they neuer go abroad without leaue, except to the Bath, and on Thursday to weepe at the graues of the dead: They rise to their husbands, and stand while they are in presence;Septemcastrens. Busbequ. Epist. and besides them, come in no company of men, nor doe they speake with a man, or in any part of their body are seene of any man, because they thinke sight, especially where beautie or comlinesse is, cannot bee without sinne. Onely the brother may bee permitted to see  the sister, but not the husbands brother. Yea, their sonnes when they come to growth, are separated from them. For this cause that sexe is not suffered to buy and sell, but is closely mewed, saue that their law alloweth them to frequent the publike Baths. The wife and Concubine differ in the right to a dowrie, which the later wanteth; but the wife must cause the other to bee her husbands bed-fellow, when hee commandeth, without gaine-saying, except on their Sabbath, or Friday night, which is the wiues peculiar. Yet are the Turkes giuen in both Sexes to vnnaturall lust (in these times) euen the women in publike Baths, sometimes are so enflamed in that filthinesse, as is intollerable. Busbequius tells of one woman, which falling in loue with a young maide, and no way else preuailing, clothed her selfe in mans apparell, and hyring a house neere, procured the fathers good will to haue that  his daughter in marriage; which being solemnized betweene them, and the truth discouered (which the blacke mantle of night could not couer from Hymaeneus) complaint was made, and the Gouernour quenched the hot flames of this new Bridegroome, causing her to bee drowned for that offence. If the man abuse the wife to vnnaturall lust, shee may haue her remedie by diuorce, if shee accuse her husband: which modestie forbiddeth to bee done in words, and therefore shee puts off her shooe, and by inuerting the same, accuseth her to her husbands peruersenesse. One Master Simons, which liued amongst them, told me, that there are some which keepe boyes gallantly arraied, to serue for the worse then beastly lust of such as will hyre them. He affirmed also, That they haue this lothsome punishment for that lothsome sinne of whoredome, to take the panch of a beast new killed, and cutting  a hole thorow, to thrust the adulterers head in this dung-wallet, and so carrie him in pompe thorow the streets. It is death, either to the bodie by iudiciall sentence,St. Gerlach. Ep. or the soule by turning Turke, for a Christian to haue carnall dealing with any of their women. A Iew which had dealing with a Turkes wife, with her husbands consent, could not escape hanging therefore, (this indeed was a fauour, for hee should haue beene burned) notwithstanding his rich countrey-men offered 2000. Duckets to saue him:Georg. Dousa in it^. Constantinop. Her husband was hanged for his wittoldly permission, and she her selfe drowned. George Dousa reporteth the like danger, which an Armenian hardly escaped, but for talking with a Turkish woman, both of them being therefore imprisoned, and thence deliuered at a deere rate. Hee telleth of their  Paederastie that they buy boyes at an hundred or two hundred Duckets, and mew them vp for their filthy lust, till they proue bearded; they will also steale boyes for that villanie, as hee instanceth of one which came with the Polonian Embassadour so stolne, and neuer could after bee heard of.

Murther (prohibited in their eight Commandement) they hold vnpardonable, if it bee done wilfully. Often will the Turkes braule, but neuer in priuate quarrels strike one another for feare of this Law, and the seueritie of the Magistrate. And if one bee found dead in street or house, the Master of the house, or the Parish, must finde out the murtherer; otherwise hee himselfe shall be accused of it, and the whole Contado shall be fined, and likewise in case of robberie. During the time that I remained amongst them (you heare Mr. Sandys) it being aboue three quarters of a yeere, I neuer saw Mahometan offer violence to a Mahometan, nor breake into ill language: If any giue a blow, hee hath many gashes made in his flesh, and is led about for a terrour; but the man-slayer is deliuered to the friends of the slaine, to bee by them tortured to death. For publike punishments (to mention that heere)  they haue impaling on stakes, thrust in at their fundament; ganching on hookes, on which they are cast from some high place, there to hang till famine (if some more gentle crueltie haue not made a suddenner dispatch) consumed them: they also haue another inuention to twitch the offender about the waste with a towell, enforcing him by often prickings to draw vp his breath, till they haue drawne him within the compasse of a spanne: then tying it hard they cut him off in the middle, and setting the bodie on a hot plate of copper, which seareth the veynes, vp-propping him during their cruell pleasure: who not onely retaineth sense, but discourse also, till hee be taken downe, and then departeth in an instant. Little faults are chastised by blowes on the soles of their feet, by hundreths at a time. Parents  correct their children by stripes on their bellies.


@. II. Of other their Opinions and Practices in Religion.
MEnaninus reckoneth seuen mortall sinnes; Pride, Auarice, Lecherie, Wrath, Enuie, Sloth, and Gluttonie. The first, they say, cast Lucifer out of heauen. The second is the root of many other sinnes. The third is most rise amongst them, and that in  the most filthy and vnnaturall kinde of Sodomie; their Law to the contrarie notwithstanding. Their fourth maketh a man a beast. The fifth shutteth men out of Paradise, and so forth of the rest. WineDrinking of Greeke wine, is too swe^t a sinne for the Turkes to forbeare. is also forbidden them; but yet they will bee drunke with it, if they can get their fill of it. And Mahomet the third (Anno 1601.) imputing diuers insolencies of the Ianizaries to their excessiue drinking of Wine (by the Musties perswasion) commanded on paine of death, all such in Constantinople and Pera, as had Wine, to bring it out and staue it (except Embassadours onely) so that the streets ranne therewith. One drinking WineA. Gis. Busb. Epist. 1. with Busbequius, made great clamors; being asked the cause, hee said hee did it to warne his soule to flee into some corner of the bodie, or else be quite gone, lest it should bee polluted with that sinne. Yet in their Fast or Lent they abstaine very religiously.Villamont. If it be  proued against a Priest, that he hath drunke wine but once, hee shall neuer be beleeued as a witnesse after it. Swines flesh is prohibited too; in abstaining from which they are more obedient; it being vtterly abhorred.
The TurkesThe Turkes are no fashionmongers. generally hate (saith Septemcastrensis) that lightnesse in apparell, speech, gesture, etc. vsed of the Christians, whom for this cause they call Apes and Goates. Likewise they are not sumptuous in their priuate buildings. They go to the warre as it were to a wedding, esteeming them blessed which are therein slaine. The wiues and women-sernants agree in one house, without iealousie and grudging; they are in their habite and behauiour modest: and, where himselfe dwelt, the Father-in-law had not seene the face of his Daughter-in-law, liuing in the same house with him, in twentie yeeres space; so religiously doe they veyle themselues.  
On Friday they pray more deuoutly, but (as the Alcoran also permitteth) they abstaine not from all labour. He saw the Grand Signior himselfe goe to their Church, and likewise to the Bath, attended onely with two youths; none vsing any acclamation to him. And in the Church he praied on the pauement couered with a carpet, like to the rest, without any throne or ensigne of royaltie. And hee obserued the like modestie in his other behauiour. But this (as other things from their ancient simplicitie) is now altered. Thus Mr. Sandys of Achmet. Euery other Friday lightly (besides at other times on occasions) hee goeth abroad to the Mosque: and when in state; there is not in the world to bee seene a greater spectacle of humane glory, or (if so I may speake) of a sublimated manhood. For although the Temple  of St. Sophia, which hee most vsually frequenteth, bee not aboue a stones cast from the vtmost gate of the Seraglio, yet hath he not so few as a thousand horse, besides the Archers of his guard foot-men, in that short procession: the way on each side enclosed with
 Cappagies and Ianizaries in Scarlet. The Aga, Captaines, Bassaes, Beglerbegs, and the rest attending in exceeding pompe, and yet (which is the greater maruell) in exceeding silence, the eares discerning no more then in midnight sleepe, except when they salute him with a soft and short murmur: So likewise in entertainment of Embassadors, he sits in a rich roome vpon a low Throne, the Bassaes standing by like Statues without speech or motion. The stranger is led betweene two, and goes backward from him, neuer putting off his hat: for to shew the head they hold it an opprobry.
The Turkes are so zealous in their superstition, that they will rather lose their life then Religion: as among other examples in Scanderbegs time at Dibra, many Turkes chose rather  to die Turkes, then to liue Christians; yea some, as it is reported, rather to kill themselues, then to leaue their superstition: and in the yeere 1568. The Persian Embassador was shot at, and one of his followers hurt by a Turke, who being apprehended, confessed that hee did it because he was an Heretike, and sent from an Heretike: for which fact he was drawne at an horse-tayle thorow the Citie, and then had his right hand cut off, and after his head. They hate the Persians, as Rustan Bassa told Busbequiu, more then they doe the Christians:Busbeq Epist. 3. like as the Traditionarie Iew doth the Textuarie, and the Papist the Protestant.
Images they haue in such detestation, that (besides the scratching out the eyes of those in the Musaique worke of Saint Sophies Temple) when Solyman ouerthrew King Lewis of Hungary,  he carried away three Images of cunning worke in Brasse, representing Hercules with his Club, Apollo with his Harpe, Diana with her Bow and Quiuer, and placed them in the Tiltyard at Constantinople: but by the perswasion of the Mufti, they were molten into great Ordnance. They haue no Scutchions or blazing of Armes: nay, they vse no seales in their letters or other writings, which seeme to them to sauour of superstition, or superfluitie.
When they conquer any Citie, they turne the Temples into Mosques, and sacrifice there. Thus did SolymanKnolls. at Buda, and Amurath sacrificed sixe hundred captiues to his Fathers ghost.
They are moderate in their priuate buildings, and detestSeptemcast. M. Simons told me that now they are herein more sumptuous. the Christians for their excesse and superfluous expences that way: What (say they) doe those Pagans thinke they shall liue euer?  They often lodge (saithVoyag. du Villamont. l. 3. c. 6. Villamont) at the Signe of the Moone; and the like moderation they vse in diet and apparell. They haue a brasse pot, and their other meane houshold implements with them in the warres, which they vse in peace. Readie money is their surest riches, because the Grand Signior is their surest Heire.
They haue the rising of the Sunne in great reuerence; and especially the appearing of the new Moone: asKnol. p. 421. when Mahomet the great besieged Scodra, the new Moone beginning to shew her selfe, the Mahumetane Priests, going about the Armie, gaue the Souldiers warning thereof, as the manner is, by singing of a Song in manner of a Procession; whereunto the whole Armie answered with a short respond, and at the same time bowing themselues to the ground, saluted the Moone with great superstition.
They maySeptemcast. haue twelue lawfull Wiues, and as many Concubines as they will (some say,  but foure Wiues.) The children of the one are equally legitimate as well as the other, and inherite alike: yet few of them keepe two Wiues together in one house: but in seuerall places where they haue dealings, they haue seuerall Wiues, which they diuorce at pleasure. Some say, but foure Wiues are allowed them: no great matter, where all their owne are allowed to their vse, with others they may not meddle. The offending man they gansh, the woman they drowne.
They tell many things of Antichrist (whom they callLeunclau. saith Degnal. Tethschel) and of the Resurrection, and of the last Iudgement, of Hell, and Purgatorie: And that Mahomet after Iudgement shall deliuer all of all Religions from thence.
They haue no knowledge of liberall Arts, of cases of Conscience, of Originall sinne, or of  actuall, further then the outward act.
Their respects to Reliques appeareth by MahometKnoll. the third, 1597. who in the discomfiture of his Armie fled towards Agris, shedding some teares as he went, and wiping his eyes with a piece of Mahomets garment, which he carried about him as a Relique.
The Turkes may neither eate, drinke, nor make water, standing.
In their aduersitie they seeke with earnest prayers to their Prophets; and publike supplications are sometimes decreed. AtKn. p. 1136. the taking of Alba Regalis, 1601. the Bassa of Buda (then prisoner at Vienna) hearing of it, abstained from meate, with his two seruants a  whole day, prostrate vpon his face, praying vnto his Prophet Mahomet, who hee said had beene angrie all that yeere with the Turkes. TheyBusbeq. endure punishments inflicted by the Magistrate with great patience, thinking they shall escape all torment in those parts in the World to come: they therefore reward the whipper, and esteeme the whip (which I enuie not to them) sacred.

They are (but contrarie to the Alcoran) addicted to sorceries and dreames: their Priests write them letters or spells, to keepe them from danger and harme of shot, etc. calledSeptemcast. Haymayly. They will write any thing for money, as letters of freedome for seruants to run away from their masters, and such like. They make a shew of holinesse, but are closely wicked, ignorant of their owne law (to couer which, they answere in darke sentences) and the people much more. Nothing is sinne, to count of, but that which endamageth ciuill societie.
They esteeme for good workes,Their good Workes. the buildings and endowings of Hospitals, making Bridges and High-wayes, digging of Pits and Wells, and conueying waters to High-waies and Cities, building Bathes, and founding of Churches, and such like publike workes. RostanM. Harborn. B^ssa left his wife, the Daughter of Solyman, at his death fifteene millions of gold, and  shee had of yeerely reuenue halfe a million: shee, amongst other her workes, attempted one most famous, which was a conduit to conuey water, for the vse of the Pilgrims betwixt Cairo and Mecca, fortie daye^ iourney, and for the same intent procured the Sultan Selym her brother, to wri^e to the Venetians for a licence to extract out of Italy an hundred thousand pound of Steele, only to make Chizzells, Hammers, and Mattocks, for the cutting of certaine Rockes, by which this water must passe.
TheirTheir oathes and vowes. Oathes (especially of their Emperours) are of many cuts, and varietie of fashion. And for Vowes; in necessities and dangers, they wil promise vnto God the sacrifices of beasts in some holy places, not vpon Altars, butAndr. Arinabene. hauing flaied off the skin, they giue it with the head, feet, and forth part of the flesh to the Priest; another part to the Poore; the third to  the Neighbours; the fourth is for the Guests.
They are so addicted to the opinion of Fate, that GOD is esteemed to blesse whatsoeuer hath successe, as namely, Selyms murthering his Father; and to detest what wanteth good euent, whatsoeuer ground it had. They feare not the Plague, accounting euerie mans time limited by Fate, and therefore will wipe their faces with the cloathes of such as haue dyed thereof.
They holdMunster. Cos. lib. 4. Busb. ep. 3. and 4. it alike acceptable to God, to offer almes to beasts, and to bestow it on men, when it is offered for the loue of God. Some there are, which will redeeme birds, imprisoned in their cages or coopes, and hauing payed their price, let them flie. Others (for the loue of God) cast bread into the water to feed the fishes, esteeming it a worke greatly meritorious;  but Dogges are accounted vncleane, in stead whereof they delight in Cats, following (they say) their Prophet Mahomet, who falling asleepe at table, and awaking to goe to his deuotions, rather cut off his sleeue, whereon he found his Cat fast asleepe, then he would disturbe her. Master Simons told mee, that he hath seene them at Cairo feed Dogges with baskets of bread, one standing by with a club to keepe them from fighting: and one gaue almes for a Bitch which had Whelps vnder a stall. Heerein perhaps (as in other things) the Egyptians are more superstitious then the Turkes, especially in this of Dogs, which sauours of their old Anubis and dog-worshipping. Yea, and in Constantinople,M G. Sandys. though they suffer them not as vncleane creatures, to come into their houses, yet they thinke it a deed of pietie to feed them, a^d buy bread therefore, prouiding them kennells also: most of them haue no particular  owner: they repaire to the Sea-side nightly, where they keepe a grieuous howling, heard (if the winde be Southward) to Pera.
They say Moses was the first great Prophet, to whom was giuen the booke of Tefrit, that is, the Law, and they which obserued it in those times were saued. But when men grew corrupt, God gaue Dauid the booke Czabur, or the Psalter: and when this preuailed not, Iesus was sent with the booke Ingil, or the Gospel, whereby in that time men were saued. They hold that Christ was borne of the Virgin Marie, at her breasts, hauing conceiued by the smell of a Rose, which the Angell Gabrel presented her. And preferring Christ before Moses, they admit not a Iew to turne Turke, but hee must first be a Christian, and eate Swines-slesh, and after two or three dayes abiuring Christ, hee is made Musulman. For so  Mahomet came last in order of the Prophets with his Alcoran. This Law and Lawgiuer is so sacred to them, that in all their prayers, euen from their mothers breasts, they obserue this forme: La illah, illelah Mehemmet irresullellah tanre rirpeghamber hace: That is, there is no God but one, and Mahomet his Prophet: one Creator, and more Prophets. This they sucke in with their milke, and in their first learning to speake, lispe out this deuotion. The infants goe with the rest to their Mosquees or Meschits, but are not tied to other ceremonies, sauing washing, till they are circumcised. Euery manAnt. Men^u. hath (in their opinion) from his birth to his death two Angels attending him; the one at his right hand, the other at his left. At foure or fiue yeere old they send him to the Schoole to learne the Curaam, and the first words which their Masters teach them are to this sense; God is one, and is not contained  in any place, but is through all, and hath neither father nor mother, nor children, eateth not, nor dinketh, nor sleepeth, and nothing is like to him. The two Angels before said, are
 called Chiramim and Chira tibin, which write the good or euill that men doe against the day of Iudgement. The TurkesMagni Geogr. abhorre blasphemie not onely against God and Mahumet, but also against Christ and the Virgin Marie, and other Saints: and they punish blasphemers of whatsoeuer Sect: they account it a sinne for a man to build a house which shall last longer then a mans life: and therefore howsoeuer they are sumptuous and magnificent in there publike buildings, yet are their priuate dwellings very homely, and ill contriued. They eate much Opium, thinking it maketh them couragious in the warres. TheyVoyages du Villam^nt. l. 3. cap. 6. haue a remedie for paine in the head or elsewhere, to burne the part affected with the touch-boxe (which they alway carry with them) or with some linnen cloth, whereby they haue many markes on their  foreheads and temples, witnesses of their needlesse and heedlesse respect to Physicians.
As the Scripture containeth some PropheciesTh. Brightman and sere omnes qui in Apoc. comment. ediderunt. of the arising and proceedings of the Turkish Nation, the rod of God, whereby hee scourgeth his Christian people; so haue they also prophecies amongst themselues of their end and ruine, when God in his mercie to Christians shall execute iustice vpon the Turkes, and cast the rod into the fire, wherewith he had chastised his children. Such an one is that which GeorgiovitzBart. Georg. Italice and Latine apud Lonicerum to. 1. l. 3. and Anglice. ap. Fox. Act. and Mon. to. 1. in fine. translateth and expoundeth: and such is that whichHist. Musulm. l. 15. Leunclavius hath transcribed out of their Booke called Messabili, wherein is written, that Constantinople shall be twice taken before Degnal Lain, that is, the cursed Antichrist, shall come; once by the Sword, another time by the force of the praiers  of the sonnes of Isahac. LainPhil. Camerarius Medit. Hist. C^nt. 3. c. 10. is an Epithete which they giue to Degnal, signifying wicked or mischieuous. Of this Degnal the Turks fable, that before his comming, shall Mechdi enioy the Empire. This Mechdi, they say,Hist. Musul. l. 16. was descended of their Prophet Mahumet, and walketh inuisible: one day he shall come into light, and raigne for a time: and after him shall Degnal their Anti-Prophet, or Antichrist, come. A certain Deruise offered to assault and murther Baiaze^ the Great Turk, professing himselfe to be that Mechdi, and was slain by one of the Bassas.


@. III.  Of the Turkish Manners, their Ciuill and Morall behauiour.
AS for the bloodie practises, which each Emperor vseth in murthering his brethren to secure him in his Throne, in rooting out of the Nobilitie of the Countries which they conquer, in rasing the Wals and Fortresses of the Cities, least they should be receptacles for conspiracie, in translating people from one Countrie to another, with other their practises and policies of state, I purpose not to adde any more: but refer the Reader to others Treatises. But to present vnto you a Turke set forth in the ordinary Turkish disposition, manners, and fashions, will not (I thinke) seeme tedious. Thus therefore haue wee viewed him with othersM. George Sandys. eyes. They be generally well complexioned, of good statures, and full bodies, proportionably compacted. They nourish no haire about them, but a locke on their crowne, and on their faces onely, esteeming it more cleanely: and to bee better prepared  for their superstitious washings. But their beards they weare at full length, the marke of their affected grauitie, and token of freedome (for slaues haue theirs shauen) scoffing at Christians which cut or want them. All of them weare on their heads white Shashes and Turbants, the badge of their Religion: as is the folding of the one, and size of the other, of their vocations and qualitie. Shashes are long Towells of Callico wound about their heads. Turbants are made like great Globes, of Callico too, and thwarted with rolles of the same; hauing little copped caps on the top, of greene or red veluet; being onely worne by persons of ranke, and he the greatest that weares the greatest, except the Mufties, which ouer-sizeth the Sultans. Some Christians (Turkising in fashion) are permitted as a great fauour to weare white heads in the Citie. The next, that they weare is a smocke of Callico  with ample sleeues, much longer then their armes: vnder this, a paire of Calsouns of the same, which reach to their ankles, the rest naked: their slip-shooes yellow or red, picked at the toe, and plated on the sole: ouer all a halfe-sleeued coate, girt vnto them with a Towell: their necke all bare: and this within doores is their Summer accoutrement. Ouer all, when they goe abroad, they weare gownes buttoned before, vngathered in the shoulders. In the Winter they adde to the former, Calsouns of cloth, which about the small of the legge are sewed to short smooth buskins of leather without soles, lining their gownes with Furres, as they doe their coates. They weare no gloues, nor alter their fashions, which (except in  richnesse) are alike in all. They retaine the old worlds custome in giuing change of garments, one vest fitting all. The Clergie goe much in greene, as Mahomets colour: whose kinsmen weare greene Shashes, and are called Emers, or Lords, as doe their women also somewhat of greene on their heads: an il-fauoured race, seeming branded of God, for their hereditarie presumption of holinesse from so vnholy a stocke. If a Christian weare greene, they will
 teare off his clothes, if not beate him. They carry no weapons about them in the Citie: only they thrust vnder their girdles great crooked kniues of a dagger-like size, in sheaths of mettall, the haf^s and sheaths sometimes richly set with stones. They beare their bodies vpright, of a stately gate, and elated countenance. In their familiar salutations they lay their hands on their bosomes, and a little decline their bodies, almost to the ground, if to a Great man, with kissing the hemme of his garment. The ornaments of their heads they neuer put off vpon any occasion. They affect cleanlinesse euen religiously, neuer making water, but they wash their hands and priuities: this they doe secretly and couching, reuiling the Christian, or striking him for pissing against a wall. This they doe also, lest they should pollute their garment, which might frustrate their prayers. They neuer walke vp and downe  for recreation, nor vse any other exercise but shooting, and then also sit on carpets in the shadow, and send their slaues for their Arrowes. These pierce deepe, through Targets of Steele and pieces of Brasse two inches thicke: the Bow for forme and length like the lath of a Crosse-bow, of Buffolos Horne, intermixed with sinewes of admirable workmanship. Wrestling and rope-walking are professions, not recreations. Of Cardes and Dice they are happily ignorant: at Chesse they will play all day long, auoiding yet the hazard of money. The better sort delight in Horses, which are quickly jaded if h^ld to a good round trot (for amble they doe not) in an indifferent iourney. But they ride not so fast to put them to it, They feed them in their stable with Barley, which there is very cheape, as onely seruing for that purpose.  
They greatly reuerence their Parents and Superiours, and the young, the aged: the left hand as they goe, hath the prioritie of the right, in that they are made Masters of the others sword, and the chiefest place the furthest from the wall. They liue brotherly together, but come not, except on speciall occasion, in each others house, and then but into the more publike parts thereof. Their houses and furniture are meane, hauing nothing on the inside but white walles (except some speciall roome) the roofes of many curiously seeled, the greater part of the floore, and that a little aduanced, couered with carpets, the cause they at entring put off their slip-shooes. They lie on Matresses of Silke, or stained Linnen, with Bolsters of the same, and Quilts sutable, but much in their clothes: as for lowsinesse which followes, it is no great shame. They haue neither Tables  nor Stooles, but sit crosse-legged on the floore all in a ring. They haue a skinne spread before them in stead of a cloth. The better sort sit about a round boord standing on a foot, halfe a foot high, and brimmed like a Charger. Rice sod in the fat of Mutton is their ordinarie food; Pottage also, fried Eggs, Pasties, Tansies, Flesh little in gobbits, London spending as much flesh in one day, as Constantinople in twentie. Fish they haue in indifferent quantitie. The Commons commonly feed on Herbes, Rootes, Onions, Garlick, Hodge-podges, etc. vile fare, and at as vile rate in so great plentie. They are attended by their slaues, of which to haue many is to bee rich. When one hath fed sufficiently he riseth, and another takes his roome, and so continue till all bee satisfied. They eate three times a day: but when they feast they sit all day long, except they rise and exonerate  nature, forthwith returning. They abstaine from Hoggs-flesh, Bloud, and that which dies alone, except in necessi^ie. Their vsuall drinke is water: the richer infuse diuers confections. Wine is prohibited, but so greedily swallowed where they can get it, that but few goe away vnled from the Emb^ssadours table. Our Beere they preferre before all other drinkes, which would in all likelihood prooue exceedingly profitable to such as would bring it in amongst them, where wine is forbidden, and Barly is at nine pence a bushell. They haue Coffa houses more common then Ale-houses with vsBiddulph., in, or neere to which on benches in the street, they will sit chatting most of the day, drinking their Coffa (so called of a berry it is made of) as hot as they can indure it. It is blacke as soot, and tastes not much vnlike it, good (they say) for digestion and mirth. Of the boyes which some Coffa-men keepe as stales,  wee haue spoken before. Optum they much vse, it seemes for the giddinesse and turbulent dreames it causeth, which they (as all kinde of stupifying, astonishment and madnesse) religiouslyIn imitation, it seemes, of their Prophet Mahumet, which had the falling euill, and ascribed it to extasie, etc. affect. This perhaps the cause why Tobacco is so liked, a thing brought them by the English, the worst here, passing currant, and excellent there. But Morat Bassa, not long since, caused a pipe to be thrust through the nose of a Turke, and so be led in derision through the Citie. They take it through reeds with great heads of wood annexed.
The vnder garments of the women differ little from those of the men. These weare on their heads a cap sugar-loafe-fashion, the better sort vse Bracelets and Iewells. When they goe abroad they weare ouer all, long gownes of violet or scarlet cloth, tyed close before, the large sleeues hanging ouer their hands. They haue the sweetest children that are lightly seen,  which they carry astride on their shoulders. They anoint their bodies with the earth of Chios, which makes the skinne soft, white, and shining, freeing the face from wrinkles.



depiction of a Turkish woman
For the Readers further pleasure I haue here presented a Turkish Woman in Picture.


They vse their bond women with little lesse respect then their wiues.Turkish women. Though they be courteous to each other, and will aske how himselfe, child, slaue, horse, cat, etc. doe: yet neuer of the wi^e: yea, if you aske a child how his mother does, he will throw stones and reuile you. Biddulph. Their Markets yeeld Men, Women, Virgins, Children, to as ample tryall and full purchase as Horses with vs: saue that the Men-slaues may compell their Masters before the Cadi to limit the time of their bondage, or set a price of their redemption, or else to sell them to another. But Galley slaues are seldome released, or those that belong to great men beyond the Cadies authoritie. They buy little children, and geld many of them, as you haue heard, which some say was begun by Selym the second, after he had seene a Gelding couer a Mare: and by Menauinus his relation of himselfe, seemes not practised in his father Baiazets time. These are in great repute  with their Masters: yea, the second Vizier of the Port is now an Eunuch.
For Arts; some haue some little knowledge in Philosophie. Necessitie hath taught them the practise of Physicke, not the grounds of Arts. In Astronomie they haue some insight, and vndertake to tell fortunes. They haue a good gift in Poetrie. Their Musicke is very vile.
The Grand Signior was once perswaded to heare some Italian Musick, but while they spent much time in tuning, hee (perhaps esteeming that their Musick) commanded them to depart. Logick and Rhetorick they reiect. Some write Histories, but few read them, thinking none dare write the truth of the present, or can, of the times past. Printing they reiect, the most of their Priests liuing by writing. Euery one hath some trades, such lightly as  serue their owne turnes; a lazie people, more esteeming ease then profit, yet very couetous, seldome holding compact with the Christians that holds not with their commoditie.




CHAP. XI. Of the Religious places amongst the Turkes: their Meschits, Hospitalls, and Monasteries: with their Liturgie and Circumcision.

@. I.  Of their Temples: A description of S. SOPHIES.
THE placesThe policie of the Turkish Empire. of most Religion to the Turkes abroad, are those which Mahumet himselfe polluted with his irreligion: as Mecca, Medina, etc. The places of most Religion amongst themselues are their Mosches, or MeschitsMe gied, Mesg^d, Mescita, Meskita, Me qui^a, Mosqui^a; signifieth a Church, Temple, or Synagogue of the Moh^metans, as Masged-Aly neere Cusa i. Templum Ali, falsly writ^en Massadalle: where Aly was buried, Bedwell.: that is, their Temples and Houses of Prayer (whereof they haue many in all Turkie) and next thereunto their Hospitals for the reliefe of the poore, impotent, and Pilgrims. Neither are the Turkes sparing in these or the like (seeming) charitable expences. For when a Turke falleth sicke, and thinketh he shall thereof dye, hee  sends for his friends and kinsfolkes, and in their presence maketh his Testament: the greatest Legacies whereof are bequeathed to publike vses, which they thinke will be meritorious to their soules.
Such are the making and repayring of Bridges, Cawseyes, Conduits to conuey water to their Hospitalls or Temples. Some also giue to the Redemption of Captiues. Many of their Women (the deuouter Sexe, whether in Religion or superstition) bequeath money to bee distributed amongst such Souldiers as haue slaine any certaine number of Christians: a deed in their conceit very religious. These are the Wills and Deeds of the inferiour sort. But the Emperors, and great Bassaes, appoint Legacies to expresse a greater magnificence with their deuotion, as the building of Temples and Hospitalls.  
Their Temples or Meschites are for the most part foure square, not much vnlike to our Churches, but larger in length then bredth. The Temple of St. Sophie in Constantinople is of all other in the Turkes Dominion the most admirable, built long since by Iustinian, and (by Mahumet the Conqueror) peruerted to this Mahumetan vse aboue nine hundred yeeres after. Of this Temple they write,Pet. Gyllius, Topographia Constantinop. l. 2. c. 3. that it ^^s first built by Constantius, sonne of Constantius the Great, with a roofe of timber: and burnt by the Arrians in the time of Great Theodosius, who againe repayred it. SozomenusSozem. l. 8. c. 22. saith, that in the broyles, which hapned not long after in the raigne of Arcadius and Honorius about Chrysostome, the Church was fired, his enem^es ascribing it to his partakers, and they againe to his Aduersaries. It is reported that  Theodosius Iunior rebuilt it. But in the time of Iustinian, ProcopiusProcop. de Aedificijs Iustin^ani, l. 1. testifieth, that base and wick^d men burnt it againe, which Iustinian built a-new in such sumptuous and manificent sort, that in rega^d of this change it might haue beene wished that it had perished long before. His chiefe worke-men were Anthemius, and Isidorus, who raised it into a most goodly frame, which might amaze the beholders, and seeme incredible to the hearers. Both he and EuagriusEuag. hist. Ecclesiast. l 4. c. 30. recite the particulars. The length was two hundred and threescore feet: the bredth one hundred and fifteene: the height a hundred and fourescore. Zonaras, Agathias, and Georgius Cedrenus, tell of the harmes it receiued by Earthquakes, whiles Iustinian liued, which yet he repaired, as did Basilius and Andronicus after him. NicephorusNiceph. Eccl. hist. l. 9. c. 9. saith that Constantine raised the Temple of Peace (which before was but small) to that large and stately gr^atnesse, which in his dayes it retayned: and his sonne Constantius finished the Temple of  Sophia so neere it, that they seemed to haue but one wall. It wasNiceph. l. 17. cap. 10. founded by Constantine his fa her: and was burnt in a sedition of the people, in the raigne of Iustinian, in which rebellion thirtie thousand of the people were slaine, and partly to pacifie the wrath of GOD (saith hee) for so great a slaughter, hee built this Temple. From the side of the Temple hee tookeSuidas in Verbo (...). foure hundred twentie and seuen Pillars or Images of Heathen gods, and of the twelue signes of the Zodiake: and fourescore Statues of Christian Emperours, which hee didistributed in the Citie. But more then enough of the ancient structure thereof.
As it is at this day, diuers haue described it: but of them all most diligently, PetrusP. Gyll Topog. Constant. l. 2. 4. Menauino, P (...) of the T. E. Bellonius and others. Gellius. The walls and roofes thereof are of Brick, the inner part lyned with Marble most excellent,  and of diuers sorts, the roofe is set with Stones, and pieces of Glasse gilded: Nature and Art conspiring to breed the beholders both pleasure and wonder. It is so composed, and the Pillars and Arches so placed, that the middle Ile within (considered by it selfe)
 seemes like the forme of an Egge, long and round: but the whole fabrick both within and without, yeeldeth to the curious obseruer a square forme. All the inner part hath Arches (in the top open to receiue light) which are sustained with Marble Pillars of diuers colours, and there are, saith Bellonius, (if one may say it) as many doores in that Temple, as are dayes in the yeere. It is farre more admirable then the Roman Pantheon: The worke of that being grosse, solid, and easie for a workeman to conceiue. But this Sophian Temple is more subtle to the view of the eye and minde. It hath two rewes of Pillars each ouer other, those vpper ones supporting the hemisphere, loouer, or steeple, which is wrought all with Musaike worke, garnished with gold and azure. The doores or gates are couered with fine Latten of Corinth: one of which (they imagine) was made of the wood of Noabs Arke. And therefore there are in it three places left vncouered for the deuouter people to kisse, for the pardon of their sinnes. It had sometimes aboue three hundred thousand Duckets of yeerely reuenue. The Turkes, when they turkeised it, threw downe the Altars, turned the Bells into great Ordnance, and either tooke away the Images, or put out their eyes, for (say they) God, and not walls and pictures, is to be adored. NicolasN. N Peregrination. l. 2. c. 20. Nicolai saith, that it had in compasse more then a mile, within which were comprehended the houses of Canons and Priests: of the most part of the Cloyster (because it was neere the Seraile) theyBellon. made a stable for horses; as Constantines Palace for Elephants; and a Temple (neere the Tilt-yard, or Hippodromus) for wilde beasts, which are tied to the seuerall pillars thereof, Lyons, Beares, Wolues, wilde Asses, Ounces, etc. No Christian may enter into this Meschit, but he may put his bodie in at the doores and view it: But Master Simons saith, they are not now so scrupulous: for he hath beene suffered to goe in: as G. Dousa also reporteth of himselfe. There haue been at once (in the time of Baiazet) numbredMenauino. thirtie and sixe thousand Turkes assembled for deuotion at an Easter-solemnitie. Perhaps (it is Master Sandys his obseruation) the ancient fabrick then standing entire, whereof this remaining was little more then the channell. Better to be beleeued then Bellonius his report of so many doores, whereas if it hath fiue, it hath more by one, then by me was discerned. It is almost euery other Friday frequented by the Sultan. The Christian Emperours ascended the stately Galleries on horse-backe. Before the entrance there is a goodly Portico, where the Christians, that visit it on curiositie, as well as the Turkes, doe leaue their shooes before they doe enter. It had in Iustinians time Porches or Galleries on both sides, one of which it seemeth fell by some earthquake. The innumerable windowes, and vnspeakable ornaments of the Temple, would easily detaine our pen, as a willing prisoner in the relation thereof. But besides the ancient, P. Gyllius, Menauinus, Bellonius, Nicolai, Dousa, and many others haue done it alreadie: neither will my Pilgrimage suffer mee to stay long in one place, which am to visite so many, both heere and elsewhere in the World. Let vs proceed therefore to their other Temples: especially seeing this is such, that none is able to expresse the excellencie, nor could euer worthily expresse the least part thereof. Besides, what others haue reported, Dousa telleth of a Marble Pillar therein, which continually sweats forth a certaine liquor, which the Turkes wipe off with their handkerchiefs, as (in their opinion) profitable against diuers diseases.
Mahomet the ConquerourN. Nicolai. built one in like fashion without any figures, which hath about an hundred houses couered with Lead for their Doctors and Priests, and for all Strangers and Pilgrims of any Nation or Religion, where they may refresh ^hems^lues, their seruants, and horses for three dayes, with meat and lodging at free cost. There are also without the precinct of the Mosche, an hundred and fiftie other Tenements for the poore of the Citie, which haue there an Asper a day, and as much bread as they need: but they account that kinde of life so vnhappy, that oftentimes those Tenements stand emptie: but the money which should this way be bestowed, is sent to the Hospitalls of the diseased. There are also fiue other Meschits, in forme resembling the former, but not so great nor so rich. The rest  ofPol of the T. E. the Meschits are of diuers sorts, some high, some low, of seuerall fashions. The Turrets, vpon which their Priests call the people to prayers, are of a great height, made in manner of Watch-towers; their greater Churches hauing two, the lesser one of them. Vpon the top is set an halfe Moone or Crescent, which is the Turkes Ensigne, as the Crosse is vsuall to the Christians. Within their Temples they haue no kinde of ornaments, but bare wals, with Arabike Letters (some in gold) written thereon, saue onely their Bookes, and Lamps burning with oyle in great abundance, and clothes of Tapestrie, on the which being spread ouer Mats vpon the pauement, they prostrate themselues in prayer time.




@. II. Of their Hospitalls and Monasteries.
THeir Hospitalls they call Imarets; of these there are great vse, because they want Innes in the Turkes Dominions. They found them for the reliefe of the poore, and of Trauellers, where they haue food allowed them (differing according to the vse of the place) and lodging places, without beds. They are open for the most part to all men of all Religions. The chiefe Hospitalls in Turki^, are in Constantinople: two of  which Mahomet and Baiazet his sonne founded. Both these haue about fiue and twentie round Turrets couered with Lead; one of which, being in the middest of the other, is larger and greater then the rest, and vnder are lodgings for the Priests: On one side are beds for Pilgrims and Trauellers, on the other for Lepers. Thrice a day may any man resort thither into a certaine place for meate. There are maintained fourteene Doctors of their Law. Some say, that the reuenues of Mahomets Hospitall amount to an hundred and fiftie thousand Duckets, and the other to as much or more. Each of which hath a little Chappel adioyning, in which the Founders are buried, who were at this great charge, that the Priests and such as are there refreshed, should pray for their soules, and say, Allae Rahsmetileson: that is, God haue mercy on them. Selym finished that which Baiazet his father had begun to build. But his sonne  Solyman erected one farre surpassing the former. Orchanes was the first of these Ottoman Princes which founded Monasteries. Mahomet the first, finishedKnoll. Turkish Hist. the great Temple at Hadrianople, the seat Royall of the Turkes in Europe before Constantinople was won. He built also, besides a Palace, another Temple, with a most sumptuous Abbey, and a publike Schoole adioyning, endowing the same with great reuenues. He also gaue great summes of money to be distributed yeerely at Mecca and Medina, for the reliefe of poore Pilgrims.Whosoeuer will read of the Temples, Hospitals, Colledges, etc. founded by their Kings, let him read Leunclau. at the end of the life of euery Sultan, in the end of his seuerall bookes, where hee relateth them at large, Hist. Musulman. lib. 18. Solyman erected, in memoriall of Mahumet his eldest sonne, a stately Tombe, a sumptuous Church, a Monasterie and Colledge, with other things for the health of his soule. He was buried himselfe in a Chappell which hee had in his life time built most stately, with a Colledge and Hospitall; his wife Roxolana, and some of his murthered children lying intombed by him: his  Scimatar also hanging by him, in token that hee dyed in warres, which honour they grant not otherwise to their Princes. The reuenues of the Country about Sigeth in Hungary (lately wonne from the Christians) were giuen to the maintenance of those houses, which his deuotion had founded. Neither is it lawfull for them to conuert any Lands to such sacred vses, except they haue first with their owne sword wonne them from the enemies of their Religion; the most acceptable seruice to their Prophet. And therefore Selym the second, sonne and successour of Solyman, intended to build a Magnificent Temple, and Munificent Colledge, Monasterie and Almes-house at Hadrianople, where hee intended his Sepulchre, brake his league with the Venetians, and wan Cyprus from them, that thence he might endow the same  with maintenance. But it were tedious to insist further in declaring their expences, which deuotion in all Turky hath procured: their Emperors and Bassaes esteeming nothing of more honor in the world, or merit for heauen. Let vs come to their Church-rites and Ceremonies.


@. III. Of their publike Prayers and Church-Rites.
THE Temples in Turkie are (as hath beene said) innumerable, both publike, and priuate of meaner bauildings: on which is a Tower, as with vs a Steeple,  whereupon on theAnd. Ariuah. Muetden or Thalisman ascendeth: and it being open with Pillars or foure Windowes, first he goeth to that on the East-side, and calleth the people to prayer with a loud voyce,Ioannes Thesaurarius Reg. Fran. stopping his eares with his hands, crying: There is no God but one, and Mahumet his Messenger: come to make prayer for remission of your sins, and know that there is no stronger then the God of Mahumet his Messenger. This hee saith in order on euery side of the Steeple. If there be in the Citie any Moschees, the Cathedrall beginneth, and then all other Parishionall follow. This they doe fiue times a day, and on Friday (their Sabbath) sixe times. First, at Sun-rising, with foure bendings to the earth, and twice praying. The second about noone, with ten bowings, and fiue prayings. The third, at  afternoone before Sun-set, with eight inclinations, and foure prayings. The fourth, with fiue bendings and three prayings about Sun-set. The fifth, longer then the rest, with fifteen bowings, and eight prayings. This bending or bowing they call Erket, which is a double bowing
 with prostrating himselfe: their prayer they call Czalamet, which they make sitting after euery Erket, with a salutation on the right hand and on the left, and the impression or signe of peace, which is done with bringing both hands ouer the face. Euery Busurman is bound to resort to these their Liturgies, at his Parishionall Meschit, except hee haue some lawfull impediment: and if not at all of them, yet at least at one to be well washed, for which purpose they haue innumerable Baths in Turkie fairely built; nor may any enter into the Temple, especially in the morning, but first well washed in the Bath, as is said before: and if hee keepeth him not cleane the rest of the day, that washing will serue: butSemtemcast^. if he haue committed any carnall sinne, or be any way soyled, or haue eaten any vncleane thing, then in some  secret place he washeth his hands and armes to the elbow, his hinder partsMenauino saith, that a^ter the secret washing of their ^ecrets, etc. They ^ome forth and wash their hands, face, and the rest, each three times, o^seruing equally that vnequall number, and saying the Psalm^ Ele^che Motte chi assro, and after, ^nother, Li illaphi Circison. and priuities; and this sufficeth without going to Bath, except he be otherwise polluted. For defect herein they haue inquisitions, and appointed penalties; respect or pardon being giuen to none that faile, especially on Friday, and in their Lent: Such a one is carried about the Towne with a boord fastned to his necke, all be-hanged with Foxe-tayles, besides a penaltie according to his state in money; and he that will not thus order himselfe, shall not be allowed their buriall rites. After they are thus washed, they put off their shooes in imitation of Moses, and then enter into the Meschitta, where the floore is couered with Mats or Carpets, nor is any other thing seene but white walls, and great store of burning Lamps, and in golden Arabike letters  thoseLa illah, illelah Mahomet irresul alah tanre hir paganber hach. words before mentioned.
There is a Pulpit, on which the Choza or Focqui ascendeth, and the first thing he doth is to stretch out his hands at large, and then ioyning them together, he kneeleth and k^sseth the ground: then he lifteth vp his head, and stopping his eares with his hands, standing a good space, as it wereQuasi in astratto in oratione. distracted or rauished in his prayers, after lifting vp his hands, hee againe kisseth the ground so many times, as the houre of prayer according to that former rule requireth; and then lifting vp himselfe againe, he stretcheth out his hands againe, so standing about a quarter of an houre, and againe kneeling with his mouth to the ground, so continueth mouing it euery way about a Pater noster while, and then lifting vp his head, and setting his hands to his eares, falls to his praying another quarter of an houre, and then licenseth the  people to depart. There is no noyse heardTheir deuotion, silence, honestie, and order is such, saith Septemcast. that I cannot but admire comparing it with the contrarie in the Churches of Christians. as if there had beene nothing within. Not so religious is their course (and yet that religion admits it) which Martin Braidenbach reporteth to be practised by them in a Moschee on Mount Sinai, where Moses receiued the Law; for the Saracens vse to get therein Prophets, thinking the issue there gotten is holy, and full of the Propheticall spirit.
Menauino thus describeth their Rites. After their mysticall washing (as before) they goe with a sober pace to the Meschit (not like one which runneth away) and if he happen to breake winde by the way, his former washing is vnsufficient, and hee must returne to renue it. Being assembled in the Meschit, they all turne their facesThey pray toward^ Mecca, as the Iewes ^owards Ierusalem. Southwards, and the Meizin or Muetden, Clerke, Sexton, Priest, Bell-ringer, or Bell rather) standeth vp and readeth that Psalme, which before hee had cried to them in the steeple, and euery one standeth vp,  holding his hands fastned to his waste, and bow their heads to their feete with great reuerence, and without stirring. Then ariseth another Priest of another order called Imam, and readeth a Psalme aloud, the Meizin as his Clerke answering, which being ended they fall on the ground, and say, Saban alla, Saban alla, Saban alla, that is, God haue mercie on vs most wretched sinners, abiding prostrate till the Priest Imam singeth againe his Psalme, and then they rise. And this they doe foure or fiue times, according to the order of their seruice. After this they all kneele and prostrate themselues on the ground, the Meizin obseruing a long Ceremonie, in which with a loud voyce hee prayeth GOD to inspire the Christians, Iewes, Greekes, and generally all Infidels to turne to their Law. Th^s being said, euery man lifteth his hand to heauen, crying aloud, Amin, Amin: and then  they touch their eyes to wipe them with their hands, (which is, as crossing among the Papists, a blessing of themselues) bringing their hands ouer their face, and so they depart. In the English Treatise of the Turkish Policie these things are related, with some other Ceremonies; as that they say together with the Priest the first Azoara or Chapter of the Alcoran, etc. BartholomaeusBar. Georgiovitz. Nobili and gliotiosi. Georgiouitz saith, that onely the chiefe sort are bound to assemble to the daily deuotions, which they obserue fiue times a day; others, which cannot spare the times, are not tyed. On their Sabbaths it is otherwise.




@. IIII. Of their Sabbaths, and of their Lent and Easter.
THE women enter not their Mesquitas, but on Fridayes at nine a clocke, or at Easter, and then they are in a Gallery or Terasse apart, where they may see and not bee seene, and this is not common to all, but the wiues and mothers of the chiefe of the place. And as we haue said of the Priest, so it is to be vnderstood, that all the men and women there doe the same without failing in any point. They suffer notSome say they are now lesse curious in this point. a Christian  to enter therein: and yet will they enter into the Churches of the Christians to heare the Church-musicke. The women abide in their Churches from nine of the clocke to midnight, continually praying with certaine motions and strange cries, continuing so long in this act, that they fall vpon the ground as in a swoune through wearinesse: and if any feele her selfe at that time to bee with childe, the Turkes hold that they are conceiued by the holy Ghost, and presently vow that childe to God, and call such Nefecs Ogli, that is, sonnes of the holy Ghost. And on Friday at nine or ten of the clocke, the Priest vseth to preach to the people: and these their discourses last aboue two houres. That which is said is not verie manifest; yet they say, that he preacheth the miracles of Mahomet, sometime exalting their faith, sometime commending obedience, and sometime rehearsing fabulous tales to terrifie the  bad, as that such mens soules are carried of certaine Camels (there being some sixe thousand flying about in the ayre for this purpose) into the Sepulchres of wicked Christians, and that the good Christians are put in their emptie Sepulchres, inueighing against the blasphemers of Mahomet, Christ and the Saints, exhorting to Almes, rehearsing their commandements of the law. And if they preach scandalous doctrine, the Mufti and the Cadlilescher depriue them, and correct them as Heretikes; yea, some of them, for preferring Christ before Mahomet, are put to death; of which one Ibraim Schec a Priest of Constantinople (reported to haue wrought miracles amongst the Turkes in the dayes of Soliman) was stoned to death, his head cut off, and his bodie burned; and of his Disciples some were beheaded, others thrust into the Gallies, for preferring Christ, and denying Mahomet. And were it not for the terrour of the sword,  there would be more innouations of religion; and some haue perswaded the Grand Signior, not to suffer the Alcoran to bee so common to be read, and interpreted of euerie one; guiltie of the absurdities therein contained. But to returne. After this preaching ended, two young Clerkes goe vp to him, and sing certaine prayers, which ended, the Priest againe beginneth to sing with the people in a base voyce, with wrigling euery way for the space of halfe an houre, saying nothing but Lailla, illellah, that is, there is but one God. And these Ceremonies are done onely on their Lenten Fridayes. Their Lent is one Moone or Moneth in the yeere, which, if this yeere it be Iuly, the next it shall bee August, and so in order: that in twelue yeeres they haue fasted all times of the yeere, making no other difference of meates, then at other times, but eating onely in the night. They prepareKnol. Tur. Hist. p. 777. themselues by diminishing their  fare (not as the Christians at Shrouetide) that they may the better endure it: for on the day, in which they fast, they will not so much as taste a cup of water, or wash their mouthes therewith, till the Starres appeare: And eight or ten dayes after it beginneth, some Officers ride about the towne, crying; Such a day beginneth the Fast, prepare yee, prepare yee; and when it is begun, the Cadi and Subassi, if they finde any shops open, or any body eating in the day, set him on an Asse backwards, with the tayle in his hand, as Adulterers are punished: and to drinke wine at this time, is death. Neither will they suffer Iewes or Christians to scandalize their Turkes this way. And when their Lent is neere the end, they goe all to the Baths and plucke off all their haires, but of the head and beard, with an oyntment for that purpose: they colour their nayles red, with an enduring colour, called Chua, with which  they dye also the tayles and feet of their horses; and the women their hands, feet, and priuie parts. This they doe in honour of their solemnitie, which lasteth three daies with great feasting, in which nothing else but meates and drinkes may be sold. They goe to the Sepulchres of the dead there to eate, full of gladnesse, and salute each other, saying; Baaram glutiotzong, that is, God giue you a good Feast: and if they meete with a Iew or a Christian, woe vnto them. On the first day of their Bairam, the Sultan rideth to S. Sophia with all pompe: and then did we see (saith Master Sandys) a sight full of horror, many mourne with age, yet dead before death, and reuolting from their Christianitie, therefore throwing away their bonets, and lifting vp their fore fingers, to which the Tyrant bowed himselfe, as glorying in such conuersions. The Turks keepeThis second Easter is called Chuccibairam. another Easter, especially in Mecca, more solemne  to the Tartars, Moores, and Arabians, then to the Turkes, except the Pilgrims, which resort thither.



@. V. Of the Turkish Circumcision.
THE Turkes say they areCircumcision. circumcised, because they are the sonnes of Ismael, and because they may be cleane when they goe to their Temples, no filth lying hid vnder the skinne. At seuen or eight yeeres of age, or later, this Ceremonie is performed. The first thing they doe, is, to inuite many thither, both Turkes, Iewes, and  Christians, besides the friends and kindred, to make the greater gaine, euery one giuing somewhat according to his abilitie. When the day is come, they which are inuited mount on horse-backe, for else it isNo solemnitie without horses. no solemnitie, and goe to the house of the childe, who being mounted on a faire horse richly clothed, with a great Tulipant on his head is carryed to Church, with a long speare borne before him, hauing a torch on the top worth a crown, more or lesse, according to the state of the partie, adorned with roses and garlands, which with the speare is left a gift to the Church, the fees of the Priest: all the way they sound on instruments: after the sonne followeth the father, the kindred, and the rest of the friends, that sometimes there are a hundred horse; at Church they alight, and accompany the childe to the Priest,  which wayteth for them. Here one of the friends sitteth downe, and on his lap the child is set: presently another pulleth off his shooes, another holdeth his hands, and others his feet, and many hold him in talke with words, and these are the Gossips. The Priest seeing all things readie, taketh the end of the skinne of his yard, and draweth it out, and nippeth it with siluer Pinsers, so to mortifie it, and cut it off with lesse paine: then making him beleeue he will deferre it till the next day, he ariseth, the other holding him fast: and after, as if he had forgot somewhat to be done about it, with sizzers, which he holdeth closely in his hand, suddenly cutteth it off, and another layeth thereon a certaine powlder to ease the paine, and in fiue and twentie dayes they looke to the curing of it, laying on it salt, and marmalade of Quinces,  and thence forwards he is called a Musulman. But his name is not then giuen him, but at his birth, and that according to their qualitie. Bellonius writes that they must answere the Circumciser to certaine questions (somewhat like it seemes to that, which in the Baptisme of elder persons is performed by themselues, of younger by their Godfathers) and therefore they are so old before they bee circumcised. Hee also affirmeth, that it is neuer done in the Meschit (wherein none vncircumcised may enter) but in the house. The name Mussulman, Mussliman, or Muslim, signifies an Orthodoxe Mahometan, as Christian or Catholike with vs: Verus Turca, saith Bellonius, Saluatus, or sanae fidei homo, after Cantacuzenus.
After the childe is loosed (who to shew himselfe of courage, smileth, and lifting vp his greatest finger saith those former words of their profession) and is againe mounted, all the company, after a little prayer and offering at the Church, with like pompe conueigh him home, where is great feasting prouision; some feast it three dayes together.
Amurath circumcised his sonne Mahomet at sixteene yeeres old. Vnto which solemnitie many Christian Princes were solemnly inuited, who sent thither their Ambassadors with Presents, who had there their scaffols prepared for them, and furnished according to their states. The solemnitie lasted fortie dayes, and fortie nights, in the great Market-place of Constantinople. And to end theseKnol. p. 957. solemnities, Mahomet the Prince was circumcised, not publikely, but in his Fathers chamber, by Mechmet one of the inferiour Bassaes, sometime the Emperour Solymans Barber. And it is done of other Turkes also most commonly in the Fathers house, not in the Church.
The women-children, about the same age among other women, without other solemnity, say ouer those words, La illah, etc. and likewise the renegado-Iewes; but the Christian renegadoes  are carried about the streets of the Cities with much solemnity, and many gifts giuen them, besides freedome from tribute:Georgiouits. many blinded by couetousnesse offer themselues to this circumcision. But if any for blasphemie against Mahomet, or iniurie to a Turke, be by force circumcised, they haue no such gifts: which punishment the Cadilescher (by the testimony of two accusing Turkes) inflicteth. And therefore to preuent the same, the Christians obtaine the Grand Seigniors safe conduct, that in cases of conscience they may not be iudged of any, except they were accused at the Court before the foure Bassaes, and the Cadilescher of Constantinople, and that by the witnesse of Priests onely, which had not in twelue yeeres drunke wine.





CHAP. XII. Of the Sepulchres, Funerall-Rites, and Opinions touching the Dead, among the Turkes.
NOw if you be wearie of viewing their Temples, and their Prayers, and other Ceremonies seeme tedious, I haue thought fit to present you with another sight, and to conclude with (that which is the conclusion of all flesh) a discourse of their Funerals. WhenMenauino. l. 2. 19. Policie of the Turkish Empire. a Turke is sicke and like to die, his friends visite him, and putting him in minde of his sinnes, aduise him with a penitent  heart to bewayle them. Then doe certaine of their Priests, or one of his kinsmen, read some Psalmes and Prayers. And if the pangs of death doe still continue, they bring him the Alcoran, or Curaam, wherein is one Legend, called Thebara Echelezi, which they read seuen times: and if hee shall die of that sicknesse, they thinke hee will die before they haue thrice read it: and if they see breath still remaine, they read another Psalme, called Iasinnel Curanil Hecin, to the end that the Deuill cause no impediment to his soule. When hee is dead, they lay him forth in the middest of the house vpon Carpets, and place him on his right side, with his face towards the South. Then doe assemble certaine Priests to buy him,If it bee a woman which is dead, the women take this care and paines about it, to lay her forth, etc. who bring with them a string of Beades (such as the Papists vse in mumbling and  numbring their deuotions) being a thousand of them, of lignum aloes, and there with compasse the bodie, and then say to euery one Sababan alla, that is, God haue mercie on him, and turne it about foure or fiue times. After this, their Priests (which are twentie or more) carrie the corps into the Garden, and lay it on a Table two hands breadth from the ground, taking away his shirt, and couering his shame with a new cloth made of fine bombast, with warme water and sope washing him from top to toe: Then do they take two sheets of bombast, in which they wrap the corps, wetting the same with Rose-water, perfumes, and odoriferous things, and laying him on the Beere, couer him quite ouer with his best garments, placing his Turbant at the head thereof, all bedecked with flowers. This done, the Priests begin their deuotions, and some of the company take vp the Beere, carrying the same with  the head forwards to the Meschit: the kinsmen follow, and the women remaine at home weeping, and make readie to eate for the Priests. When they come to the Church, they set him downe without doores, and goe and make an end of their seruice. After that, they carry him forth of the City to the buriall place: (for it is not lawfull to bury in their Cities.) Some prouide their Sepulchres in their life time, some haue them made after by their friends, either in their Gardens, or some solitarie place: They haue also common buriall places, as are our Church-yards, wherein are many Tombes of Marble, Brick, or other matter, according to the qualitie of the person.
If the deceased were a man of high condition, his horses are led with his corps, and his Tombe is adorned with many Epitaphs. And if he were a great Commander, those horses are  sadled the contrary way, and richly furnished, hauing certaine things hanged at their noses, which cause them to neigh, as it were lamenting the losse of their Master. They carry also the truncheons of their Lances, with their Standards and Ensignes, trailing along the ground. There are planted also about their Sepulchres violets and other pleasant flowers. The common sort haue their Tombes of Marble engrauen with letters.
When they are come to the place, with those sheets they let the corps into the graue, couering him on euery side with boords, only on the face they lay a little earth, and there leaue him, and returne home, where they finde store of cheere, and there make a prayer for his soule. GeorgiouitzLib. 2. saith, that they make ouer the graue the forme of an Altar, lest the beasts should goe ouer it, and defile it. They also often repaire thither with teares, and set on the Monument  flesh, bread, wheat, egs, milke, etc. which is done for the dead mans soule in almes to the poore, or to the birds, or ants, which they also account an act of mercy, no lesse meritorious then the other. The Priests haue fiue aspers a piece giuen them for their paines. And if the partie be poore, they gather money to pay the Priests, and to discharge the funeralls. They weareM. Sandys saith, the better sort mourn in white, and for blacke he n^uer saw it worne by Turke. blacks eight dayes in token of mourning: and those that are of great account, three dayes; at which time the friends of the dead assemble, and vsing some words of mutuall consolation from thenceforth resume their wonted habite. Howbeit their kindred, specially of the female sexe, often repaire to the graues to lament there.
Bellonius in his Obseruat.Bellon. lib. 3. cap. 5. obserueth, that they sew not the sheet at the head nor at the feet. The reason is their dreame of certaine Angels, sent in commission presently after the buriall,  to examine the deceased partie, into whom they say GOD hath then put a new spirit. These Angels Menauino cals Nechir and Remonchir, who come with dreadful countenances and
 burning fire-brands, and examine him of his life, which if they finde wicked, they scourge him with fierie whips, if good, they become goodly Angels, and comfort him. Bellonius a little otherwise telleth, that those Angels (which hee calleth Guanequir and Mongir) come, the one with an yron hammer, the other with a hooke, which set the corps vpon his knees, and put a new soule into it; and then aske if he haue beleeued Mahomet and obserued his precepts, if hee haue done good workes, kept their Lent, paied his Tithes, giuen Almes. Of which, if hee can giue good account, they depart from him, and two other Angels come in their places, white as snow, and one of them puts his armes, in stead of a pillow vnder his head, the other sits at his feet, and defends him vntill the day of Iudgement. But  if hee satisfie not the demands of those blacke Angels, hee with the yron mallet strikes him at one blow there with nine fadome vnder the ground: and neither of them ceaseth, the one with his hammer, the other with his hooke, to torment the deceased partie vntill the day of Iudgement. For this cause the Turkes write vpon the dead carkasses the name Croco, and make their Sepulchres hollow, that they may haue roome to kneele, and some lay boords ouer, that no earth fall in. The feare hereof makes them in their morning praier to say, Lord God, from the questioning of the two Angels, the torment of the graue, and euill iourney, deliuer me, Amin. Yea, hence are the praiers which the Turkes, men and women, say at the graues of the dead, for deliuerie from these Angels.
 Concerning the day of Iudgement, theyMenauino. l. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. hold that there is an Angel standing in Heauen, named Israphil, holding alway a Trumpet in his hand prepared against Gods command, to sound the consummation of the World. For at the sound thereof, all Men and Angels shall die, for so they finde it written in their Curaam, which Booke is of high authoritie with them. The Turkish Doctors would dissent from that opinion of the Angels mortalitie, if this Booke would giue them leaue: for to contradict the authoritie thereof is punished with fire, or else their tongues are pulled out of their heads. They hold, that after this dismall sound shall bee a great Earthquake, which shall tumble the Mountaines and Rockes from their places, and grinde them to meale. After this, God will returne to make anew the light, and the Angels as before, and will cause to fall a pleasant raine, called Rehemet sui, that is, the raine of mercie:  and so shall the earth remaine fortie dayes, although those dayes shall bee of a larger size then these. Many also hold, that from thenceforth there shall bee no darknesse of the night, as now, but that it shall be most cleere; neither shall there need any more sleepe for the sustentation of our bodies.
After fortie dayes God will command Israphil to sound his Trumpet the second time, at which found all the deadThe resurrection. shall bee raised againe by the will of God, the dead euen from Abel to the end of the world, throughout all the earth, hearing the sound thereof, and rising in manner as they were buried. Amongst them shall be seene diuers faces and countenances, some shining as the Sunne, many like the Moone, many as the Starres. Others shall bee obscure and darke, and others with hogges faces, with swolne tongues. Then shall euerie one crie Nessi, Nessi, that is, Woe is me wretch, who haue suffered my selfe to be ouercome with  my filthy lusts. The Angels shall with their fingers point at the faces which shine, which are they that haue wrought good workes, and shall shew them to one another. The wicked shall haue enuy there^^. They say, that those with faces like hogs, are such as haue beene Vsurers; and those with the swolne tongues, Liers and Blasphemers. There shall be other trodden vnder foot, to wit, the proud persons of this world. God, say they, will then demand account of the Kings, Princes, Emperors, and Tyrants, which vse oppression and violence.The iudgement. Then shal God diuide this raised company into seuentie parts, all which shall be examined; presenting their sins before their eyes, and all that they haue in this world done well or ill: whereto hee shall need no testimony; euerie member bearing witnesse against it selfe of the deeds, yea, and very thoughts. There shall be also Michael the Angel, holding in his hand the ballance of diuine  Iustice, and shal weigh soules, and distinguish the good from the bad. There shal be Moses with his Standard, vnder which shall all the obseruers of his law bee assembled. Neere to him shall be Iesus Christ, the Sonne of the Virgin Mary, with another great Standard, and all his Christians, the obseruers of his Faith. On the other side shall be Mahomet, with his Standard and faithfull Mahumetans: they which haue done good shall be all gathered vnder the said Standards, where they shall haue a pleasant shaddow; the rest shall be extremely scorched by the heat of the Sun, according to the measure of their sinnes. Thus shall both parts abide, till God shall pronounce his eternall sentence. When that doome is pronounced, the Angels shall stand diuided into squadrons, all like adorned, the Seraphins on one side, the  Cherubins on the other: of the which one part shal sound Instruments of diuers sorts, and other shall sing hymnes: and many shall stand at the gates of Paradise, singing and gratulating the blessed soules which haue obserued the diuine Precepts; Christians, Iewes, Turkes,Paradise. and Moores, being all of equall beautie and beatitude, if they haue done well. But sinners shall be
 knowne asunder. They affirme also, that God will giue those soules of Paradise a large space in heauen for their euerlasting habitation, goodly and shining. They shall also haue Barachi, Sun-beames, on which they may ride and take their view round about Paradise, of the precious delights therein. There shall they haue pleasant fruits, and if they eate one apple, two shall grow in the roome; and to quench their thirst, they shall haue riuers cleere as Crystall, sweet as Sugar, by drinking of which their sight and vnderstanding shall increase in such sort, that they shall see from one Pole to the other. The meates which they eate, shall consume by a subtile kinde of sweat. Further they say, they shall haue their women called Vri, that is, shining, which shall euerie day be Virgins, with which they shall continue for euer. Neither shall there be any danger of olde age; the men alway being as of thirtie yeeres old, the women  of fifteen or twentie. Those three Standard-bearers shall be the principall, each of them hauing a peculiar part of Paradise assigned him for his dominion.
Those which for their bad deeds shall be condemned to hell,Hell. shall be all knowne by proper names,Master Sandis saith, he was told by a Sicilian deuout Renegado, that the burning Globe of the Sunne, was the continent of the damned. which they shall beare in their fore-heads: and they shall beare the number and greatnesse of their sinnes on their shoulders. Thus shall they bee led betweene two Mountaines where Hell is situate, at the mouth whereof is a most venemous Serpent: and from one Mountaine to another is a Bridge thirtie miles long, which is so made, that they ascend on the first part, the other part is plaine, the last descendeth. This Bridge (say they) is made of thin yron and sharpe: (they call it Serat Cuplissi, that is, the Bridge of Iustice.) Vpon this shall passe the sinners with the heauie weight of their sinnes vpon their shouldiers: and they which  haue not beene altogether euill shall not fall into Hell, but into Purgatorie: but the other shall suddenly bee plunged into the bottome of Hell, where they shall burne, more or lesse, according to the quantitie of the fire of their sins, which they haue carried out of this world: and after the burning they turne to bee refreshed, and presently againe to the fire. In the midst of Hell they say is a tree full of fruit, euerie Apple being like to the head of a Deuill; which groweth greene in the midst of all those flames, called Zoaccum Agacci, or the tree of Bitternesse, and the soules that shall eate thereof, thinking to refresh themselues, shall so finde them, and by them and their paines in Hell, they shall grow madde. And the Deuils shall binde them with chaines of fire, and shall dragge them vp and downe through Hell. Those soules which sometime shall name God in their aide, they say, after many yeeres, shall goe  into Paradise; and none shall remaine in Hell, but such as despaire of their saluation and Gods mercie.Bellon. obseru. l b. 3. cap. 6. Resurrection of Rammes. Thus farre Menauino. To this agreeth Bellonius, and addeth, that in the day of Iudgement, they beleeue a resurrection of the Birds and Beasts: and that the Rams which they kill at their Easter, shall goe into Paradise: and therefore, though one would serue, they kill many. For the Booke of Zuna saith, that those Rams shall pray for their Sacrificers in the day of Iudgement. It telleth that the Starres are hanged in the ayre by golden chaines, to watch lest the Deuils should learne the secrets of Paradise, and reueale them to Sooth-sayers. Also, that the Ramme which Abraham offered in stead of his sonne, was a blacke one, which had been nourished fortie yeeres in Paradise; that Mahomet shall be turned at the end of the world into a Ramme; and the Turkes into Fleas; whom hee shall carrie sticking  to him, out of Hell into Paradise, and there shake them off, where they shall againe receiue the formes of Turkes: That hee shall wash them with the water of that Fountaine in Paradise, to purge the blacknesse which they got by the scorching of Hell, from whence hee will deliuer all good Turkes.


CHAP. XIII. Of the Religious Votaries amongst the Turkes, and of their Saints,  Sects, Miracles, and Hypocriticall holinesse.
TO proceed vnto the differences of opinions amongst the Turks: Septemcastrensis (who liued verie many yeeres amongst them) saith, that although they consent against Christ, yet doe they much dissent among themselues, wresting the Alcoran to their purposes, and scarcely one of a hundreth agreeing with his fellow about Mahomet and their Law. And besides their differences in Ceremonies, there are, saith he, foure sects, differing in maine grounds of Religion; which would not be appeased without bloud, if they feared not the higher power,  and were not thereby kept in awe. One of these sects is that of the Priests, holding that none can be saued, but by the Law of Mahomet. The second, of their religious Dermschler,
 reputed the Successors of the Saints, the friends of GOD and Mahomet, who are of opinion, that the Law profiteth nothing, but the grace of GOD: and these ground their opinions on miraculous illusions, of which he reporteth one in the time of Amurath the second, who examining this contention betwixt these Seculars and Regulars, and being purposed to giue sentence in the behalfe of the Priests, and against the religious, one of these DermschlerVisions and Apparition among the Turkes as well as among the Papists. appearing to him in a Vision, (others also ground Faith on Visions) and deliuering him out of a great danger, altered his minde: for going to stoole in the night, the boords gaue way, and he fell in, staying on a crosse Timber, where this religious man in their wonted habite appeared to him, and bid him now vse the helpe of his Priests for his deliuerance. This after so  affected the King, that himselfe became a religious man, till the necessitie of State-affaires compelled him to resume his gouernment. (Hee that listeth may compare with this, Dunstans deuices for his Regulars:) The third he calleth Czofilar speculatiue men; which Sect is founded on Tradition, holding that they are saued by Merit, without Law or Grace. These are verie earnest in praiers, neuer ceasing; and meeting in the night, and sitting in a circle, they begin to say, Layla illalach, with shaking their heads till they fall downe senselesse: these three sorts are manifest to the people, and as it were of equall esteeme with them. The fourth are called Horife, that is, Heretikes, holding, that euerie man is saued in his owne Law, and all Lawes to be a like good to the obseruers; these are burned if they be taken.
Strange it is, that he reporteth of the miraculous workes of some of them,Miracles as well with the Turkes as Papists. that they may  seeme (as he saith) incarnate Deuils: Some going naked, with their priuities onely hidden, and some of these are impassible, besides the violence of Winter and Summer, induring, like stones, the branding with fire, or wounding with sword: some seldome eate or drinke, and some not at all: others, but from hand to mouth: some are perpetually silent, hauing no conuersation with men, of which he saith he saw one; and some haue their supernaturall traunces or rauishments: some dwell amongst men, some by themselues apart, and some in Wildernesse: some keepe hospitalitie in Cities, at least to harbour men, if they haue not food for them: some carrying about water in leather bagges, giuing it to all, and demanding nothing for the same, except any voluntarily gratifie them. Some inhabite at the Sepulchers of  the Saints, keeping the same, and liuing on the vowes and offerings of the people, not obseruing the washings and ceremonies of the Law. As concerning those Water-carriers, Nicholas Nicholai saith, that he hath seene in a morning at Constantinople fiftie of those Sacquas (so he calleth them) in a company, all furnished with their Scrips of leather, full of Cisterne or Fountaine-water hanging on their side, with cups of fine Corinthian Latten, gilded and damaskined, bearing in the same hand a Looking-glasse which they hold before their eyes of them whom they giue to drinke, admonishing them to thinke on death: and if any giue them any thing, they out of a Violl cast on their faces sweet smelling water. Hee telleth of some that would seeme to liue a solitarie life amongst beasts, but indeed liue in shops in most popular Cities, the walls whereof are couered with skins of diuers beasts, and vpon the hornes thereof they hang Tallow Candles.Mocke-eremites In the midst of this their sacred shop standeth a stoole  couered with a greene cloth, and vpon the same a great Latten Candle-sticke without any Candle. Moreouer, they haue painted a Cimitterre hung in the middest, in memorie of Haly, who forsooth with his sword cut the Rockes in sunder: and they breed vp with them beasts, as Bulls, Beares, Harts, Rauen^, Eagles; so that in stead of their liuing with beasts, beasts liue with them. And if sufficient be not brought to their shops, they with one of these beasts in their hand goe about the streets begging.
In the Armie of the Turkes that assaulted Malta, in the yeere 1565. wereKnol. p. 794. thirteene thousand of a certaine kinde of men amongst the Turks, which liue of the reuenues of the Church, who had at ConstantinopleTurkish Decij. vowed their liues for their superstition. Antonio PigafettaKnol. p. 834. reporteth, that as the Emperours Ambassadors were conueyed from the presence of the Great Turke to their lodging, by the Ianizaries and their Aga, there were amongst them certaine  Religious men, called Haagi, which vse to follow the Ianizaries, who continually turning about, and in their going singing, or rather howling certaine Psalmes or Prayers for their great Sultans welfare, made them wonder that they fell not downe for giddinesse. And this my friend Master Simons hath seene them doe, taking one another by the hand in a ring; and so continuing their whirle-gigg-deuotions with continuall turnings (fitly agreeing to so giddie and brain-sicke a Religion) till with the great applause of Turkes, and admiration of others, sweat, and a long protracted wearinesse makes an end of this dancing their round.
 But amongst all their orders of Religion, Nicholas Nicholai,N.N. l. 3. c. 15 and Christoph. Richerius. and before him Menauino, reckon foure which are most common amongst them, the Giamailer, the Calender, the Deruisi, and the Torlachi.
The Giamailer, are for the most part faire young men, of rich houses, which giue themselues
 to trauell through diuers Regions, at other mens charges, vnder colour of Religion; carrying with them none other apparell then a little Cassocke of purple colour, girt with a girdle of silke and gold; vpon the ends whereof hang certaine Cymbals of Siluer, mixt with some other cleere-sounding metall: and they doe ordinarily weare sixe or seuen of these about their girdles, and vnder their knees. In stead of a cloake, they are couered with the skinne of a Lyon or Leopard, being whole and in his naturall haire, which they make fast vpon their breast, by the two former legges. All the rest of their bodies are bare; sauing that they weare great Rings on their eares, and a kinde of Sandalls on their feet; their haire groweth long like womens disheueled ouer their shoulders. They beare in one of their hands a Booke, written in the Persian language, full of amorous Sonnets. And thus with their Voyces and  Cymbals, they make pleasant Musicke, especially if they meet some faire stripling, whom they set in the midst of them, and incompasse with their Morice-musicke. These are the Pilgrimes of Loue; and vnder pretext of Religion, doe draw vnto them the hearts of women and younglings, and are called the men of the Religion of Loue, vnto which order of Religion youth is prone more then enough. The partakers of their Musicke ordinarily impart to them of their Coyne.
The CalenderNic. Nic. is of a contrarie profession to the former, glorying of abstinence and chastitie. They haue for their dwelling certaine little Churches, which they call Techie, ouer the gates whereof they doe write these or the like words, Coeda normas dil ersin cusciunge al, cachecciur: that is, They which will enter into their Religion, must doe workes like theirs,  and remaine in their Virginitie. These Calenders are clothed with a little short coat without sleeues, after the fashion of Haire-cloth, made of Wooll and Horse-haire, and doe not let their haire grow long, but cut the same, and couer their heads with felt Hats, like the Priests of Graecia, about which hang certaine strings, about the breadth of an hand, made of Horse haire: in their eares, and about their neckes and armes they weare great rings of Iron. They pierce their skinne vnder their priuy member, thrusting thorow the same a ring of an indifferent bignesse and weight, to barre them from venerie, if they were thereunto otherwise willing. They also goe reading of certaine Songs, made by one of their Order, called Nerzim, the first Saint and Martyr, after their reckoning, of their Religion, who for certaine words spoken against the Law of Mahomet, was in Azamia flaid quicke. MenauinoLib. 2. c. 10. saith, he had  read some of his writings agreeing with the Christian Faith in many points. SomePolicie of the Turkish Empire. say, he was martyred for confessing Christ.
The Deruis goe bare-headed, and cause their head and beard to be cut with a razor, and all the hairie parts of their bodie: and burne also their Temples with a hot Iron, or an old piece of cloth burnt; hauing their eares pierced, wherein they doe weare certaine great rings of Iasper. All their clothes are two sheepes or goat skins, the haire thereof being dried in the Sunne, one before, and the other behinde, embracing the bodie in forme of a girdle, otherwise naked Winter and Summer. They dwell without the Cities, in Suburbs and Villages. Thus vnder the colour of Religion they roame vp and downe, and make no conscience to rob, kill, and murther (if they finde themselues the stronger, with a small Hatchet which they  beare vnder their girdle) all men of whatsoeuer Law or Nation. They are fornicators, and most detestable in that most detestable sinne of Sodomie. For shew of holinesse they eate of a certaine herbThis seemes to be the same herbe which Menauino calleth Asseral. called Matslach, the violent operation whereof maketh them to become madde, so as through a certaine furie, they with a certaine knife or razor, doe cut their necks, stomacks and thighes, vntill they be full of most horrible wounds; which to heale, they lay vpon them a certaine herbe, letting it lie vpon their hurt, vntill it be altogether consumed into ashes, suffering in the meane time extreme paine with maruellous patience. Thus do they imitate their Prophet Mahomet, who, through abstinence in his den, fell into such a furie (say they) that hee would haue throwne himselfe from the top of it. And therefore fooles and madde men are in great reuerence; yea, they account such for Saints: and if such madde  men strike or rob them, they take it in good part, and say they shall haue good lucke after it. They erect stately Monuments ouer such mad mens graues, as at Aleppo, oneBiddulph ep. Fooles are esteemed beloued of God: if such be Christians they circumcise them by force, and esteeme them Saints, saying, God hath made him a foole, thus to be saued by their meanes. Sheh Boubac (who being mad, went alwayes naked) being dead, they built a house ouer his graue, where to this day (saith our Author) there are Lampes burning day and night; and many of these Daruises there remained, to looke to his Sepulchre, and to receiue the offerings of such as come, as many do euery weeke out of Aleppo. If any be sicke or in danger, they vow to offer money or other things to Sheh Boubac if they recouer.
The same account they make of one Sheh Mahammet a mad man, yet liuing in Aleppo, going naked with a spit on his shoulder. Men and women will come and kisse his hand, or some other part of his body, and aske him counsell, for they hold that mad mens soules  are in heauen talking with GOD, and that he reuealeth secrets to them. And euen the Bassaes themselues wil kisse and consult with this Oracle. Hard I deeme it to say whether is the mad
 man. In a late victorie against the Christians, they affirme that this Sheh Mahammet was seene in the field many thousand miles distant, fighting against their enemies, whom by his helpe they ouercame.
But to returne to our Daruises, this our Author saith, that oftentimes great Bassaes, in displeasure with the Emperor, will retire themselues into this Order, as the Hospital and Sanctuarie of their diseased and dangerous state. Their witnesse is of better account then any other mans, although he were an Emir, or of the kindred of Mahomet. They liue of Almes, as the other Religious doe, which they begge in the name of Haly. They haueNic. Nichol. in Natolia a Sepulchre of a Saint called by them Scidibattal, who (say they) conquered the most part of  Turkie, and about the place of the Sepulchre is an habitation and couent, where aboue fiue hundred of these Deruises dwell: and there once in the yeere they keepe a generall assembly, in which their Superiour (whom they callThat is, the Father of Fathers. Assambaba) is present and President; their Counsell or Chapter consisting (saith Menauinus) of aboue eight thousand of their Order. One of these DeruislarsKn p. 463. drawing neere vnto Baiazet the second, as if he would haue receiued an Almes of him, desperately assailed him with a short Scimatar, which he clos^ly hid vnder his hypocriticall habite. But Baiazet by the starting of his horse (afraid of this Hobgoblin) auoided the deadly blow, but not v^wounded: neither had he so escaped, had not Ishender Bassa with his Hors-mans Mace presently strucke downe the desperate villaine, as he was redoubling his blow, who was forthwith rent in pieces by the Souldiers. Baiazet thereupon proscribed all them of that superstitious Order, and banished them out of his Empire. The like (as Septemcastre^sis saith) they had attempted against Mahomet his father in his youth, while Amurath was yet liuing. And in our daies Mehemet or Muhemet, the great Visier Bassa, who swayed almost wholly and onely their mightie Empire (as appeareth in the Historie of that State) in the dayes of Soliman, Selym, and Amurath, and as Master Harborne relateth, was esteemed to possesse two and twentie millions of gold, was not assaulted only, but murthered by one of these Deruislers. For whereas it is a custome of the great men, that at ordinarie houres all their Chaplaines, or Priests, assemble themselues in the Diuano, there together mumbling their superstitions: and this DeruislerKnol. Turk. Hist. p. 950. ordinarily thither admitted, vpon an old grudge, for that M^hemet had before depriued him of a Souldiers place and pension, when the Visier sate there to giue publike audience, sitting right against him, after his Mumpsimus finished, the Visier reaching vnto him his wonted Almes, he with a dagger closely before prouided, stabs him into the breast, and was therefore of Mehemets slaues with exquisite torments done to death. In their great Counsell before mentione^, there are young men clothed in white, which tell the most memorable obseruations in their trauells; which they present to the Assambaba in writing, subscribed with their names. On the Friday they vse after praier and eating the herbeAsseral is an herb, that maketh men merrie, as if they were drunken. Asseral, to read the same with dances, and after their dance (which is about a huge fire, made of as much wood as an hundred beasts can carrie) they cut the skin of their armes, legs, or breasts, engrauing some figure thereon, whereto they after apply ashes and vrine. In the doing hereof they vtter this speech: This I  cut for the loue of such a woman. Vpon the last day of their Feast, they take leaue of their Gouernor, and depart in troupes like Souldiers with Banners and Drums; and so returne vnto their owne Monasteries.
The Torlaquis (by others called Durmislurs) cloath themselues with sheeps and goats skins like vnto the Deruis: aboue the same they wrap about them in manner of a cloake the skinne of a great Beare, with the haire, made fast vpon their stomacke with the legs: vpon their heads they weare a white Bonnet of Felt folded with small plaits, hauing the rest of their bodies altogether naked. They also burne their Temples as the former. A beastly generation. For they know not, nor will not learne to read, write, or doe any ciuill profitable act, but liue idlely vpon almes, roaguing thorow the Countrey alone, and in troupes thorow the Desarts, robbing such as they meet handsomely apparelled, causing them to goe as they doe, naked. They professe palmistry and fortune-telling, the people feeing and feeding them for such vanities. And sometimes they carry with them an old man, whom they worship as a God: lodging themselues neere the best house of the Towne where they come. And there this new numen, and old impostor, faining himselfe rauished in spirit, pronounceth graue words and spirituall commandements; at sundry times lifting vp his eyes to heauen, and after turning to those his disciples, willeth them to carry him from thence, for some imminent iudgement there to be executed, as is reuealed to him. They then pray him to auert that danger by his prayer, which he accordingly doth: which the people (deluded by their hypocrisies) reward with a large beneuolence, at which they after amongst themselues doe merrily scoffe. They  eate also of the herbe Matslatz, and sleepe vpon the ground naked of clothes and shame, and commit also abominable Sodomitrie. And thus much of their misorderly orders of an irreligious Religion. He that will read more at large of them, let him read the Booke of the
 Policie of the Turkish Empire, which out of Menauino discourseth more largely of these things, and other the Turkish Rites.
SeptemcastrensisCap. 15. telleth of certaine Saints of exceeding estimation for holinesse, whose Sepulchres are much frequented of deuout Votaries: as that of Sedichasi (which signifieth a holy Conquerour) in the confines oof Caramania. Another is called Hatsehipettesch, that is, The Pilgrims helpe. AnotherAssich is the Goddesse of loue with the Georgiouitz. Ascik passa who helpeth in loue-matters, and for children in barrennesse. Another Van passa, for concord: and Scheych passa, in trouble and affliction: and Goi or Muschin, or Bartschin passa, inuoked for their cattle: and Chidirelles for trauellers, to whom he sometime appeareth as a traueller; and any one that hath extraordinarily liued, is reputed a Saint after his death.  
They haue many whose names I remember not (saith hee) in like reuerence with them, as are the Apostles with vs. When they would seeke for things lost, they go to one Saint; when they are robbed, they goe to another; and for the knowledge of things secret, they repaire to a third. They haue their Martyrs, and Miracles, and Reliques. Thus they tell of certaine religious men condemned wrongfully, for suspition of treason, to the fire; which they entred without harme (asDan. 3.27. those three companions of Daniel) and their shooes were hanged vp for a Monument. Their Nephes ogli, that is, soules or persons begotten of the holy Spirit (such is their fancie) without seed of man, they hold in such reputation, that they account themselues happy, which can doe them any good, yea that can touch them: and if their haires be laid vpon any, they say that their sicknesses are cured.  
In this reputation of sanctitie, they haue a certaine old woman, which hauing a dog with her (in her pilgrimage to Mecca) readie to die for thirst, made water in her hand, and gaue it to the dog: which charitable act was so highly accepted, that a voyce was presently heard from heauen, saying, This day thou shalt be in Paradise. And at the same time shee was caught vp bodie and soule into heauen: and hereupon are they liberall to their dogs. If this crosse an opinion, which some Saracens hold, that women come not to Paradise, no maruell, seeing falsehood is commonly contrarie both to the Truth, and it selfe. He that would read the miraculous tales which they tell of their Saints, may haue recourse to that namelesse Author, which of his Countrey is called, and heere often cited by name, Septemcastrensis: who tellethSeptemcast. cap. 18.  of his Master and his Mistris their deuotion and vowes to Goi and Mirtschin, for preseruation of their cattell, sometimes miraculous (so readie is the Deuill with his sauing destruction, and destroying preseruation) yea hee saith, that the Deuill doth turne himselfe amongst them into an Angell of light, with such effectuall illusions, that there are seene, or (at least) beleeued amongst them, the dead raised to life, diseases of all sorts cured, secrets of the hearts disclosed; treasures, long before hidden in the ground, reuealed: and besides, such ostentation, and shew of dissembled holinesse, that they may seeme not to come short of the Fathers and Apostles in that behalfe: if bodily exercise were the triall of sanctitie.
BusbequiusBusbequius epist. 1. tells, that they haue like conceit of one Chederles, amongst them, as some superstiti^us persons haue of St. George, and the Turkes affirme to bee the same: The Deruis  haue a great Temple dedicated in his honor at Theke Thioi, not farre from Amasia, the chiefe Citie of Cappadocia. The Countrey and both Legends agree, for the killing of the Dragon, deliuering the Virgin, etc. They say that hee trauelled many Countries, and at last came to a Riuer, the waters whereof yeelded immortalitie to the drinker, and now cannot be seene. Chederles heereby freed from death, rides about euery where on his horse (which thence also dranke in immortalitie) and delighteth in battells, taking part with the best cause: and to make vp the tale, they say hee was one of the companions of AlexanderAlexander Mag. was also one of their Saints. the Great; they affirme, that Alexander was Salomons chiefe Captaine, and Iob his high Steward. In that Moschee or Temple at Theke Thioi is a fountaine of water, which they say, sprang vp of the staling of Chederles horse. Like Stories haue they of his horse-keeper, and nephew, whose Sepulchres they shew, where deuout Pilgrims obtaine many blessings. They shew for relikes  the pieces of the shooes which Chederles his horse brake in that Dragon-fight, and vse the same in drinke against agues and head-aches. These places are full of Dragons and Vipers. Sultan Murat Chan,Leuncla. hist. Musul. lib. 14. or Amurath the second in a battell against the Christians, vsed this prayer, O righteous God, giue vs strength and victorie, O Muhamet, O Mustapha the top of glory, by abundance of miracles, by the abundance of Gaiberenlers, which are friends to the Musulmans, and walke inuisible, by the abundance of the Cheders, grant vs victorie. In the timeLeuncla. Hist. Musul. lib. 4. of Vrchan, or Orchanes the sonne of Ottoman, they say these Gaib-erenlers appeared on white horses in a battell against the Christians, and slew them. These (they say) are friends to the Islams, that is, Catholike, or right beleeuing Musulmans, and are diuine protectors of  the Imania or Mahumetan Law. Such tales you may read in the Spanish relations of the West Indies, as at the battell of Tauesco,Historie of the West Indies. Lop. de Gom. where a strange horse-man discomfited the Indians, etc. And our inuocation of God and Saint George, is rather Turkish, then truely Christian: For
 God alonePsal. 142.2. is our strength, which teacheth our hands to fight, and our fingers to battell: and whomPsal. 73.25. haue I in heauen but thee, and I haue desired none in earth with thee? As for George and Chederles, I know them both alike in matter of Inuocation, saue that it is worse to abuse to impietie a Christian name then a Turkish: and King Edward the third seemed to inuoke Edward as much as George, Ha Saint Edward, Ha Saint George (saith Thomas Walsingham.) But that of George is rather an Embleme of euery Christian, as not onely the Heroique Muse of our Spencer,Spencers Red Crosse Knight in the Fa. Q. in Poeticall fiction, but the Diuiner of great Diuines,Reinold de Rom. Eccles. Idololat. lib. 1 cap. 5. in their iudiciall censure haue manifested. It seemeth that the Chederles and Gaib-erenlers are diuers: and perhaps that Martiall Nation in conquest of the Christians of those parts, would soone reconcile themselues  to that Martiall Saint, and drinke in those further deuotions which his horse pissed. Such Emblemes were those of Christopher, Catherine, George, which the Papists inuocate as Saints; an errour proceeding from those pictures (as it seemeth) in Churches, according to that of the Prophet,Ierem. 10.8. The stocke is a doctrine of vanitie, andHabac. 2.18. the image is a teacher of lies. The ruder posteritie in that mist of Antichrist, and smoke from the bottomlesse pit, not being able to discerne an Emblem and Historie asunder, haue made Saint George the MarsBap. Mant. Fast. lib. 4. of the Christians, quem nostra iuuentus pro Mauorte colit. BellarmineBel. de Eccles. Tri. lib. 1. 20. struggleth much, rather then hee will lose his Saint, and yet confesseth the Historie Apocryphall. BaroniusBaron. Notat. in Martyrolog. Rom. Apr. 23. his fellow Cardinall, but beyond in truth, acknowledgeth it an Image of a Symbole, rather then of a Historie, which Iacobus de Voragine without good authoritie, in his Golden Legend maketh historicall.  He saith the Virgin representeth some Prouince, which imploreth the Martyrs helpe against the Deuill. But HyperiusHyp. de rat. stud. Theolog. lib. 3. cap. 7. and Villauicentius Posseuini interpret it more fitly, to signifie the Church assaulted by the Diuell, protected by the Christian Magistrate: in which respect our Defender of the Faith, may iustly be termed the Patron of that renowned Order, which hath now learned their George to be Symbolicall, not a Cappadocian, and (as Princes, of(...). 1. Cor. 3. Gods husbandrie, which gaue name to Saint George) to fight against the Dragon, and the beast with hornes like the Lambe, but speaking like the Dragon. As for the Popish George, Baronius also hath another originall from the Arrians, worshipped of them for a Martyr. But if any would bee further acquainted with this Knightly Saint, let him resort to Doctor RainoldsRain. de Idol. R. E. his larger Discourse touching these Romish Idolatries: which howsoeuer Serarius seekes to confute, mustering a hugeSerar. Litaneuticus l. 2. c. 20. Armie of eight and twentie Arguments to fight for  this fighting Saint: Yet doe none of these Georgian Souldiers strike one stroke to proue that their Legendary Martyr, nor so much as conclude his Horse tayle, or Dragons teeth, or his owne sword or speare: no nor shew whether This George thus related, pointed, worshipped, bee the childe of Historie or Mysterie; heire of the Painter, Poet, or Historian: Symbolicall or Historicall. As for George, Christopher, Catherine, Hippolitus; that some Saints haue beene called by these names, wee much deny not, care not: if these thus deliuered in their Stories, bee but monsters, or mysteries.


CHAP. XIIII. Of their Priests and Hierarchie: with a digression touching the Hierarchie and Miserie of Christians subiect to the Turke.
AFter the discourse of their Regulars (which in estimation of deuotion haue with the Turkes, and therefore in this Historie, the first place) their Secular  Priests follow to be considered. These are of differing degrees, which MenauinoLib. 2. cap. 3. thus reckoneth: first, the Cadilescher, vnder which the Mofti or Mufti; the third, the Cadi; and after these (in subordinate orders) the Modecis, Antippi, Imam, Meizini, and besides these the Sophi. A certaine Ragusian,Edit. Alcorani Latin. in an Oration before Maximilian the Emperour doth not much disagree: but for Cadilescher, he calleth the first Pescherchadi whereof (hee saith) there are two, one in Romania, the other in Natolia, chiefe Iudges of the Armie, hauing power to reuerse the sentence of the Emperour, if it be against the law of Mahomet. A second Magistrate (saith hee) is called Muchti, the chiefe Interpreter of the law, from whose sentence is no appeale.
Nic. NicolaiPeregrination. lib. 3. c. 14. saith the same of their two Cadileschers, and that they are chosen out of their most learned Doctors of their Law, and alway follow the Court, and with the consent  of the Bassaes, constitute and depose the Cadi; hauing for their annuall stipend seuen thousand or eight thousand duckets, besides their ordinary gaines. They haue tenne Secretaries kept at the Grand Seigniors charge, and two Moolorbassis, which are busied about the
 horses: they haue also two hundred or three hundred slaues. They vse few words, but such as are of their Law and Religion altogether, with very much shew of grauitie. AriuabeneAlcoran. Ital. (in his Preamble to the Italian Alcoran) maketh CadilescherKadileskieri ab Arabibus Casiaskeri d^cti, Iudices sunt supremi, etc. L. Soranz. Otto. to be a generall name to all their Orders of Priests. Others doe place the Mufti in the highest place, and the Cadilescher in the second ranke: and perhaps others gaue the Cadilescher the first place, because their life was more in action and gouernment, as attending on the Court, and on the warres: but the Mufti being highest Interpreter of their law (though without gouernment) must indeed haue preeminence. And so MenauinoLib. 2. Cap. 4. seemeth to affirme, who, though he placeth the Cadilescher first, yet saith, thatQuando per caso s'appella a sue sententie, si recorre al Mophti. when happily appeale is made from his sentence, they haue recourse to the Mophti. And this opinion is now generall and most current, which ascribeth  to the Mufti the chiefe place.
Master Harborn, sometime Embassador into Turkie for Englands Queene (the worlds wonder, our Westerne Hesperus, that shined so farre ouer and beyond all Christendome, into the East; but my words are too base to vsher in that renowned name) ELIZABETH, thusLib. Manuscript. reporteth. The Turkes doe hold for head and chiefe of their Religion the Mufti (the choice of whom is made by the Great Turke himselfe) such a one as is knowne to be wise and learned, and chiefly of a good life. His authoritie is so esteemed, that the Emperour will neuer alter a determination made by him. He intermedleth in all matters as best him liketh, whether they be ciuill or criminall, yea, or of State. And yet he hath no power to command; but  is in each mans free libertie, when there happeneth any doubt of importance, to make in some few words by writing a declaration of his matter, in forme of a question: to whom the said Mufti, in writing likewise (called Zetfa) giueth a briefe answere containing his iudgement thereon. This Zetfa, brought to the Iudge, is the rule of his sentence, prouided, that the declaration, made before to the Mufti, contain^d no vntruth. Also the Grand Signior, to shew that he is religious and iust, doth serue himselfe of the authoritie of this Mufti, in affaires of warre and peace, demanding his iudgement (in manner aforesaid;) by this course, the subiects being inclined to more forward obedience. But yet the Mufti will commonly flatter him, and leane to that part, to which he seeth him incline: as in the time of Selym the second, the Mufti hauing discouered the Emperours intent to warre vpon Cyprus,  approued the same in his Zetpha. But after, vpon great offers made to Mehemet the Visier, to breake that resolution, the Mufti, by him wonne to fauour the matter, affirmed still, that the warre against Cyprus was good and iust, but that his Maiestie had a greater obligation in conscience, which hee was bound to take in hand, namely, to procure the reuolt of the Moores in Spaine, there oppressed by the Christians, wherein hee was so bold with the Emperour, as to tell him to his face, that if hee did neglect the cause of those Mahumetans, hee might be thereunto by his subiects compelled.
Concerning the Mufti, and other steps of their Hierarchy, MasterKnol. p. 1302. Knolles writeth, That the Turkes haue certaine Colledges, called Medressae, at Constantinople, Adrinople, Bursia, and other places, in which they liue, and studie their prophane Diuinitie and Law, and haue  among them nine seuerall steps or degrees vnto the highest dignitie.
The first is called Softi, which are young Students. The second are Calfi, who are Readers vnto the first. The third Hogi, Writers of Bookes (for they will suffer no Printing.) The fourth, are Naipi, or young Doctors, which may supply the place of Iudges, in their absence. The fifth, Caddi, Iudges of their Law, and Iustices to punish offenders; of which there is one at least in euery Citie through the Turkish Dominion: and are knowne from other men by their huge Turbants, two yards in compasse. The sixth, are Muderisi, which ouersee the Caddies doings, and are as Suffragans to their Bishops; who are the seuenth sort, and are called Mulli, which place and displace Church-men at their pleasure. The eight, Cadelescari, who are but two great and principall Iudges or Cardinals, the one of Graecia; the other of Natolia: and these two sit euery day in the Diuano among the Bassaes, and are in great reputation.  The ninth is the Mufti, who is among the Turkes, as the Pope among the Roman Catholikes. When the Bassaes punish any offence against their Law, they send to him. Hee may not abase himselfe to sit in the Diuano, neither when hee comes into the presence of the Grand Seignior, will he vouchsafe to kisse his hand, or to giue any more reuerence, then he receiueth. The Great Sultan ariseth to honour him, when hee comes vnto him, and then they both sit downe face to face, and so talke and conferre together. No man can ascend to this place, but by the dignities aforesaid.
MahometKnol. 1161. the third, forced by a tumult of the Ianizaries to present himselfe vnto them, came accompanied with the Mufti, and some few others of the reuerend Doctors of their  Law, who were by the Sultan commanded to sit downe, whiles the great Bassaes abode standing. Such respect it had to these men. Thus much Knolles.
In the BookeCap. 24. of the Policie of the Turkish Empire, it is said, that the Mufties authority
 is like to that of the Iewish High Priest, or Roman Pope. I rather esteeme it like to that of the Patriarkes of Alexandria, Antioch, etc. as binding not all Mahumetans, but the Turkes onely: whereas the one had, the other challengeth a subiection of all, which professe their religion. That Author also affirmeth, that whensoeuer the Mufti goeth abroad forth of his own house (which he vseth to doe very seldome) his vse and custome is, first to goe and visit the Emperour; who as soone as hee seeth him comming to salute him, and doe him reuerence, presently ariseth out of his seat, and embracing him with great kindnesse, entertaineth him very friendly and louingly, causing him to sit downe by him, and giuing him the honour of the place.
 His authoritie, saithL. Soranzo. part. 2. cap. 61. Soranzo, is so great, that none will openly contradict the Mufties sentence: but yet if the Emperour be setled in a resolution, the Mufti with feare or flattery inclines vnto him.
Next to the Mufti is the Cadilescher,Cadilescher. who being also chosen by the Emperour, may bee compared to those, whom the Christians call Patriarches, or else to the Primats and Metropolitans of a Kingdome. Of these there are now in this encreased greatnesse of the Turkish Empire, three; whereas it seemeth that they had in the time of Baiazet but one, and long after (as before is said) but two. To one of these is assigned Europe, namely, so much thereof as is subiect to the Turke, for his Prouince: To the second, Natolia or Turky: to the third,  Syria and Egypt, with the parts adioyning. There were but two Cadileschers, till Selym wan Syria and Egypt, and erected a third. ButMagin. Soranzo saith, that this third of Cairo is not rightly called Cadilescher, but should rather be called the great Cadi. Out of all which Prouinces, whatsoeuer causes come to be determined, by appeale or otherwise, they are brought to be decided before the Cadilescher of the same Prouince whence they arise: notwithstanding that the abode of each of them be continually, or for the most part, at Constantinople, or elsewhere, wheresoeuer the Emperour holdeth his Court. The honour done to them, is little lesse then to the Mufti, for that their authoritie is ouer Priest and people, temporall and spirituall: they are also learned in their law, aged and experienced. Of the Muderisi and Mulli, I can say no more then I haue done.
Next to these are the Cadi,Cadi. which are sent abroad and dispersed into euery Citie and  Towne of the Turkish Empire: which besides theirAndr. Ariu. Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction (as I may terme it) in forcing man to their religious obseruations, are as it were, Iusticers and Gouernours of the places. So neere glued are the Offices and Officers, the religion and politie of the Turkes. There are other which are not sent forth, which are called Choza, that is, Elders. These, with the Talismans, haue the ordering of their Parishionall Churches: The Thalisman calling the people to prayer, and the Choza executing the Seruice and Preaching; and in absence, each supplying others Office. Menauino more distinctly, and in other names, numbreth those Church-officers. The ModecisModecis. is a Gouernour of an Hospitall, receiuing and disposing the rents, with the other customes thereof. Their Schoole degrees are before spoken of, out of Knolles. SomePolicie of the Turkish Empire. adde to these former, these other Priests, of baser condition. The AntippiAntippi.  are certaine Priests, which vpon Friday (called of them Glumaagun, and is obserued as their Sabbath, because Mahomet (as some hold) was borne on that day) and on other their fasting and feasting-dayes, after they haue vsed diuers Ceremonies in a certaine place, in the middest of the Temple, about thirtie steps high, from thence read vnto the people something concerning the life of Mahomet. After which, two little boyes stand vp, and sing certaine Prayers: Which being ended, the Priest and all the people sing a Psalme with a low voyce, and then for halfe an houre together they cry Illah, illelah, that is, there is but one God. After all this, one of these Antippi, out of that high place, sheweth forth vnto the people a Lance and Scimitar, with exhortation to vse their Swords and Lances in defence of their Religion.  Of the ImamImam. and Meizin,Meizin. is elsewhere shewed, that the one calleth the people to the Mosche or Meschit, the other there celebrateth publike Orisons. The Sophi also are certaine Clerks or Priests, employed in the singing of Psalmes and Hymnes, after their manner,Sophi, perhaps the same with the Softi before mentioned. in their Churches at the times of publike Prayers.
All these inferior Orders of Priests are chosen by the people, and haue a certaine stipend allowed them by the Emperour, which yet is so small, that many of them are driuen to vse either writing of Bookes, or Handicrafts and Trades for their liuing, and are clothed like Lay-men. They haueBar. Georgiouitz. no great learning, it is sufficient if they can read the Alcoran, which being written in Arabike, they are as loth to haue translated into the vulgar, as the Papists are to haue the Scripture. Hee which can interprete, and make some Exposition of the Text, is of profund learning. Yet are they reuerenced: and if a Turke doe strike or offer outrage to  them, he loseth his hand; and if he be a Christian, his life; being sure to be burned. Some say, that now of late some of them are more studious of Astronomie and other Arts. As for those superiour rankes, no doubt may be made of their high account. The Chadilescher is clothed
 in Chamlet, Satten, Silke, Damaske, or Veluet of seemely colour, as Russet, or Tawny, and in Purple-coloured cloth with long sleeues. Their Tulipan on their head is of maruellous greatnesse, sharpe in the middest, of Purple Russet colour, deeper and thicker then others; their beards great. They ride on Geldings, with Purple foot-cloths fringed; and when they goe on foot, they goe slowly, representing a stately and sacred grauitie.
There is another order of sacred persons, which yet are neither regular nor secular, by any vow or ordination, but had in that account for their birth, being supposed to descend of the line of Mahumet. The Turkes and Tartarians call them Seiti or Sithi, the Moores Seriffi. These we are greene Tulipans, which colour none else may weare, and that onely on their head. Some Christians, ignorant hereof, haue had their apparell cut from their backes, for  wearing somewhat greene about them. These they call Hemir. They enioy many priuiledges, especially in giuing testimony, wherein one of these is as much as two other, which they abuse to iniury and wrong. The most of them are Moores, which goe ten or fifteene in a company, with a banner on a staffe, hauing a Moone on the top; and that which is giuen for Gods sake, they sit and eate in the street, where also they make their praiers, and are poorly clad. Like to these (in priuiledge and prauiledge) are the Chagi, or Fagi, which liue on almes like Fryers. They attend on the publike prayers, on the holy Reliques, on the Corpses and Funerals of the dead, and to prey on the liuing by false oathes.

A digression touching the Hierarchie, and Miseries of Christians  vnder the Turke, etc.
ANd thus we haue taken a leisurely view of the Turkish Hierarchy, from the poore Softi to the courtly Cadilescher and pontificall Mufti, flourishing and triumphing together with that Monarchy, which is exalted, and hath exalted them, with the power, not of the Word of GOD, but of the Sword of Man. But with what words meane whiles shall wee deplore the lamentable and miserable estate of that Christian Hierarchy  and Ecclesiasticall Politie, which sometimes flourished there with no fewer, nor lesse titles of dignitie and eminence? Where are now those Reuerend Names of Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Patriarkes, and the swelling stile of Oecumenicall? Nay, where are the things, the life and liuing? for the stile, names, titles, still continue; continue indeed, but as Epitaphs and Inscriptions on the Monuments of their deceased and buried power, as the ghosts and wandring shadowes of those sometimes quicke and quickning bodies of rule and gouernment.Constantinople decyphered, with due Epithets and titles. Great Citie of great CONSTANTINE, seated in the Throne of the World, the fittest situation to command both Sea and Land, through Europe, Asia, and Africa; at thy first Natiuitie honored with a double Diadem of Christianitie and Soueraigntie; to which the Sea prostrateth it selfe with innumerable multitudes of Fish, the Land payeth continuall  tribute of rare fertilitie; for which old Rome disrobed her selfe to decke this her New-Rome, Daughter and Imperiall heire, with her choisest Iewels and Monuments: a Compendium of the World, Eye of Cities, Heart of the habitable earth, Academie of learning, Senate of gouernement, Mother of Churches, Nurse of Religion, and (to speake in the language of thine owne)Niceph. Callist. in Praef. A new Eden, an earthly Heauen, modell of Paradise, shining with the varietie of thy sacred and magnificent buildings, as the Firmament, with the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. This was thy ancient greatnesse, great now, onely in miserie and mischiefe, which as chiefe seat of Turkish Greatnesse, is hence inflicted on the Christian Name. And thou, the Soule of this Bodie, the goodliest Iewell in this Ring of Perfection, which so many wonders of Nature conspired to make the Miracle of Art,Temple of Saint Sophia. the TEMPLE of that WISDOME of GOD, which is GOD; called by him which saw thee both Christian and Mahumetan,Georg. Phranza Chron. lib. 3. cap. 17. A terrestriall Heauen,  a Cherubicall Chariot, another Firmament, beyond all names of elegance; which I thinke (saith another)Const. Manas. ap. Pontan. the very Seraphins doe admire with veneration, and (which hath here moued thy mention) high Seat and Throne of that Patriarchiall and Oecumenicall Highnesse, which hence swayed all the East, and contended with Westerne Rome for Soueraigntie; now excludest rule, rites, yea persons Christian, wholly hallowed, to the damnable holies of ridiculous and blasphemous Mahometisme: the multitudes of other Churches, as silly captiued Damsels, attending and following thee into this Mechiticall slauerie. O CITIE, which hast beene (woe worth that word, that hastie hast-beene) which hast been! but who can say what thou hast beene? let one word, the sum of all earthly excellence, expresse what flouds of words  and seas of Rhetorick cannot expresse, which hast beene CONSTANTINOPLE; which art (that one name may declare thy bottomlesse hellish downefall) indeed, though not in name, Mahometople; the Seat of Mahomets power, the settling of Mahumetan dregs: What
 words can serue to preach thy funerall Sermon, and ring thy knell to succeeding ages? Sometimes the Theatre of worldly pompe, but then on that dismal day of thy captiuitie, the stage of earthly and hellish Furies, the sinke of bloud, and slaughter-house of Death. What sense would not become senselesse, to see the breaches of the walls filled vp with the slaine? the gate by death shutting out death, closedHist. Pont. Turcograec. vp to the arch with confused bodies of Turks and Christians? the shouts of men fighting? the cries, grones, gaspes, of men dying? the manifold spectacles andPlurima mortis imago. Virg. varietie of death? and yet the worse estate, and more multiplied deaths of the liuing? women rauished; maidens forced; persons, vowed to sanctitie, deuoted to lust, slaughter, slauerie; reuerend age no whit reuerenced; greene youth perishing in the  bloome, and rotten before it had time to ripen; the father seeing the hopes of his yeeres, deare pledges of Nature, slaine or sold before his face: the children beholding the parents passe into another captiuitie; all taking an euerlasting fare well of all wel-fare, as well as of each other. Well may we in compassion weepe for those miseries, the bitter passion whereof, like a violent whirlewinde, did to them drie vp the fountaines of teares. Euen he which writ the Historie of these things, quorum pars magna fuit, George Phranza, Counseller,Curae leues loquuntur, ingentes stupent. S^n. He after turned Monk, and scarce had bare bread to sustaine him. Jac. Pontan. He is said to haue slaine his owne wife, etc. to preuent slauerie: and himselfe died in the fight. Th. Zygomal. and great Chancellor to the Emperour, might much moue vs with his owne particular; himselfe sold to one, his wife to another, his daughter (richly espoused) now married to the Sera^le-slauerie, his sonne slaine with the Sultans owne hand, for not being obsequ^ous to his beastly lust: if particular and priuate cases could finde any proper place in publike calamities; and  if the Emperours owne Historie, were not (as some haue told it) more tragicall. O Sunne, how could thy brightnesse endure to see such hideous spectacles! but clouds of shot, dust, and smoake, hid them from thee! O Earth, which otherwhiles at that timeConst. was taken, May 29. 1453. of the yeere, deckest thy selfe with thy fairest roabes, embroidered with varietie of flowers! how wast thou then couered with dead carkasses, and furrowed with rills of bloud? O GOD, that the sinnes of man should thus prouoke thy iustice, by vniust and sinfull instruments, to punish iniustice and sinne! and to chastise thy Christian seruants, by Antichristian and deuillish enemies! Iust art thou, O Lord, and iust are thy iudgements, which in iudgement remembrest mercy, which sauest the soules of thine, in and by the affliction of their bodies, but wilt cast this Rod of thy wrath into a fire that neuer shall be quenched.
 But mee thinkes I heare some excepting at this long digression, and quarrelling at this Tragedie in stead of the proceeding Historie. Shall I craue pardon? Or shall I rather desire the Reader a little to consider with mee in this narration of Constantinople (as the Map and Epitome of Easterne Christendome) the miserable and perplexed estate of all Easterne Christians, by like meanes brought and trampled vnder the feet of the Ottoman Horse? The larger storie of their rites and opinions is reserued to another taske: this I haue propounded as the glasse of their miseries, that being now to take leaue of the Turkes, wee might not so much honour them with this peale of Rhetorical Ordnance; as by this mirror of miserie, be touched with feare in our selues for like punishments, if in time we meet not God with repentance; and remembring the afflictions of Ioseph, to pray for those our brethren, that God would  haue mercy on them, and giue them patience, and (in his time) deliuerance. They which would take more view of the miseries of Christians vnder the Turke, may in Viues, Georgiouitz, Septemcastrensis, and others, read them; for mee, the parallel^ of the Tur^ish and Christian Hirarchy, was some occasion of this digression, touching which, let mee ^orrow a few words with our Reader.
Mahomet the Conqueror, for the repeopling of the Citie, pretended great fauour to the Christians, gaue them licence to elect a new Patriarch, whom he honoured with the wonted rites and solemnities: and vouchsafed to conferre with him about the Christian mysteries (for his mother was a Christian, and he himselfe addicted to studies of learning, beingPhranza. l. 1. cap. 33. skilfull  in the Greeke, Chaldee, Persian, Latin, Arabike, besides his Turkish, languages, professing knowledge also in Astrologie) and receiued at the hands of this Patriarch, (his name was Gennadius) a large treatise thereof,Confes. Christ. fld. Gennadijum. Turcogr. l. 2. and in Biblioth. Patrum. yet extant in Greeke and Turkish, and gaue him diuers priuiledges. But things fained cannot continue: and partly through his owne couetousnesse, partly through the ambition and disagreeing of the Clergie, heauie fines were imposed on them, and the Seat receiued in his time nine successions, and eight in the raigne of Baiazet his sonne, and so groneth vnder that burthen to this day. And howsoeuer the Patriarch enioyethSteph. G^rla. cbij ep Octob. 7, 1574 etc. Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall respect amongst the Christians, yet is hee contemned of the Turkes, some of them vpbraiding both him and other Christians, with the names of dogs, Ethnicks, vnbeleeuers, and the like zealous Rhetorick: nor is he admitted a  roome amongst the Bassaes, except when he brings his tribute of 4000. duckets, with almost as much besides to the Bassaes and other officers. In his Monastery and Patriarchiall Church and Palace, are no Bishops or great Prelates nourished, but a few Monks and some Lay-officers and Counsellors. Hee sometimes (but seldome) preacheth, on some chiefe Feasts at
 the Consecration of some Bishop or Archbishop: and very little preaching they haue amongst them, and that which is, in the old pure Greeke, which very few of them vnderstand, thinking it sufficient if two or three of their audience conceiue them, and very few can preach.Wences. Budovitz. Ep. 1580. They haue not the Scriptures in the vulgar Greeke. The reuenue of the Patriarch is about 20000. Dollers. They gather much in their Churches; and hee sendeth his Collector to gather abroad, and the other Prelates pay an annuitie to him. To preuent abuses from Turkes, he hath a Ianizarie or two at the Church-doore in the time of the Lyturgie. They reade in their Churches great Legends of the lies of Saints, as well as the Papists. Their Religion is almost altogether in rites, like the other. The difference betweene new and old Rome was one principall occasion of the losse of Constantinople, as appearethPolit. Turcog. vid. Ep. G. Trapez. by the Emperour  Iohn his going to Rome to sollicite ayde, (which had been giuen him but for refusing a Papall ceremonie) and the proceedings of the Councell of Florence. The Patriarkes of Alexandria, Antiochia, and Ierusalem, acknowledge this of Constantinople Oecumenicall: and his iurisdiction extendeth through Asia Minor, the Archipelago, Greece, Mysia, Walachia, Moldavia, Dalmatia, Russia, and Muscouia. The Calogeri or Monkes haue their Gardens and Vineyards, which they till and dresse with their owne hands to sustaine themselues. The other Patriarchs also pay a yeerely tribute to the Turke. The Priests are poore, and liue of Almes and the prices of their holies, which are most gainefull in exequies. The Laitie is no lesse miserable for the most part, of spare diet, but giuen to drinking. Both Iewes and Christians pay for themselues and euery of their Children aboue twelue yeeres old, a  Ducket by the poll: and much more for the maintenance of the Nauie, besides their tribute-children for Ianizaries.
The Greekes are ignorant and vnlearned, and haue exiled (in a blinde zeale) Poeticall and Philosophicall Authors, for feare of pollution to their studies. And as Simeon Cabasilas writ to Crusias, they haue about seuentie Dialects of the Moderne Greeke tongue, the purest of which is at Constantinople, the most barbarous of all (O Times!) at Athens. O ATHENS,Athens desciphered. before calledHen. Steph. ad Dicaearch. Bi. (...). Athenae bodie satines, pro (...). Fran. Portus Cret. So Constantinople, called Antonomasticae (...), and when they went thither their phrase was (...), of which words contrad^cted and corrupted, the Turkes call it Stambol at this day, G. Postel. Compend. Cosmog. Asser. Men. in vita Alfredi. (...), The Greece of Greece; and that which the sight is in the eye, that which the minde is in the soule, such was Athens in Greece, Seat of the Muses, Graces, Empire, Arts! O ATHENS! but I am forced silence. Let Zygomal, an eye-witnesse, speake; There now (saith hee) remaines no more but the skin thereof, her selfe is long since  dead: the True Athens and Helicon are come into our Westene parts. And how can any of them labour in learning, which must labour to liue? Necessitie hath no law, no learning. Euen we here now behold a Brittish Athens, or rather an Attike Britaine, where whilome our Ancestors (euen after Learning and Religion had here now flourished) found through the Danish pestilence, a brutish barbarisme. Alfred, the sonne of a King, and after King himselfe, could not finde a Master in all his Dominions to teach him the Latin tongue: and procuring with care and cost, forreiners to teach him, first learned that language at sixe and thirtie yeeres of his age: hauing begun to reade the vulgar at twelue yeeres, which his elder and lesse studious brethren could not then doe. And himselfe in the Preface of Gregories Pastoralls, (to vse his owne words in our later English) saith, That learning was so fallen in the English  Nation, that very few were on this side Humber, which their seruice could vnderstand in English, or an Epistle from Latin into English declare: and I weene that not many beyond Humber were not. So few of them were, that I also one onely may not remember by South Thamise, when as I to raigne vndertooke. I could shew the like in Italie also by testimony of Pope Agatho, in the sixth Synode at Constantinople vpon like cause. But I forget my Greekes, as they haue done their Greeke; I feare rather, I seeme to remember them too much, and that seuere Censors will iudge this an abortiue issue, borne before the time. I will therefore stay my willing pen till fitter time, referring the more studious to those which haue written of this subiect, especially to Martin Crusius his Turcograecia, where out of the Letters of Gerlach and others, as also of the Greekes themselues, Iohn and Theodosius Zygomale, and of  the Patriarchs,Alfredus Rex. Sex. Syn. Const. A. 4. Metrophanes, Ioasaphus, Ieremias, (betweene this last Patriarch and D. Andreas and Crusius there passed some writings of Religion) they may haue further satisfaction. Their stile is, Ieremies by the mercie of God Archb. of Const. New Rome, Oecumenicall Patriarch. Michael by the mercie of God Patriarch of great Theopolis,Cr^s^ Turcogr. hist. Ecclesiast. etc. Censura Orient. Ecclesia per Ierem. Patriarch. Antiochia,Moses Mardenus 1552. made a profession of his faith at Rome, in his and the Patriarch of Antiochiaes name: the like was done by Sulaka elect Patriarch of the Nestorians, 1553. both translated by And. Mosius. which may bee iugglings, as well as that of Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria, as George Dousa testifieth against Baronius. and of all the East. Sophronius by the mercie of God Patriarch of the holy Citie Ierusalem, and of all Palestina. In a Testimoniall to D. Albert Lewenstein, the Patriarch of Alexandria stileth himselfe, I Ioachim Pope and Patriarch of the great Citie Alexandria, Iudge of the World, etc. Others Humilis Metropolita Rhodi Callistus. Gabriel Archb. of Philadelphia. And if to the Patriarch, Archb. of P. Seruant to your Holinesse, Gabriel. A Bishop, (...), or humilis Episcopus N. 
 Gerasimus. They make publike mention of the foure Patriarchs in their Church Lyturgies. The Venetians allow the Greekes free vse of their religion through all their Dominion: and Crete is a chiefe place for their learned men.
The greatest misery which accompanieth the Turkish thraldome, is theirSeptemcast. c. 5. zeale of making Proselytes, with manifold and strong inducements, to such as haue bin more nuzzled in superstitions, then trained vp in knowledge, and see such contempt of Christians, and honours which befall to many Renegadoes: and very many are peruerted and bewitched therewith.
Yea, many voluntarily offer themselues to Apostasie; and others, bySeptemcast. handleth this at large. hopes, feares, griefes,  despaires, importunities, distracted: by that vizor of vertue in the Turkish grauity, sobriety, bodily purity, and spirituall zeale (after their sect) with whole rabbles of Satanicall miracles deluded: wanting all intercourse of Sacraments, preaching, reading, and all Christian holies: and full of wants in necessaries for this life; forget a better, and turne Turke. Thus do they sell to the Deuil their soules, bought by the bloud of Christ Iesus. We may well despaire of words to vtter this misery, and to describe this Mart of Hell; seeing it exceedeth all words to see the Markets made of Christian bodies, the remainders of cruell and bloudy warres, chained together in more then beastly bondage, so brought to the markets: if any bee sicke by the way, driuen on as long as they can goe, and when their feet faile, laid ouer a horse,  like as butchers deale with small cattle, and if thy die, left for a prey to the fowles and beasts: the places of their abode by the way, filled with cryes of younglings of both sexes, abused to vnnaturall lust. In the markets they are stripped, viewed, and (modestie forbids to speake, O Image of God thus abased!) openly in the secretest parts handled, bee they male or female: forced to goe, runne, leape; and if shame or disdaine make them vnwilling, by whips and stripes compelled: the infant plucked from the mothers breast and sold from euer againe seeing her, or libertie: the wife thus openly deluded and dealt with before the husbands face, and for a base price giuen by some baser Turke, euerlastingly diuorced from his face: his daughters virginitie, openly, secretly! my words are swallowed vp with horrour of the fact: himselfe, at home, reuerend for his yeeres, now in that respect contemned, and hanging  long on hand as vnprofitable ware, before hee finde a buyer. Priest, Souldier, Merchant, Artificer, Husbandman, all equally subiect to this iniquity, saue that Gentlemen, and those of most liberall education are least esteemed and most abused, because they can bring least profit to their Masters. Where besides filthy lusts, they suffer hunger, thirst, cold, and stripes; and which redoubleth those blowes, euen there is the passion of Christ, in this passion of their owne, vpbraided to them. Some in impatience reuolt, some runne away, and are brought backe to a worse estate, if possible: some kill themselues; and some! But I can say no more. Let vs pray for them: and let vs at last leaue this Tragedie, and take view of former Antiquities.



CHAP. XV. Of the Regions and Religions of ASIA MINOR, since called Natolia and Turkie.
NExt after the Turkish Religion thus related, it seemeth fittest to discourse of the ancient names and limits of Regions, and of the former Heathenish Religions of that part of the Turkish Dominion, which among AuthorsGem. Phrys. Haiton. Maginus. Francisco Thamara, and aeliij. hath  since, in a singular eminencie, obtained the name of Turkie. And if it seeme strange, that the Turkish Religion (a new vpstart) be declared before those former of the Pagans, the matter wee had in hand hath thus altered our methode, that after wee had described the deformed disioynted lineaments of the Mother, an Arabian Saracen, her more mis-shapen Daughter, this Turkish Mopsa, might attend her hard at her heeles. As for the Region, we haue followed the Turkish forces hither: and now that we haue glutted our selues with the view of their later affaires of State and Religion, let vs cast our eyes about vs, and obserue the Countrey it selfe, which because of her long and entire subiection to this Nation, is styled by theirTurcia, and Turcia Maior. name. The GreekesMel. and Peucer. lib. 5. The Greekes called this, Asia simply, as being best knowne to them. called it Natolia, (...), because it was the Easterne part of that Empire, as they called Thracia,  the Countrey about Constantinople (which was named (...)) Romania. This Natolia, or Anatolia, is of others called Asia Minor: and yet Asia, in most proper and strict account, is peculiarly applied to one Region in this great Cherosonesus, or Peninsula, which containeth
 besides that, the Regions of Pontus, Bithynia, Lycia, Galatia, Pamphilia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Armenia Minor. It was bounded on the East with Euphrates, (now Frat;) on the South, with the Mediterranean Sea: on the West, with the Archipelago: on the North, with the Black-Sea, stretching in length from 51. to 72. degrees of Longitude, and in breadth from 36. @. to 45. This Countrey hath beene anciently renowned for Armes and Arts: now theThis part of Asia hath been exceedingly subiect to Earthquakes: in the time of Tiberius, twelue Cities were by them prostrate in one night. Niger. graue of the carkasses, or some ruinous bones rather, and stonie Reliques of the carkasses of more then foure thousand Places and Cities, sometimes inhabited. Many changes hath it sustained by the Egyptian, Persian, Macedonian, Roman, Tartarian, and Turkish generall Conquests, besides such exploits, as Croesus and Mithridates of old, the Saracens, and the Westerne Christians of later times, haue therein atchieued. Let  the studious of these things search them in their proper Authors: our taske is Religion, whose ouer-worne, and almost out-worne steps, with much curious hunting in many Histories, wee haue thus weakely traced. Of the Turkes we haue alreadie spoken, and we leaue the larger Relations of the Christians (for why should wee mixe Light with Darknesse?) to their proper place. For euen yet, besides the Armenians, there remaine many Christians of the Greek Church in Cappadocia, and other parts of this Region.


HONDIVS his Map of ASIA MINOR.
map of Turkey, East Asia
NATOLIA


Next vnto those parts of Syria before deliuered, are situate in this lesser Asia, Cilicia, Armenia  Minor, and Cappadocia. CAPPADOCIA,CAPPADOCIA called also Leucosyria, and now Amasia, stretcheth foure hundred and fiftie miles along the Euxine Sea, bounded on the West with Paphlagonia, Galatia, and part of Pamphylia; on the South, with Cilicia; on the East,
 with the Hills Antitaurus and Moschius, and part of Euphrates. Heere runneth Halys, the end of Croesus Empire, both in the site and fate thereof; the doubtfull Oracle here giuing him a certaine ouerthrow. For when hee consulted with the same, touching his Expedition against Cyrus, he receiued answer, That passing Halys, hee should ouer-turne a great State; which he interpreting actiuely of his attempts against Cyrus, verified it passiuely in himselfe. And here, besides other streames, slideth Thermodon, sometime made famous by the bordering Amazons. Of which manly Foeminine people, ancient Authors disagree:Amazons. Theophrastus deriuing them from the Sauromatae; Salust fetching them from Tanais; P. Diaconus describing them in Germany; Trogus and Iustine reporting them Scythians; Diodorus crossing the Seas  to finde them in Lybia, and thence also, in a further search, passing into an Iland in the Atlantike Ocean; Ptolomey and Curtius placing them neerer the Caspian Sea; StraboStrab. lib. 11. doubting whether there euer had beene such a people, or no. Some haue found them out a-new in the new World,Riuer of Amazons. naming that huge Riuer of them. Goropius confidently auouched them to bee the Wiues and Sonnes of the Sarmatians or Cimbrians: who, together with their Husbands, inuaded Asia. And this hee proueth by Dutch Etymologies and other coniectures. Which, if it be true, sheweth, that their Religion was the same with the Scythian. TheyGram. ex Statio. are said to haue worshipped Mars, of whom they faine themselues to be descended. Religion it were, to speake of their Religion, of whose being wee haue no better certaintie. StraboStrab. l. 12. writeth,  That in the places ascribed to the Amazons, Apollo was exceedingly worshipped.
In Cappadocia was seated the Citie Comana, wherein was a Temple of Bellona, and a great multitude of such as were there inspired and rauished by deuilish illusion, and of sacred Seruants. It was inhabited by the people called Cataones, who being subiect to a King, did neuerthelesse obey the Priest that was in great part Lord of the Temple, and of the Sacred Seruants, whose number (when Strabo was there) amounted to sixe thousand and vpwards of men and women. The Priest receiued the reuenue of the Region next adioyning to the Temple, and was in honour next to the King in Cappadocia, and commonly of the same kindred. These Idolatrous Rites are supposed to haue beene brought hither out of Tau^ica Scythia, by Orestes and his sister Iphigenia, where humane Sacrifices were offered to  Diana. Here, at the solemne Feasts of Bellona, those Sacred Seruants before mentioned, called Comani, wounded each other in an extaticall furie, bloudy Rites fitting Bellona's solemnities.Solinus. Argaeus, whose hoary head was couered continually with snow, was reputed a religious Hill, and habitation of some God.
StraboStrab. l. 12. reporteth of the Temple of Apollo Catanius, in Dastacum; and of another of Iupiter in Morimena, which had three thousand of those Sacred Seruants or Religious Votaries, which as an inferiour Order were at the command of the Priest, who receiued of his Temples reuenue fifteene Talents, and was reputed in the next ranke of honour to the Priest of Comana.
Not farre hence is Castabala, where the Temple of Diana PersicaStrab. l. 12. Coel. l. 26. c. 33. where the sacred or deuoted women were reported to goe bare-footed on burning coles without harme. It is  reportedVadiani epit., that if a Snake did bite a Cappadocian, the mans bloud was poyson to the Snake, and killed him.
Many excellent Worthies hath this Region yeelded to the world. Mazaca (afterwards of Cl^udius called Caesarea) was the Episcopall Seat of Great Basil. Cucusum, the Receptacle of exiled Chrysostome: Amasia (now a Prouinciall Citie of the Turkish Beglerbegs) sometime the Countrey of Strabo, to whom these our Relations are so much indebted: Nissa and Nazianaum, of which, the two Gregories receiued their surnames. But that Humane and Diuine learning is now trampled vnder the barbarous foot of the Ottoman-horse. Here is Trapezonde also, whilome bearing the proud name of an Empire. Licaonia,Licaonia. the chiefe Citie whereof is Iconium, celebrated in holy Writ, (and a long time the Royall Seat of the first Turkes in Asia, and since of Car^mania, now Conia, or Cogne, inhabited with  Greekes, Turkes, Iewes, Arabians and Armenians) is of Ptolomey adioyned to Cappadocia. And so is Diopolis,Diopolis. called before Cabira, since Augusta, which Ortelius placeth in the lesser Armenia.
In Diopolis was the Temple of the Moone had in great veneration, much like, in the Rites thereof, to that before mentioned of Comana: which although it bareComana Cappadocia, and Ponitica, Strab. l. 12. the surname of Cappadocia, yet Ptolomey placeth it in this Armenia; and Comana Pontica, in Cappadocia, of the same name and superstitious deuotion to the same Goddesse. Thence haue they taken the patterne of their Temple of their Rites, Ceremonies, Diuinations, respect to their Priests. And twice a yeere in the Feasts, which were called, The Goddesse her going out, the Priest  ware a Diademe. He was second to none, but the King: which Priest-hood was holden of some of Strabo's progenitors. Pompey bestowed the Priest-hood of this Temple vpon Archelaus, and added to the temples reuenue two Schoeni, that is, threescore furlongs of ground,
 commanding the inhabitants to yeeld him obedience. Hee had also power ouer the Sacred Seruants, which were no lesse then sixe thousand.
Lycomedes after inioyed that Prelacie, with foure Schoeni of land added thereto: Caesar remoued him, placing in his roome Diteutus, the sonne of Adiatorix, whom (with his wife and children) hee had led in triumph, purposing to slay his elder sonne, together with him, But when the younger perswaded the Souldiers that he was the elder, and both contended which should die, Diteutus was of his parents counselled to yeeld to the younger, and to remaine aliue, to bee a stay to their family. Which pietie Caesar hearing of, grieuing for the death of the other, hee thus rewarded. At the Feasts aforesaid, is great recourse of men and women hither. Many Pilgrims resort to discharge their vowes. Great store of women is  there, which for the most part are deuoted; this Citie being as little Corinth. For many went to Corinth, in respect of the multitude of Harlots, prostituted or consecrated to Venus.
Zela.Zela, another Citie, hath in it the Temple of Anias, much reuerenced of the Armenians; wherein the Rites are solemnized with greatest Sanctimony, and Oathes taken of greatest consequence. The sacred Seruants and Priestly Honours are as the former. The Kings did sometime esteeme Zela, not as a Citie, but as a Temple of the Persian Gods: and the Priest had supreme power ouer all things; who, with a great multitude of those sacred Seruants inhabited the same. The Romans encreased their Reuenues.
In Cappadocia the Persian Religion was much vsed: but of the Persian Rites see moreLib. 4. in  our Tractat of Persia. TheThe infamous lewdnes of the Cappadocians. GALATIA. 300000. Galli. lewdnesse of the Cappadocians grew into a Prouerbe; if any were enormiously wicked, he was therefore called a Cappadocian.
GALATIA or GALLOGRAECIA, so called of the Galli, which vnder the conduct of Brennus (saith Suidas) assembled an Army of three hundred thousand, and seeking aduentures in forraine parts diuided themselues: some inuading Greece; others Thrace and Asia, where they setled themselues betweene Bithynia and Cappadocia. On the South it is confined with Pamphilia, and on the North is washed with the Euxine Sea, the space of two hundred and fiftie miles. Sinope, the mother and nursing Citie of Mithridates, is heere seated: one of the last Cities of Asia that subiected it selfe to Turkish bondage, in the dayes of Mahomet the second. Of the Galatae were three Tribes, Trogini, Tolistobogi, and Tectosages: all  which Goropius deriueth from the Cimmerij. At Tavium, which was inhabited with the Trogini, was a brazen Statue of Iupiter, and his Temple was a priuiledged Sanctuarie. The Tolistobogi had for their chiefe Mart Pisinus, wherein was a great Temple of the Mother of the Gods, whom they called Andigista, had in great veneration; whose Priests had sometime beene mightie. This Temple was magnificently builded of the Attalian Kings, with the Porches also of white stone. And the Romans, by depriuing the same of the Goddesses Statue (which they sent for to Rome, as they did that of Aesculapius out of Epidaurus) added much reputation of Religion thereunto. The Hill Dindyma ouer-looketh the Citie, of which shee was named Dindymena, as of Cybelus (which Orletius supposeth to bee the same) Cybele. Of the Galatians, Deiotarus was King: but more fame hath befallen them by Paules Epistle  to them.
PlutarchPlut. Sermo and Disputatio a natoria. tells of a Historie of a Galatian woman, named Camma, worthy our recitall. Shee was faire and noble (the daughter of Dianaes Priest) and richly married to Sinatus the Tetrarch. But Sinorix, a man richer and mightier then hee, became his vniust corriuall, and because he durst not attempt violence to her, her husband liuing, he slew him. Camma solaced her selfe as she could, cloystering her selfe in Dianaes Temple, and admitting none of her mightie suiters. But when Sinorix had also moued that suit, she seemed not vnwilling: and when he came to desire her marriage, she went forth to meet him, and with gentle entertainment brought him into the Temple vnto the Altar, where shee dranke to him a cup of poysoned liquor; and hauing taken off almost halfe, she reached him the rest: which after shee  saw he had drunke, she called vpon her husbands name aloud, saying; Hitherto haue I liued sorrowfull without thee, wayting this day, now welcome me vnto thee: for I haue reuenged thy slaughter on the most wicked amongst men, and haue beene companion and partner with thee in life, with him in death. And thus dyed they both. The like manly woman-hood (if a Christian might commend that, which none but a Christian can discommend) Valerius MaximusVal. Max. l. 6. c. 1. sheweth of Chiomara her country-woman, wife of Ortyagon, a great man amongst the Tectosages: who, in the warres of Manilius the Consul, being taken prisoner, was committed to the custodie of a Tribune, who forc't her to his pleasure. After that agreement was made for her ransome, and the money brought to the place appointed, whiles the Tribune was busie about the receit thereof, shee caused her Gallo-graecians to cut off his head, which  she carryed to her husband, in satisfaction of her wrong.
At the Funeralls of the GalatiansAlex. ab Alexandro, genial. dicrum, l. 3. c. 7. they obserued this custome, to write letters and hurle
 them into that latest and fatall fire, supposing that their deceased friends should read them in the other world. At their sacrificesGen. di^r. l. 4. cap. 17. they vsed not an Aruspex, or Diuinor, which gazed in the entrailes, but a Philosopher, without whom they thought no Sacrifice acceptable to their gods. The Deuill certaine was the god to whom their humane Sacrifices were acceptable, which in deuillish inhumanitie they offered at their bloudie AltarsIbid. l. 6. c. 26., when they diuined of things to come, which they did by his falling, by the dismembring and flowing forth of his bloud.Athenaeus. Athenaeus out of Philarchus, telleth of one Ariannes, a rich Galatian, which feasted the whole Nation a whole yeere together, with Sacrifices of Bulls, Swine, Sheepe, and other prouision, made ready in great Caldrons, prouided of purpose for this entertainment, that he  made them in spacious Boothes, which he had therefore built. Pausanius saith, That the Pesinuntian Galatians abstained from Swines flesh. The Legend of Agdistis and Atte, which he there addeth, is too filthy to relate.
BetweeneD. Niger. Asi e Com. 1. Maginus the mouth of Pontus, the Thracian Bosphorus,PONTVS and BITHYNIA. and part of Propontis on the West, and Galatia on the East, part of the Euxine Sea on the North, and Asia (properly so called) on the South, is situate the Prouince called by the double namePontitae gentes a ^^ntico c^^no^inatar Ma^, L. Flor. l. 3. c. 5. of PONTVS and BITHYNIA. There were sometimes two Prouinces, diuided by the Riuer Sangarius: now they are called Bursia by Giraua; by Castaldus Becsangial. The most famous Cities therein are, or rather haue beene, NICE, famous sometimes for Neptunes Temple, but more for the first Generall Councell therein celebrated, against Arrius, in defence of the Trinitie, and Christs Diuinitie: Nicomedia, sometimes the Seat of Emperours, now ruinous: Apamia, and  ^^sa or Bursa, nigh to the Mount Olympus, where the first Ottomans had their seat Royall, and all of that race, except the Great Turkes themselues, are still buried: Chalcedon, built seuenteene yeeres before Byzantium; and therefore the builders accounted blinde, which neglected that better Seat. Here was a famous Councell of six hundred and thirtie Bishops, against the Heresie of Eutyches: heere Iason had built a Temple to Iupiter, in the straights ^hich seuer Europe from Asia, after Melas measure fiue furlongs. Of their ancient Kings others haue related: but one cannot passe this our Historie without obseruation, and that is MithridatesGramaye. Pontica. Iustin. l. 37. L. Florus. T. L^uij Epi^om., the sixth King of that name; who loosing his father in the eleuenth yeere of his age, by his Tutors was trecherously assailed, but escaped, and by vse of that antidote, which of him still beareth the name Mithridate, out-liued their poysoning conspiracie. Hee liued  indeed to the death of thousands, which either his crueltie or his warres consumed. Foure yeeres together (to auoid their Treasons) he liued in the fields and woods, vnder a shew of hunting; both preuenting their designes, and inuring himselfe to hardnesse. Hee spake two and twentie languages, being Lord of so many Nations. Hee held warres with the Romans sixe and fortie yeeres, whom those renowned Captaines, Sylla, Lucullus, Pompey, did so conquer, as he alway arose againe with great lustre, and with greater terror: and at last dyed, not by his enemies command, but voluntarily in his old age, and his own Kingdome, neuer made to attend the Roman triumphs; Syllaes felicity, Lucullus prowesse, and Pompeyes greatnesse notwithstanding. His aspiring thoughts had greedily swallowed the Soueraignty both  of Asia and Europe. He caused in one night, all the Romans in his Dominions to be slaine; in which massacre perished a hundred and fiftie thousand, as some haue numbred. But it cannot be conceiued (saithP. Oros l. 6. cap. 2. Orosius) how many there were, or how great was the griefe both of the doers and sufferers, when euery one must betray his innocent guests and friends, or hazard his owne life; no Law of Hospitalitie, no Religion of Sanctuary, or reuerence of Images, being sufficient protection. And no maruell, if he spared not his enemies, whenCap. 5. he slew Exipodras and Homochares his sonnes; and after the poysonings and voluntary death of Monyma his wife, Statira and Roxane his daughters; his sonne Pharnaces (like to taste of the same cup) won to his part his fathers Armie, sent against him, with which he pursued his  father so hotly, that hee, hauing denounced a heauy curse vpon him, entred amongst his Wiues, Concubines, and Daughters, and gaue them poyson, pledging them in the same liquor; which his body accustomed to his Antidotes, easily ouer-came, and therefore was faine to intreat another to open a bloudy passage for that his cruell soule. A man (saith Orosius) of all men most superstitious, alway hauing with him Philosophers, and men expert in all Arts, now threescore and foureteene yeeres old. The Religion in Pontus was little differing from the Greekes. Wee read of the Sacrifices of this King to Ceres, and to Iupiter Bellipotens, in which the King brought the first wood to the fire. He powred also thereon Hony, Milke, Wine, Oyle, and after made a Feast. In honour of Neptune they drowned Chariots, drawne with foure white Horses, with which (it seemed) they would haue him ease himselfe in his Sea-voyages.Ortel. in Parerg Dom. Nig. Asiae Com. 1. At the mouth of Pontus was the Temple of Iupiter Iasus, called Panopeum:  and nigh thereto, a Promontory sacred to Diana, sometime an Iland, ioyned to the Continent by an Earthquake. Hereabouts was the Caue Acherusium, whose bo^tomlesse bottome was thought to reach to Hell.

I may in the next place set downe Paphlagonia,PAPHLAGONIA. which, as it fareth with such as haue mightie Neighbours, can scarcely finde her proper limits. SomeMaginus Gramay. Strab. l 12. Epitom. in Strab. reckon it to Galatia, before described; and sometimes Pontus hath shared it: and either the force of Armes, or bountie of Emperours hath assigned it at other times to Phrygia, Cilicia, or other parts, the bounds thereof are thus deliuered: Pontus confineth on the North; on the East, the Riuer Halys; on the South, Phrygia and Galatia; on the West, Bithynia. Of the people hereof, called Heneti, someMaginus. deriue the Veneti of Italy. They now call it Roni. It had the name Paphlagonia of Paphlagon, the sonne of Phineus. The Mount Olgasys is very high, and in the same are many Paphlagonian Temples. Sandaracurgium is another Mountaine, made hollow by the Metall-miners, which were wont to bee slaues redeemed from capitall Sentence, who heere  exchanged that speedie death for one more lingring. So deadly is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending, of this Idoll of the World: which the Spaniards haue verified in the West, by the destruction of another world. Vitruuius tells of a Fountaine in Paphlagania, as it were mixed with Wine, whereof they which drinke without other liquor, proue drunken.
The Heptacometae and Mossynoeci inhabited about those parts;Coel. Rhod. l. 18. c. 30. a people of that beastly disposition, that they performed the most secret worke of Nature in publike view. These are not so much notorious for being worse then beasts, as their neighbours, the Tibareni,Tibareni. for surpassing in iustice other men. They would not warre on their enemy, but would faithfully before relate vnto him the Time, Place, and Houre of their fight; whereas the Mossynoeci  vsed to assault strangers that trauelled by them very treacherously. They haue also a ve^^mous kinde of Hony, growing out of their trees, with which they beguiled and slew three troupes of Pompey. The Tabareni obserued one strange fashion, that when the woman was deliuered of a childe, her husband lay in, and kept his chamber, the women officiously attending him, a custome obserued at this day amongst the Brasilians.


CHAP. XVI. Of Asia proprie dicta, now called Sarcum.  
THis Region (in the strict sense) being a particular Prouince of the lesser Asia, isPtol. l. 5. c. 2. Maginus. Ortelius in Parergo. bounded on the West with part of Propontis, and Hellespont, the Aegean, Icarian and Mertoan Seas; on the South, with the Rhodian Sea, Lycia and Pamphilia: on the East, with Galatia; on the North, with Pontus and Bithynia, and part of Propontis. In which space are contained Phrygia, Caria, and both Mysias, Aeolis, Ionia, Doris, Lydia. SomeVadianus. circumcise from hence both Phrygia, and Mysia, alledging the authoritie ofAct. 16.6. Saint Luke. But in the Apocalypse,  Chap. 1. these parts are also added; and, 1. Pet. 1.1.
PHRYGIA.PHRYGIA is diuided into the greater, which lyeth Eastward; and the lesse, called also Hellespontiaca and Troas, and of some Epictetus. The greater PHRYGIA hath not many Cities. Here stood Midaium, the Royall Seat of Mydas, and Apamia, the Phrygian Metropolis.Plin. l. 5. c. 29. Phrygia is called of the riuer Phryx, which diuideth it from Caria. Herodotus telleth thatHerodot. l. 2. the Phrygians were accounted the most ancient of all people; for the triall whereof Psammetichus King of Egypt had shut vp, without societie of any humane creature, two children, causing onely goats to bee admitted to suckle them, who after long time pronounced bec, which they had learned of the goates; but because that (with the Phrygians) signified bread, therefore they accounted the Phrygians first authors of mankinde. Before Deucalions floud, NannacusSuidas. is reported to raigne there, and foreseeing the same, to haue assembled his  people into the Temple, with supplications and prayers. Hence grew the prouerbe to say, A thing was from Nannacus, which was exceeding old. Many antiquities are told of their gods; whose Theologie thus is recitedEus. de praep. l. 2.4. by Eusebius. The Phrygians tell, that Meon was the most ancient King of Phrygia, the Father of Cybele, who inuented the pipe called Syrinx, and was named the Mountaine mother, beloued of Marsyas. But when as Attis had raised her belly, her father slaying him, and his fellowes, shee enraged with madnesse, ranne vp and downe the countrey. Marsyas roamed with her, who after, being ouercome in a Musicall contention of Apollo, was slayed quicke. After these things did Apollo loue Cybele, with whom she wandred to the Hyperboreans: and by his command the bodie of Attis was buried, and  Cybele obtained diuine Honours. Hence it is, that euen to this day the Phrygians bewayle the young mans death. In Pessinus a City of Phrygia (after reckoned to Galatia) they erected a Temple to Attis, and Cybele. After the death of Hyperion, the children of Coelus
 parted the Kingdome amongst them, the most famous of which were Atlas and Saturne: to the first of which befell the parts adioyning to the Ocean. He had great skill in Astronomy. Of his seuen daughters were procreated many of the Gods and Heroes: and of Maia the eldest, and Iupiter, was Mercury begotten. Saturne the sonne of Atlas being couetous and wicked, married Cybele his sister, and had by her Iupiter. They tell of another Iupiter, brother of Coelus and King of Crete (but there and here they are so intangled with Fables, that the least inquirie hath most ease, and no lesse certaintie.) This Cretan held the Empire of the World, and had ten Sonnes, whom they call Curetes; his Sepulchre they shew to this day. Saturne (the Brother of Atlas) reigned in Italy and Sicilia, till Iupiter his Sonne dispossessed  him, who proued a seuere Prince to the wicked, and bountifull to the good. Thus much Eusebius of the Phrygian Diuinitie out of their owne Legends, the Mysteries whereof he after vnfoldeth. Other Tales they had, as that Minerua killed there a fire breathing beast; of Philemon and Baucis, and such like, mentioned by the Poets. Meander making Warres with the Pessinuntians, vowed for Sacrifice whatsoeuer he first met after hee returned with Conquest, which he performed on Archelaus his Sonne, ouercomming,Gramay. saith one, Pietie with Pietie. Impious is that Pietie which destroyeth Humanitie, and Deuillish crueltie both in the Idoll and Idolater; as appeared also in the euent (if our Story bee true) the father rewarding such Pietie with greater Impietie on himselfe, and casting himselfe into  the riuer, left his name therunto. The like is told of the Riuers Saga^is and Scamander. Hercules when he went with the Argonautes to Colchos, came on shoare on Phrygia to amend his Oare, and being thirstie sent his sweeting Hylas to the riuer for water, who falling therein was drowned, whereupon he (leauing his co^panions) wandred in the woods, bemoning his Hylas.
About these times TantalusA mirrour for Misers. liued in these parts, a man besides other vices exceedingly couetous, not sparing the Temples of the Gods. Hence arose the Fable, that he was punished in Hell with perpetuall hunger and thirst, whiles pleasant waters and dainty fruits did offer themselues to his mouth, but when he would haue tasted them, fled from him. So indeed doth Mammon torment his followers, making them to want as well that which they haue, as that which they haue not, the Medicine being the increaser of the Disease, as when fire is quenched  with Oile: like Gardners Asses laden with good herbs (a burthen to them, food for others) thems^lues glad to feed on Thistles. And how many Tantali do we daily see enduring a hunger and thirst in the midst of their abundance? a monstrous and vnnaturall sicknesse, to hunger after that which they haue: yet cannot, yet will not feed on; a Dropsie-thirst, saue that they dare not drinke that, which they haue and thirst. Vnworthy of that life, which he sacrificeth to that, which neuer had the dignitie to be mortall: vnworthy that body, which he pineth with plenty; or that soule, which he damneth for a fancie of hauing; or that nature of man which he confineth to the Gall^es, to the Mynes, in the seruice of a piece of earth, vnworthy of the name of Christian, whose Christ was, to one of hisIudas. Mat. 26.15. Fore-fathers, worth thirty pence, but now this will sell him for three halfe pence, for a piece of bread; yea, like Aesops Dog, for the shadow of a piece of Bread: vnworthy of any thing, saue that his couetise, to be  his Tempter, his Tormentor, his Fury, his Deuill: Once, pitty it is, that hee prizeth a Halter so deare, else would he rid the World of a burthen, and himselfe of his worthlesse life. But whither hath Tantalus carried me? Take heed (Reader) he doe not carry thee further, or thou him, beyond words: They say he would haue sacrificed his Sonne Pephilops, had not Diuine power releeued him: thou art like to find him Tantalus still. What the Poets tell of Ganymedes euery one knowes; of Niobe famous for her sonnes and daughters, which she lost all in one day: of Midas, (another Tantalus) whose couetousnesse became a new AlchymieThe Fable was that Midas hauing his wish granted, wished all that he touchted might become Gold, and so his meate was Gold and starued him. to turne all into Gold. And how doth this two-fold Alchymie gull the world? the one making with vaine hopes a rich estate become poore, the other with ful haps making all Gold but the Man; onely the RomaneLa Noue Discourser of the Popes Buls Alchymist is Master of that Art which the former professe, that turnes so easily a little Lead into so much good Gold: onely the wiseman, wise in the latter to  be Master of himselfe and his wealth, not a slaue to passion or pelfe. And yet Midas in a publike calamity (hapning by an Earthquake, which swallowed vp Houses) warned by an Oracle, to cast into those gaping jawes of the earth that which was most precious: hurled therein much treasure (what could hee thinke more precious: and how much more easily would many a Mydas haue hurled in himselfe?) But the Earth not yet satisfied, would not close vp her mouth, till his sonne Anchurus (esteeming man to be most precious) leaped in, and the reconciled Element receiued an Altar in witnesse of his haughty courage. There were many Phrygian Kings named Midas.
The Phrygians sacrificed to the riuers Meander and Marsius: they placed their Priests after  death vpon a stone, ten cubits high. TheyStobaeus. did not sweare or force others to an oath: they were much addicted to diuination by Birds. MacrobiusMacrob. l. 1. 21. applyeth their Tales of Cybele, and Atis, to the Sunne. Silenus is reckoned among the Phrygian Deities: whomGoropij Becces. Goropius
 fercheth out of Scythia, and maketh him Midas his Master in Geography and Philosophy: The diligent attendance of the Scholer was occasion to that Fable of his long eares: the learning of the Master gaue him diuine Honours.
In Phrygia on the riuer Sangarius stood Gordie (or as ArrianusAr. l. 2. calleth it, Gordion) of which he reporteth, that when Alexander came thither, he had a great desire to see the Tower, in which was the palace of Gordius and Midas, that he might behold the shafts or beame of Gordius his Cart, and the indissoluble knot fastned thereto. For great was the fame thereof amongst the next adioyning people: that Gordius was one of the ancient inhabitants of Phrygia, hauing a little place of ground, and two yokes of Oxen, the one hee vsed to the plough, the other to the Waine or Cart. And while he was one day at plough, an Eagle sate vpon the  yoke, and there continued till euening. Gordius astonished at so ominous a token, went to the Telmissean Sooth-sayers (for to the Telmissean, both men and women, this diuining science seemed hereditarie) and there met with a Virgin, whom hee acquainted with this accident: she counselled him to returne thither, and to sacrifice to Iupiter the King, for the augury was good. Gordius entreated her company with him, that she might instruct him how to sacrifice, which shee granted vnto him, and afterwards her selfe also in Marriage. These had betwixt them Midas, a proper stripling. Now a sedition hapning among the Phrygians, they consulted with the Oracle, which answered that a Cart should bring them a King, that should end that sedition. And whiles they were musing on this answere, Midas came riding in his Cart (with his parents) into the throng, and was by the Phrygians forthwith acknowledged  King. The Car in memory thereof, was hanged vp to Iupiter in the Tower (or Temple of Iupiter,Qu. Curt. l. 3. so Curtius calleth it) with thankes for that Eagle (Iupiters bird) sent before to fore-signifie thus much to his Father. The knot fastned vnto it, was of the barke of the Cornell or dog-tree, wouen with such Art, that a man could neither finde beginning nor end thereof. Bruted it was amongst the Phrygians, that hee which could vntie it should be Lord of all Asia. Alexander turning it to and fro, and with vaine curiositie searching how to loosen it at last with his sword chopped it in sunder, lest he should otherwise leaue some scruple in the hearts of his Souldiers. Thus farre Arrianus.
In the LESSER PHRYGIA, (of a Hill therein, called Idaea; of a Riuer, Xanthe, of  the Kings, Troas, Dardania, etc.) stood that eye of Asia, and Starre of the East, called Ilium or TROY. Of which, all that I can say, will but obscure the renowne and glory which all Heathen Antiquitie haue by an vniuersall consent of Poesie and History giuen to it. And what Greeke or Latine Author hath not mentioned her ruines, and done exequies to her Funerall? Dardanus is named her founder, after whom, and his succeeding sonne Ericthonius, Tros ruled, who erected the Temple of Pallas, and reedified the Citie, leauing thereto his name. To him succeeded Ilus, and after him his sonne Laomedon, whom Neptune and Apollo helped in repayring the Citie: which Hercules sacked, and Priamus restored, but to a greater losse, by the Grecians tenne yeeres siege, and one nights spoyle. Dares,Dares, Dictys, de quibus Scal. in Ep. ad Cas. Istiusmodi. (...), scriptorum monstra, etc. ita Viues figmenta eorum vocat, qui de bello famosiss. voluerunt iudere. de trad. dis. l. 5. Homer. Eurip. Virg. Ouid. Horat. Seneca. Silius. Statius. Claud. etc. and Dictys, supposed Historians of those times, besides Homer, and the Greekes and Latines his followers, haue  more then enough related the particulars. Hesione, sister to Priamus, was by Hercules giuen to Telamon for the first entring the walls. Her did Priam demand in vaine by Antenor, and Aeneas his Ambassadours. Paris, otherwise called Alexander, one of the fiftie children of Priamus and Hecuba, was sent in the same businesse, and returned with Helena, the wife of Menelaus a Lacedemonian Prince, who consulting with the other Grecian Lords for her recouery, first Diomedes and Vlysses were sent to intreat; after a thousand sayle of ships, to force her restitution: which after a tedious warre, with much losse on the one side, and vtter ruine on the other, was effected. The league of the Greekes was made by Calchas, who diuiding a Boare in two parts, caused the Princes with their swords drawne, and be sprinkled with blould to passe betweene, swearing destruction to Priamus and the Troians. The like rites of solemne couenant we read obserued by GODGen. 15.15. himselfe: and by theIerem. 34.18. Iewes.  
The Religion of Phrygia and Troy, and all these Grecian parts of Asia were little, (if little) differing from the Greeke superstitions: of which in our Europe-discoueries wee are to relate. Therefore adiourning a larger discourse till then, wee are a little to mention heere their deuotions. In Troy were the Temples of Iupiter, Hercaeus, at whose Altar Priam was slaine; of Iupiter Fulminator, of Iuno, Apollo, Minerua, Mercury, Neptune. To Neptune they which sayled, did sacrifice a Black Bull and Oxen, whose hinder parts were burnt, the inwards they tasted; Rams and Hogges were sacrificed also to him. To Mercury clouen tongues hurled into the fire; To Venus, on the Hill Ida; To Scamander, to the Nymphes in caues. To the dead, also they sacrificed Black Sheepe ouer a ditch or hole in the ground, with wine, water,  and flower, thinking that the soules dranke the bloud. They had whole flockes sacred to the God, vntouched by men. They obserued auguries, thunders, dreames, Oracles of Apollo, and other superstitions. The Troian Virgins when they were to bee married, bathed themselues
 a little before in Scamander, vsing these words to the Riuer; Take, O Scamander, my Virginitie. This gaue occasion to one Cimon to defloure Callirrhoe, hauing hidden himselfe in the reeds, and vpon that watch-word lifted vp his Reedie-head, and forced his Maiden-head, which caused the ceasing of that foolish and superstitious custome. But of all their superstition, the most famous was their fatall Palladium (a name giuen to all Images, which superstition beleeued not made with his hands) was said to haue fallen from heauen a Pessinus, or (asApollod. l. 3. Apollodorus witnesseth) at Ilium, at the prayer of Ilus when he built it. For he hauing a pyed Oxe giuen him by the King of Phrygia, and warned by him to build a Citie where that Oxe should lye downe, followed him to this place, where he built a Citie, which hee called of his owne name Ilium; and desiring Iupiter to send him some signe, found this Palladium the next morning before his Tent. SomeNat. Com. l. 4. c. 5. say Asius a Philosopher made it by Magicall Art: Apollodorus addeth, that it moued vp and downe, holding in the right hand a Iauelin; in the left, a Distaffe. It was three cubits long. Apollo's Oracle fore-warned, that that Citie should neuer be taken, in whose walls it was kept. They hid it therefore in a more secret part of the Tower, that it should not be publikely knowne, making many other like it, to deceiue all future deceiuers. A woman-Priest attended the holy things in honour thereof, keeping fire continually burning. It was vnlawfull with common hands or eyes to touch or see it. And therefore when Ilus saued it from flames, the Temple being on fire, he was for his blind zeale punished with blindnesse; of which, soone after hee recouered by diuine indulgence. Vlysses stole it from them. And thus perished that famous Phrygian Citie, if that may be said to perish which still continueth, farre farre more famous by Homers pen, then Priams Scepter, or Hectors valour.
The ruines thereof are as yet very apparant (according to Bellonius,Bel. l. 2. c. 6. an eye-witnesse, his report) the walls of the Citie yet standing, the remnants of her decayed building still, with a kinde of Maiestie entertaining the beholder: the walls of large circuit, of great spongie blacke and hard stones, cut foure square. There are yet to be seene the ruinous Monuments ^^^e Turrets on the walls. They spent foure houres, sometime on horse, and sometime on f^^t, in compassing the walls. Great Marble Tombes of ancient workemanship are seene without the walls, made chest-fashion: and their couers yet whole. There are also extant  the ruinous shapes of two great Towers; one in the top of the hill, (on the bending whereof the Towne stood) the other in the bottome: and another in the middle. Many great Cisterns made to teceiue raine water are yet whole. There are the ruines also of Churches built there, by the sometime inhabiting Christians. The soile about it is dry and barren: the Riuers (so much chaunted) Xanthus and Simois are small rilles, in Summer quite dry: as also Mela testifieth, fama quam natura maiora flumina. A later TrauellersMast. George Sandys. lib. 1. saith, That they are not so contemptible as made by Bellonius, who perhaps mistaketh others for them, there being sundry riuolets that descend from the mountaines. He addeth that these ruines are still ruined, and beare not that forme lessened daily by the Turkes, who carried the pillars and stones vnto Constantinople, to adorne the buildings of the great Bassaes, as they now doe  from Cyzicus.
This Ilium (whose Sepulchre only Bellonius hath seene) is not in that place where old Ilium stood, but thirtie furlongs Eastward, if StraboLib. 13. be receiued, yea it changed the place and situation often, and here at last abode, by warning of the Oracle, which also now had his Fates as well as Ilium. A small Towne was this later Ilium, hauing in it the Temple of Pallas, which Alexander in his time graced, enriching the Temple with offerings, and the place with name of a Citie, with building and immunitie. After his victory ouer the Persians, hee sent them a fauourable Epistle, with promise to build them a sumptuous Temple, and there to institute sacred games, which Lysimachus after his death in great part performed, peopling  it from the neighbour Cities. The Romans also planted there a Colonie, when as Lysimachus afore had walled it, and built the Temple. Fimbria, in the warres against Mithridates, hauing treacherously slaine the Consull Valerius Flaccus, and seeking to enter, vpon deniall assailed it, and in the eleuenth day entred by force; glorying that he had done as much in eleuen dayes, as Agamemnon with a thousand saile of Greekes, had done in ten yeeres. Not so much, replied an Ilian, for Hector was not heere to defend the Citie. Caesar, emulous of Alexanders attempts, and deriuing his pedigree from Iulus, confirmed their former libertie, adding a new Region to their Territory. Mela telleth a strange wonder of the Hill Ida: Soone after midnight they which looke from the top therof, discerne certain dispersed fires, which as the light approcheth are more vnited, and at last gathered into one flame, like a fire, which by degrees groweth into a round and huge globe, and then the degrees diminishing in quantitie,  but in qualitie of like increasing, is at last taken vp into the Chariot of the Sunne.
Achilles among the later Ilians enioyed a Temple and a Tombe: Patroclus also and Antiochus had their Tombes: to them all and to Aiax did the Ilians sacrifice; an honor denied to
 Hercules for sacking their Citie: an vniust quarrel, if this yet may be a iust excuse of their partiall superstition. Thymbra is a field hard by, through which slideth Thymbraeus, disemboking it selfe into Scamander there, where standeth the Temple of Thymbraean Apollo.
ArrianusLib. 1. reporteth, that Alexander sacrificed to Protesilaus, (erecting Altars on his graue) who was the first of the Grecians, that in the Troian warre set foot in Asia; as hee had before in the Straits of Hellespont offered a Bul to Neptune and the Sea-Nymphes, powring a golden Viall into the Sea: and in the places from whence he set saile, and where he arriued, he set vp Altars to Iupiter Decensor, to Pallas, and to Hercules. And being come to Ilion, he sacrificed to Troian Pallas, and fastening the armes, which he vsed, in her Temples, (a rite which the Philistims1. Sam. 31.10 obserued in Saul their enemy, and Dauid1. Sam. 22.^. with the armor of Goliah)  hee tooke thence the armour sacred to the Goddesse; Monuments till that day of the Troian warre, afterward the weaponsAr^eraspidae. of his guard. HeeCurt l. 2. appeased also Priamus his Ghost, performing his exequies at the Altar of Iupiter Hircius, so to reconcile him to Neoptolemus his house, of which he, by his mother, descended. He crowned Achilles his Tombe: calling him happyO f rtunate young man whose vertue f und So braue a Trumpe thy noble acts to sound. Spencer Ruines of Time., who had Homer to blaze abroad his praises to the world: in which he was greater then Great Alexander.
Not farre hence is the Citie and Hauen Priapus, so called of the beastly God: like to Orthanes and Conisalus and Tyehon, drunken Gods of the Athenians. This God or Deuill (of more iniquitie, then antiquitie) was not knowne of Hesiod. This Region was called AdrastiaStrab. l. 13. of King Adrastus, who first built a Temple of Nemesis, calling it Adrastia. In the countrey  adioyning was an Oracle of Apollo Actaeus, and Diana: whose Oratorie being demolished, the stones was carried to Pa^ium, where was built an Altar, famous for fairenesse and greatnesse. Of this Adastria was a Temple at Cyzicus.
This Cyzicus was a Citie of MYSIA-MINOR; (for there is another Mysia, called Maior, according to PtolomeysPtol. l. 5 c. 2. diuision:) the former is called Olympica, the later byGal. de san. tuenda. l. 5. Ortel. Thesaur. Galen Hellespontica: there is another Mysia in Europe, which Volateran distinguisheth, calling Maesia. Some ascribe this Cyzicus to Bithynia. We list not to vmpire betwixt Geograph^ but to relate our Historie,Appian. in Mithridatico. Gramay. which telleth that this Citie was renowned for Antiquitie, giuen by Iupiter in dowrie to Proserpina; whom therefore the Inhabitants worship. The greatnesse, beautie, lawes, and other excellencies of Cyzicus let others shew you: their Temple  I cannot but stay to view with wonder,X^ph^linus ex Dione apud Gram. Plin. l. 36. c. 15. whose pillars are measured foure cubits thicke, fiftie high, each of one stone: in which, the whole building was of polished stone, and euerie stone was ioyned to his fellow with a threadPilum aureum or line of gold: the Image of Iupiter was of Iuory, crowned with a Marble Apollo. Such was the beautie of the worke, and costlinesse of the matter, that the earth, whether with loue seeking to embrace it, or with iust hatred for the idolatrous curiositie, swallowed vp both it and the Citie in an Earthquake. The like befell to Philadelphia, another Mysian Citie (one of the seuen ChurchesApoc. 3.7. to which Iohn writ:) and to MagnesiaPius 2. Asia. in the same Region. Neere to Cyzicus was the Hill Dyndima: and thereon Cybels Temple built by the Argonautes: who had also vsed a certaine stone for an anchor, which they fixed sure at Cyzicus with Lead, because it had often plaid the fugitiue,Plin. l. 36. c. 15 called  therefore the fugitiue Stone. The Cyzican Towers yeelded a seuen fold Eccho.
The Mysians for their great deuotion were called smoke-climers, a fit name for all superstitious. They had in honour thePolianus l. 6. ap. Gra. Nymph Brythia: vnder colour of religion the Parians cousened the Lampsacens of a great part of their territory. Of this City was Priapus aforesaid, a man monstrous in lusts, admirable in his plentifull issue; hated of the men, (howsoeuer of the women beloued) and by them exiled to a wilde life in the field, till a grieuous disease sent amongst them, caused them, by warning of the Dodonaean Oracle to recall him; Fit seruitour for such a god. Hence the tale of his huge Genitals, and of his Garden-deitie. Offering to rauish a Virgin at the time of her wedding, he was seared by the braying of an Asse, a creature for this cause consecrated to sacrifices. Lettice most sutable to such lips.  
A little hence standeth Abydus,Cor. Agrip. de van sc. c. 63. where was a famous Temple of Venus, in remembrance of their libertie recouered by a Harlot. Ouer against the same on Europe side, was Sestus, chaunted by the Poets, the guard of the Hellespont, one of the keyes (saith Bellonius) of the Turkish Empire; the Castles being for that purpose well furnished, the Straits not aboue seuen furlongs ouer. Here did Xerxes ioyne Asia to Europe by a bridge, professing warres not against the Greekes alone, but against the Elements. To Mount AthosHerodot. l. 7. did this Mount Atheos write his menacing Letters. To the Hellespont hee commanded three hundred stripes to be giuen, and fetters to be cast in, with reuiling speeches for the breach of his new-made bridge, which the Sea (disdaining the stopping of his passage, and infringing his liber^ie) had by tempest broken.  
In MysiaStrab. l. 13. was that famous Pine-tree, foure and twentie foot in compasse, and growing intire threescore an ten foot from the root, was diuided into three armes equally distant,
 which after gathered themselues close into one top, two hundred foot high, and fifteene cubits. Apollo Cillaeus had a Temple dedicated to him at Cilla; another was erected at Chrysa to Apollo Smynthius; and twentie furlongs thence, another to Diana Astirma; another (with a sacred Caue) at Andira to the mother of the Gods: this Caue reached vnder the earth to Palea, a hundred and thirtie furlongs. Attalus reigned in these parts, who furnished the Library of PergamusPergamus. with two hundred thousand Volumes, for the writing wherof those parchment skins were inuented, therefore called to this day Pergamenae. Of this name Attalus were three of their Kings; the last of which made the Romans his heires. Heere was that cruell Edict of Mithridates published to murther the Romans, whereby many, driuen to  seeke helpe of Aesculapius in his Temple at Pergamus, found him either vnmercifull, or vnskilfull to cure them, although his Physick-shop was in this Citie. Here were inuented (by King Attalus) Tapestrie hangings, called Aulaea of Aula his hall, which was hanged therewith. Here was also a yeerely spectacle of the Cock-fight. The Mysian Priests abstained from flesh and marriage. They sacrificed a Horse, whose inward parts were eaten before their vowes.
South-wards from hence along the Sea-coast, trendeth Aeolis: whereunto adioyneth LYDIA,LYDIA. calledOrtel. Thes. anciently Asia, and the Inhabitants, Asiones. It was called Maeonia of Ma^es their first King, who begat Cotys, and he, Attys, and Asius, of whom some say) Asia  taketh name. CambletesAthen. l 10. c. 1. Ex Xantho Lydo. a Lydian King (saith Athenaeus) was so addicted to gourmandize, that in the night he did teare and eate his wife; and finding her hand (in the morning) in his mouth, the thing being noysed abroad, he killed himselfe. The same Author tellethLib. 12. c 4. of King Andramytes, that he made women Eunuches for his attendants: that the Lydians were so effeminate, that they might not endure the Sun to looke vpon them, for which cause they had their shadie bowers: that in a place, therefore called Impure, they force women and maidens to their lust, which Omphale (who had indured this violence, comming after to bee their Queene) reuenged by as vniust iustice. For assembling all the seruants or slaues, shee shut vp among them their masters daughters, permitting them to their pleasures. Shee was  daughter of Iardanus of the posteritie of Attis, who set Hercules his taske to spin amongst her maides. Her husband Timolus deflowred Arriphe in Diana's Temple. Of him haply was named the hill Timolus, which yeelded golden sands to the Riuer Pactolus. HalyattisHerodot. l. 1. was after a long succession the Lydian King, father to Croesus, whose Sepulchre was an admirable Monument, being at the bottome stone; else where, earth: built by men and women, slaues, and hired persons. It is sixe furlongs in compasse, and two hundred foot; and a thousand and three hundred foot broad. All the daughters of the Lydians prostitute themselues, and thereby get their liuing and dowrie. These were the first inuenters of coyning money: the first Hucsters and Pedlers: the first players at Dice, Balls, Chesse, in the time of Attys the first: driuen to this shift by famine, which when they knew not otherwise to redresse, they deuised these games, passing the time of euery second day with these pastimes, then beguiling  their emptie bellies, and (according to their ominous inuention) now not so much the companions, as the harbengers and forerunners of emptinesse, although some contrarie to their first originall, vse them to ease their fulnesse. Thus did the Lydians liue (if Herodotus be beleeued) two and twentie yeeres, eating and playing by course, till they were faine to diminish their multitudes by sending Colonies vnder Tyrrhenus vnto that part of Italy, whichSilius l. 4. of him receiued that name.
Here on the winding streames of Meander (or nigh thereto) was situate Magnesia, (not that by Harmus) whose Inhabitants worshipped the Dyndimene Mother of the Gods. But the old Citie and Temple perishing and a new builded, the Temple was named of Diana Leucophryna, exceeding that of Ephesus in workmanship, but exceeded in greatnesse and multitude of oblations. And yet this was the greatest in Asia, except the Ephesian and  Dindymene. Of Tralles a neighbouring Citie was Metrodorus the Priest of Iupiter Laryssaeus. In the way from thenceStrab. l. 14. to Nyssa, is a Village of the Nyssaens, Acharaca. There is the Plutonium (compassed with a Groue) and the Temple of Pluto and Iuno, and the Caue Charonium, admirable to the view, ouer-hanging the Groue, which it threatneth, seeming to deuoure it. They say, that sicke men, which are deuoted to those Gods, goe thither, and in a street neere the Caue, stay with such as are expert in those mysteries, who sleeping for them, inquire the course to cure them by dreames. These inuoking diuine remedies many times lead them into the Caue, where abiding many dayes with fastings, and sweatings, they sometimes intend to their owne  dreames, by the counsells of the Priests. To others this place is pestilent and inaccessible. Here are yeerely festiualls solemnized, and then most of all are these deuotions practised. Youths and striplings naked and anoynted, draw or lead a Bull into the same Caue with great speed, who falls anon dead. Thirtie furlongs beyond Nyssa is a festiuall place solemnly
 frequented by the neighbouring Inhabitants, which is said to haue a Caue dedicated to the same Gods, and reaching to Achataca.
After Omphale, Hercules posteritie, which he had by her, raigned: carrying for their royall Ensigne that Battle-axe, which Hercules had taken from Hippolita the Amazon. Candaules wearie of the burthen, gaue it to one of his Courtiers to beare, interpreted an ominous presage of that which happened. He thinking it not enough happinesse to enioy the beauties of his wife, vnlesse some other eyes were witnesses of his possession, placed Gyges his friend where he might see vnseene (happily the occasion of thatCic. Off. 3. Tale of Gyges Ring, wherewith he went inuisible) to take view of his winds nakednesse. But being perceiued by her at his departure, shee put him soone after to his choyce, whether hee would enioy what hee had  seene, and the Kingdome for dowrie, without other ioynture then Candaules bloud, or would there himselfe bee slaine. Easie to iudge his choyce, by which Hercules his race failed. Of him descended Croesus, whose History is knowne. Him did Cyrus ouerthrow,Herodot. l. 1. and had set him on a pyle of wood to burne him, who then cryed Solon, Solon, Solon: which Cyrus not vnderstanding, caused him to be asked, why he so called: he answered, That sometimes drunken with wealth and pleasure, he thought himselfe happy, but then was taught by Solon, not to iudge any happy till his end; which lesson hee now learned to his good cost: to his good indeed; for Cyrus for this pardoned his life, now the second time saued: which a little before a Souldier in taking the Citie had bereaued, haue not naturall affection in his sonne (before this time dumbe) violently inforced Nature to loosen the instruments of speech, and proclaime, It is  the King. Thus had the Oracle prophesied, that the day would be dismall and disastrous to the father, when the sonne should speake (whereto hee had before in vaine sought helpe of God and men) and he could speake freely all his life after. And this was all that Croesus by his sumptuousCroezus had bin exceeding liberall to Apollo, who deluded his Votarie with ridles, as in our Persian relation you may reade. presents, and superstitious deuotion could get of Apollo, which had foretold him, what he himselfe had no power to auert or alter, not to speake of his enigmaticall answeres, snares, not instructions; nocuments, not documents vnto him.


CHAP. XVII. Of Ionia and other Countries in that Chersonesus.  
IONIA.IONIA is situate on the Icarian Sea, ouer against the Iland Chios. The Inhabitants are accounted Athenian Colonies (whereas Athens may rather seeme to bee Ionian) deducing their name fromCoelius Rhod. lib. 7. 10. Sard. l. 3. Ion the sonne of Creusa and Xuthus. But more probable isAr. Montan. Fr. Iunius, etc. their opinion which deriue them from Iauan, as isLib. 1. c. 8. before obserued by vs. Of the Ionians in Asia, were reckoned ten principall Cities in the Continent, Miletus, Myus, Priene, Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea, Erythraea, besides Chios and Samos in the Ilands, to which they imparted their names.
The Ionians had their common Sacrifices and Ceremonies at the Promontorie of Mycale,  generally by all the Ionians dedicated to Neptune Heliconius, erecting there vnto him a Temple: the place was called Panionium, and the feast in which those sacrifices were offered, Panionia. To those twelue Cities,Strab. l. 14. Strabo mentioning the founders of them, addeth also Smyrna, and saith, that they were called to the Panionian solemnities by the Ephesians, who were sometime called Smyrnaeans of Smyrna the Amazon, who is named the founder of Ephesus. Against those Smyrnaeans the Sardians warred, and would on no condition raise their siege, except the Smyrnaean Matrons were permitted to their lusts.Gramay. The maide-seruant of one Philarchus amongst them deuised, that those of her condition might in their Mistresses habite be sent, to saue their Masters beds, which was accomplished.  
As for EPHESVS,EPHESVS. the place was designed by Oracle for the building thereof, which warned them there to build, where a Fish and a Bore should shew them. It happened, that as certaine Fishermen at the sacred fountaine Hypeleus were broyling their fish, one of them leaped with the coales into an heape of straw, which thereby was fired; and a Bore which lay couered therein, leaping out, ranne from thence as farre Trachea, and there fell downe dead of a wound which they gaue him, grunting out his last gaspe, where Pallas after was honoured with a Temple. Greater then Pallas and her swinish deuotion, was thatAct. 19.17, 28. Great Diana of the Ephesians, (so proclaimed in the madnesse of their zeale) and that Image which came downe from Iupiter, which all Asia and the world worshipped. This Image (asPlin. l. 19. c. 40 Plinie writeth) was thought by some to be of Ebonie; but Mutianus thrice Consul, writ, That it was of the  Vine, neuer changed in seuen alterations or restitutions, which the Temple receiued. It had many holes fi^led with Spikenard, the moysture whereof might fill and close vp the rifts. The
 doores of the Temple were of Cypresse,Solinus c. 49. which after foure hundred yeeres were as fresh as if they had beene new. The roofe of the Temple was Cedar. The Image, which superstition supposed came from Iupiter, was made (saith the same Mutianus) by one Canetia. The Temple (reputed one of the worlds seuen wonders) was first the building of the Amazons, as Solinus affirmeth. ButPausanias. l. 7. Pausanias reproueth Pindarus, for affirming that the Amazons had built it, when they made their Expedition against Theseus and the Athenians: for at that time (saith he) the women going from Thermodon, sacrificed to the Ephesian Diana in their way, as they had done before in the times of Hercules and of Bacchus. Not the Amazons therefore, but one Croesus of that Countrey, and Ephesus (supposed the sonne of the Riuer Cayster)  founded it. Of him the Citie also receiued her name. About the Temple dwelt both diuers other suppliants, and women of the Amazonian race. These were spared by Androclus the sonne of Codrus, who here planted his Athenian Colonie, and chased out the Leleges, which before were the Inhabitants; who being slaine in this Expedition, his Sepulchre remained in Pausanias his time, on which was set a man armed. Xerxes when hee burned all other Temples in Asia, spared this, vncertaine whether for admiration or deuotion; most certaine, a bootlesse clemencie. ForLucian de morte peregrini. Herostratus, to lengthen the memory of his name with detestation of his wickednesse, fired this Temple on that day in which Alexander was borne at Pella. Diana forsooth, (who in her Midwife-Mysterie is called also Iuno Lucina) in her officious  care to helpe Olympias in her trauell, was then absent. It was after restored to a greater excellencie by Dinocrates, or (as Strabo termes him) Chermocrates, who was also the Architect of Alexandria. SomeN. Perot. Cornucope. Munst. Com l. 5. Plin. l. 16. c 40. affirme, That two hundred and twentie yeeres were spent in building this Temple, by all Asia: Plinie saith, foure hundred. It was built on a Marish, because of Earthquakes (which are said to be more common in Asia then other parts) being founded on Coles, the second foundation Wooll. There were therein an hundred twentie seuen Pillars, the workes of so many Kings, threescore foot in height, and sixe and thirtie of them very curiously wrought. The Temple was foure hundred twentie fiue foot long, two hundred and twentie broad; of the Ephesians holden in such veneration, that when Croesus had  begirt them with a straight siege,Heredot. l. 1. they deuoted their Citie to their Goddesse, tying the wall thereof with a rope to the Temple. It was enriched and adorned with gifts beyond value. It was full of the workes of Praxiteles and Thraso.
The Priests were Eunuches,Strab. l. 14. called Megalobyzi, greatly honoured, and had with them sacred Virgins. SomeGramay. Ionit. call these, or else another order of Diana's Priests, Estiatores and Essenae, that is, Good fellowes (after the appellation of this bad age) which by yeerely courses had a peculiar diet assigned them, and came in no priuate house. All the Ionians resorted to Ephesus,Thucyd. l. 3. at Diana's festiuall, which with daunces and other pompe they solemnized, with their wiues and children, as they had done before at Delos: the Temple had priuiledge of Sanctuarie, which Alexander extended to a furlong, Mithridates to a flight-shot, Antonius added part of the Citie: But Augustus disanulled the same, that it should no longer bee a  harbour for villaines. This the Romans finde (saith aPius secundus Asia. Roman Pope relating this Historie) among whom are so many Sanctuaries, as Cardinals houses, in which theeues and ruffians haue patronage, which make the Citie (otherwise quiet and noble) a denne of theeues. A lake named Selinusius, and another which floweth into it, were Diana's patrimonie, which by some Kings being taken from her, were after by the Romans restored. And when the Publicans had seized the profits, Artimedorus was sent in Ambassage to Rome, where hee recouered them to Diana, for which cause they dedicated to him a golden Image in the Temple. In the midst of the lake was the Kings Chappell, accounted the worke of Agamemnon. AlexanderArrian. l. 1. not onely restored the Ephesians to their Citie, which for his sake they had lost, and changed the gouernment into a popular state, but bestowed also the tributes, which before they had paied to the Persians, vpon Diana, and caused them to be slaine which had robbed  the Temple, and had ouerthrowne the Image of Philip his father therein, and such of them as had taken Sanctuarie in the Temple he caused to be fetched out and stoned. While hee staied at Ephesus, hee sacrificed to Diana with very solemne pompe, all his Armie being arranged in battell array. But this Temple of Diana, together with their Diana is perished: But neuer shall that Truth perish, which Paul writ in his Epistle to them; for obseruing which by Christ himselfe in another Epistle written by S. Iohn, they are commended;Apoc. 2. and which in a Councell there holden, was confirmed against the Heresie of Nestorius and Celestius. But alas, that golden Candlesticke (as was threatned) is now almost by Greekish superstition and Turkish tyrannie remoued thence: a Bishop with some remnants of a Church  still continuing.
The Ephesians were obseruers of curious Arts, which not onely LukeAct. 19.19. mentioneth, but the prouerbe also confirmethSuidas., Ephesiae literae: so they called the spells, whereby they made themselues in wrestling, and other conflicts, inuincible. The summe of those Magicall bookes
 burned by them, Luke rateth at 50000. pieces of siluer, which Budaeus summeth at 5000. Crownes.Bud. de Asse l. 5. The many TemplesAgrip. de V.S. c. 63. of Venus at Ephesus, are not worth memorie. Memorable is the History of an Ephesian maid,Caelius lect. antiq. l. 8. c. 13. who, when Brennus inuaded Asia, promised him her loue (which he much desired) and withall, to betray the Citie to him, if hee would giue her all the Iewels and Attire of the women; which the Souldiers were commanded to doe, who heaped their gold so fast vpon the Damosell, according to their command, that shee was therewith couered and slaine. The Asiarchae, which LukeActs 19. nameth, BezaBeza annot. saith were certaine Priests, whole office it was to set forth publike playes and games in honor of their Gods; as also were the Syriarchae. The Ephesians,Athenaeus l. 12. 9. as all other Ionians, were much addicted to nicenes and sumptuousnesse of attire, for which, and other their delicacies, they grew into a prouerbe.  
The Ionians had other places and Temples amongst them, famous for deuotion and antiquitie, such as no where else are to be seene, as the Temple and Oracle of Apollo at Gemini, MyusPausan. Achaica. lib. 7. had a small arme of the Sea, whose waters by the means of Meander fayling, the soyle brought forth an innumerable multitude of fleas, which forced the Inhabitants to forsake their Citie, and with bagge and baggage to depart to Miletus. And in my time (saith Pausanias) nothing remaineth of Myus, in Myus, but Bacchus Temple. The like befell to the Atarnitae neere to Pergamus. The Persians burnt the Temple of Pallas at Phocea, and another of Iuno in Samos, the remaines whereof are worthy admiration: the Erythraean Temple of Hercules, and of Pallas at Prienae; that for antiquitie, this for the Image. The Image of Hercules  is said to be brought in a ship which came (without mans helpe) to the Cape, where the Chians and Erythraeans laboured each to bring the same to their owne Citie. But one Phormio a Fisher-man of Erythraea was warned in a dreame, to make a rope of the haires cut off from the heads of the Erythraean Matrons, by which their husbands should draw the same to the Towne. The women would not yeeld; but certaine Thracian women which had obtained their freedome, granted their haire to this purpose, to whom therefore this priuiledge was granted, to enter into Hercules Temple, a thing denied to all other the Dames of Erythraea. The rope stil remaineth: and the Fisher-man which before was blinde, recouered his sight. In this Towne also is Mineruaes Temple, and therein a huge Image of Wood, sitting  on a Throne, holding with both hands a Distaffe. There are the Graces and Houres, formed of white Marble. At Smyrna was the Temple of Aesculapius: and nigh to the Springs of the Riuer Meles, a Caue, in which they say Homer composed his Poems. Thus much Pausanius. The IonianSealiger in Euseb. Chron. animad. letters were more resembling the Latine, then the present Greeke are, and were then common, as in our first Booke is shewed in our Phoenician Relations.
At Miletus, a mad phrensie had once possessed their Virgins, where by it came to passe, that they in great multitudes hanged themselues. Neither cause appeared, nor remedie: Needs most they goe whom the Deuill driues. WhomPolyan. lib. 3. stratagem. neither the sweetnesse of life, bitterternesse of death, teares, intreaties, offers, custodie of friends could moue, Modestie detained from proceeding in this immodest butcherie: and which is more to be wondred at, a Posthume modestie, which could not be borne, till they were dead. For a Law was made, That the naked bodies of such as had thus strangled themselues, should bee drawne through the  streets: which contumely, though it were but a Gnat to those Camels, which with the halter they swallowed, yet strained they at it, and it could not bee digested, but stayed their fury. Before the Troian warre, was Hercules famous at Militus. The Ionians were subiect to the Assyrians: after that to the Egyptians; next to the Lydians, Persians, and the other Empires, which successiuely followed.
From Ephesus to Colophon are seuentie furlongs. This Towne grew into a Prouerbe; forColophonem adde^e Eras. Ad. though their excellencie in Horse-manship they vsually made the victorie (otherwise doubtfull) to bee certaine on that side which entertained them. Before Colophon was the Groue of Apollo-Clarius. And here dyed Calchas, that famous wizard for griefe, that when vpon his demand Mopsus had certainly answered how many Pigs were in the belly of a Sow,  by him propounded: Calchas could not doe the like, when Mopsus asked of the number of Figs growing on a Fig-tree thereby.
Not farre from hence is Etythrae, the Towne of one of the Sybils, which liued in the time of Alexander, of which name also there were others in other places and times, renowmed for their prophesyings. Beyond Clazomenae is the Temple of Apollo, and Smyrna famous in those blinde times;Apocal. 2.9. for the Temple and Statue of Homer; since, for the Prelacie of Polycarpus, whom our Lord himselfe so highly commendeth. PliniePlin. l. 7. c. 4. Plura exempla lege ap. De l. Dis. Mag. and Maiol. D. 6. writeth of one in Smyrna, which being a maide, changed her sexe, and became a stripling: of which sort he affirmeth he had seene one in Africa, then liuing when hee writ, which on her marriage day sustained that  al^eration. Phlegon relateth of Philotis, another Smyrnaean maide, thus made a male. Pontanus telleth the like of a woman at Caieta, married to a Fisher foure yeeres, and of another the wife of Antonio Spensa twelue yeeres, which after married a wife and had children.
 And in late times Spaine hath yeelded two such examples; of which I list not to play the Philosopher, whether they were imperfect males, or perfect Hermaphrodites. But to hold on our Asian iourney. Neleus builded Miletus (who also erected the Altar at Possidium.) The Milisian Oracle was sacred to Apollo DidymaeusMela. Herm. Barb. Castig. amongst the Branchidae, who betrayed the treasures of their God to Xerxes the burner of their Temple; and therefore for feare of punishment followed him after his flight. Afterwards the Milesians builded a Temple, which for the exceeding greatnesse remained without roofe, compassed with dwelling-houses, and a Groue, adorned sumptuously with gifts of ancient workemanship. Here was the Legend framed of Branchus and Apollo, whom they called Vlios and Artemis, of healing. Neere vnto  the Temple of Neptune at Possidium was Heraeum, an old Temple and Oratory, after conuerted into a Store-house, but then also retaining diuers Chappels full of old workes, as was also a Court-yard without, from whence when Antonius had taken three Colosses (the worke of Miro) standing on one basis, Augustus placed there againe Pallas and Hercules, but translated Iupiter to the Capitoll, and built him a Chappell.
Solmissus is not farre from hence, where the Curetes or Priests of Iupiter dulled the eares of Iuno with the sound of weapons, whiles Latona was deliuered. Heere were many Temples, some old, fome new. TheDict. Hist. Curetes or Corybantes, for so they were also termed, were a shauen order of Priests, who, rauished with a sacred fury, played vpon Cimbals, and danced, shaking their heads to and fro, drawing others into the same rage of superstition. These first  began their deuotions at Ida, a Hill of Phrygia, and after sailed into Crete, and here with their furious sounds they deliuered Iupiter from Saturnes gullet (who had before couenanted with Titan to kill all his male children) while hee could not by meanes of their noyse heare Iupiters crying. Diodorus Siculus writeth, That Corybantus was the sonne of Iason and Cybelo, and with Dardanus brought into Phrygia the rites of the Mother of the Gods, and calleth his Disciples in that sect Corybantes, Natalis ComesNat. Co. l. 9. c. 7 trauerseth many opinions about their originall and rites: their dances were in armour.
The Region of the Dorians was almost rounded with the Sea; Herein was Gnidus a City of name for the Marble Image of Venus: and Halycarnassus, the Countrey of Herodotus and Dionysius famous Historians, and of Mausolus, whose Sepulchre,Mala. l. 1. c. 16. erected by Artemisia his  wife and sister, was accounted one of the worlds seuen wonders.
In the Suburbes of Stomalymne was the Temple of Aesculapius of great reputation, and riches. In it was Antigonus of Apelles workmanship: there was also Venus naked, after dedicated to Caesar at Rome, as the mother of that Generation by Augustus.
Neere to Bargolia was a Temple of Diana. My lasa another Citie of Caria had many publike buildings and faire Temples; among the rest, two of Iupiter, (surnamed Osogo) in the one; and in the other, Labrandenus, of Labranda a Village, a little off, which had an ancient Temple of Iupiter Militaris much frequented. The way leading thither was called Sacred, paued sixtie furlongs, through which their Procession passed in pompous solemnitie. The noblest of the Citizens were ordained Priests, which function dured with their liues.
 There is a third Temple of Iupiter Carius, common to all the Carians, of which also the Lydians and Mysians are partakers. Strabo reporteth ofLib. 24. two Temples, at Stratonica, one at Lagina, sacred to Hecate, where were celebrated yeerely solemnities; the other neere the City of Iupiter Chrysaoreus common to all the Carians, whither they resort to sacrifice, and to consult of common affayres: which their assembly is called Chrysaorean. In Caria was Alabanda, a Citie of no great note, except for that notorious, impious, and impudent flattery of theirs in building a Temple to ROME, and appointing anniuersary games to bee there celebrated, in honour of this new Goddesse; that Citie (since the mother of whoredome to the Christian world) euen then receiuing without scorne of the giuers, or shame of the present, the title  of deitie (they are the words of a worthyS.W.R. hist. of the W. l. 5. c. 6. @. 6. LYDIA. Historian of ours) at the gift of such a rascall Citie as Alabanda.
LYDIA, called alsoAelian. lib. 4. Strabo. lib. 13^ Maeonia, was a rich Countrey, whose mother Citie was Sardis, the Royall Seat of Croesus, washed by golden Pactolus, where idlenesse was a speciall fault, and punished by the Law. Fiue miles from the Citie is a Lake called Colous, where is the Temple of Diana Coloena, very religiously accounted of, wherein on their festiuals, Apes were reported to dance. The Region, called Burned, stretcheth it selfe heere, about the space of fiue hundred furlongs, mountainous, stony and black, as if it were of some burning, wanting trees altogether (Vines excepted) which yeeld a verie pleasant Wine. Heere was another Plutonium at Hierapolis ouer against Laodicea. It was a hole in the brow of a Hill, so framed, that it might receiue the bodie of a man, of great depth. Below it was a squared  trench of halfe an acre compasse, so cloudie and darke, that the ground could scarcely bee seene. The ayre is not hurtfull to them which approach; but within it is deadly. Strabo put in Sparrowes, which presently dyed. But the gelded Priests, called Galli, might approch to
 the mouth, and looke in, and diue in as long as they could hold their breath, without harme, but not without signes of working passions, whether of diuine inspiration, or reluctation of the naturall forces. No lesse maruellous then the dampe of the ayre, is the hardning qualitie of the waters, which being hot, doe harden themselues into a kinde of stone.As strange is that which is reported of the waters of the lake Tatta, that if a rope be drawne thorow it, or a bird toucheth it with her wings they are kerned with salt. Warner mentioneth the like in Hungarie, and Acosta, in Peru. Those Galli heere mentioned with Priests of Cybele, so called of Gallus, a Riuer in Phrygia;Warn. de aquis Hungariae. the waters whereof, temperately drunken, did exceedingly temper the braine, and take away madnesse; but being sucked in largely, caused madnesse. These Priests drinking heereof vnto madnesse, in that fury gelded themselues, and as their beginning, so was their proceeding also in madnesse, in the execution of their rites, shaking and wheeling their heads like mad-men. VolateranVolat. l. 10. out of  Polyhistur reporteth, that one Gallus the companion of Attys (both gelded) imposed this name on the Riuer, before called Teria. Of Cybele and Attys we haue spoken before. I adde, that after some, this Attys was a Phrygian youth, which when hee would not listen to Rhea in her amorous suites, gelded himselfe; so consecrating his Priesthood vnto Rhea or Cybele: othersNatal. Com. lib 9. cap. 5. affirme, that shee preferred him to that Office, first hauing vowed perpetuall chastitie, and breaking his Vow, was punished with madnesse, in whichMacr. Sat. l. 1. cap. 21. cals him Attinis, and applyeth this as the tale of Venus and Adonis, to the Sunne and Earth in the Winter. Cybele is drawne with Lions, which signifieth the influence of the Heauens. Attinis th^y purtraied with his rodde, the marke of his power, and a pipe, noting the windes caused by the Sunne. Their mourning ended on the eight Kalends of April: the first day in which the Sun maketh the day longer then the night, they solemnized the Feast, called Hilaria. See lib. 1. c. 17. de Phen. hee dismembred himselfe, and would also haue killed himselfe, but that by the compassionate Goddesse hee was turned into a Pine-tree. That the Fable! this the History! that these gelded Priests wore also long womannish attire, played on Tymbrels and Cornets, sacrificed to their Goddesse the ninth day of the Moone; at which time they set the Image of the Goddesse on an Asse,  and went about the Villages and Streets, begging with the sound of their sacred Tymbrell, corne, bread, drinke, and all necessaries, in honour of their Goddesse: as they did also in the Temples, begging money in her name, with some musicall Instruments; and were therefore called Matragyrtae. Thus did the Priests of Corona also begge for the maintenance of their Goddesse, with promises of good fortune to their liberall contributors. Lucian in his Asinus relateth the like knaueries of the Priests of Dea Syria. Concerning his Image, Albricus thus purtrayeth it: A Virgin sitting in a Chariot, adorned with varietie of gemmes and metals. Shee is called Mother of the Gods and Giants: these Giants had Serpentine feet, one of which number was Titan, who is also the Sunne, who retayned his Deitie, for not ioyning in conspiracie against the Gods with his brethren. This Chariot was drawne with  Lions. Shee wore on her head a Crowne fashioned like a Tower. Neere her is painted Attys a naked boy, whom in iealousie shee gelded. Macrobius applies this to the Sunne:Boc Genealog. Deor. lib. 2. Boccace to the Earth (Mother indeed of the Ethnike Deities, which were earthly, sensuall, deuilish) who addeth to that former description of Albricus, a Scepter in her hand, her garment embroydered with branches and herbs, and the Galli* her gelded attendants with Trumpets. The interpretation whereof, they which will may reade in him, as also in Phornutus, Fulgentius and others, with many other particulars of her Legend. Claudian calls her both Cybele and Cybelle, which name Stephanus thinketh she receiued of a Hil of that name in Phrygia (as doth Hesychius likewise) so was shee called Dyndimena of the Hill Dindymus. I could weary the Reader with long narrations out of Pausanias, Arnobius, Lilius Gyraldus and others, touching  these things: but in part wee haue before shewed them in our narrations of Adonis in Phoenicia, and of the Syrian goddesse (to which Phornutus referreth this) and when we come to a larger handling of the Grecian Idolatries, we shall finde more fit occasion.
It is now high time to leaue this (properly called) Asia, and to visit LYCIA, washed by the Sea two hundred miles, wherein the mount Taurus ariseth, hence stretching it selfe Eastward, vnder diuers appellations, vnto the Indian Sea. They were gouerned by common Councell of three and twentie Cities, till the Romans subdued them. Here was Cragus, a Hill with eight Promontories, and a Citie of the same name, from whence arose the Fables of Chymaera. At the foot of the Hill stood Pinara, wherein was worshipped Pandarus: and a little thence the Temple of Latona; and not farre off, Patara,  the worke of Patarus, beautified with a Hauen, and many Temples, and the Oracles of Apollo, no lesse famous (if Mela bee beleeued) for wealth and credit, then that at Delphos. The Hill Telmessus was here famous for Southsayings; and the Inhabitants are accounted the first Interpreters of Dreames. Here was Chymaera a Hill, said to burne in the night. PAMPHYLIA beareth Eastwards from Lycia, and now together with CILICIA of the Turkes, is called CARAMANIA. Herein was Perga, neere whereunto on a high place stood the Temple of Diana Pergaea, where were obserued yeerely Festiuals. Sida had also in it the Temple of Pallas.
There remaine of this Chersonessus,Dom. Niger, ARMENIA minor. ARMENIA minor, and Cilicia. Armenia minor, called also Prima, is diuided from the Greater, or Turcomania, by Euphra^es  on the East: it hath on the West Cappadocia; on the South Cilicia, and part of Syria; on the North the Pontike Nations. It was sometimes reckoned a part of Cappadocia,
 till the Armenians by their inuasions and Colonies altered the name: As for their rites I finde little difference, but they either resemble the Cappadocians, or their Armenian Ancestors.
CILICIACILICIA. abutteth on the Eastern borders of Pamphylia, and was diuided into Trachea, and Campestris; now hath in it few people, many great Mesquitaes, and well furnished; the chiefe Citie is Hamsa,Strabo. l. 14. sometime called Tarsus, famous for the studies of learning, herein (saith Strabo) surmounting both Athens and Alexandria; but most most famous for yeelding him to the world, then whom the whole world hath not happily yeelded any more excellent that was meerely a man, that great Doctor of Nations, who filled these Countries  and all Regions, from Ierusalem euen to Illyricum, (now full of barbarisme) by preaching, and still filleth the world by his writings, with that truth which hee learned, not of man, nor at Tarsus the greatest Schoole of humanitie, nor at Ierusalem the most frequented for Diuinitie, but of the Spirit of Truth himselfe: who both was at first from Heauen conuerted, and after in the third Heauen confirmed in the same.
Strabo mentioneth the Temple and Oracle of Diana Sarpedonia in Cilicia; where being inspired, they gaue answeres: The Temple of Iupiter also at Olbus, the worke of Aiax. From Anchiale, a Cilician Citie, Alexander passed to Solos, where hee sacrificed with prayses to Aesculapius, for recouery from a strong Feuer, gotten before in the waters of Cidnus, and celebrated Gymnicall and MusicallAr. lib. 2. Games. The Corycian and  Triphonian Dennes or Caues were held in much veneration among the Cilicians, where they sacrificed with certaine Rites: They had their Diuination by Birds andGramaij. Oracles. Of the Corycian Denne or Caue (so called of the Towne Corycos, almost compassed with the Sea) MelaMela l. 1. c. 13 writeth, that from the Hill which ascendeth the space of ten furlongs, this Caue or strange Valley descendeth by degrees, the further, the more spacious, enuironed with a greene circle of pleasant shadie Groues, filling the eyes and minde at once, with pleasure and wonder. There is but one passage into it, and that narrow and rough, which continueth a mile and halfe vnder delightfull shades, the Rills running heere and there, resounding I know not what strange noyse in those darkened Bowers. When they are come to the bottome, another Caue presently presents it  selfe, which terrifieth those that enter, with the multiplied sounds of Cymbals and vncouth minstrelsie. And the light fayling by degrees, it brings them into a darke vault, where a Riuer riseth; and hauing runne a swift course in a short channell, is againe d^unke vp of the earth: so soone dieth that streame which is yet immortall, the Earth dealing with this, that as some with their children begotten and borne in darknesse, smoothering that breath which but euen now from them they receiued, alway bearing, and alway barren. There is a further passage, but none durst view it, possessed with a superstitious fancie of the Gods inhabiting; that conceit presenting all things to the minde as venerable and full of Deitie, which to the sense were dreadfull and full of horror. Beyond this was the Tryphonian, alway couered with a blacke mantle of darkenesse, fabulously  supposed the bed of Typhon, and naturally exstinguishing the naturall life of whatsoeuer entred.
Vnto these things which haue beene said of the Temples, Priests, and Rites, obserued in Asia, thus much may be added out ofLib. 3. c. 15. Sardus, of their Sacrifices. The Phrygians sacrificed Swines bloud. This did the Galli, Priests of Cybele, and this did the Bedlem Votaries, to recouer of their madnesse. The Colophonians offered a dog to Enodia, which is Hecate, as did also the Carians to Mars. The Phaselites in Pamphilia sacrificed Fishes to Caber, the sonne of Vulcan; and the Lydians, Eeles to Neptune. The Cappadocian Kings in their Sacrifices to Iupiter Stratioticus, or Militaris, on a high Hill, built a great fire, the King and  others bringing Wood thereto: and after that another lesser, which the King sprinkled with Milke and Hony, and after fired it, entertaining those which were present with good cheere.
PeucerPeucerus de diuinatione* tells of Diuinations vsed in some parts of Lycia: betwixt Myra and Phellus there was a Fountaine full of Fishes, by whose forme, nature, motion, and feeding, the Inhabitants vsed Diuination. The same Lycians in the Groue of Apollo, not farre from the Sea, had a drie ditch, called Dina, in which the Diuiner put in fishes, and ten gobbets of rosted flesh, fastened on spits, with certaine Prayers: after which, the drie ditch became full of water, and fishes of all kindes and formes, by which the Priests obserued their Predictions. And not farre from hence, at Myrae in Lycia, was the Fountaine of Apollo Curius, where the fishes being three times called with a Pipe, assembled themselues,  and if they deuoured the meats giuen them, it was interpreted a good bode and happy presage: if they strucke away the same with their tayles, it was direfull and dreadfull. At Hierapolis in Lycia, the fishes in the Lake of Venus, being called by the Temple-keepers,
 presented themselues, enduring to bee scratched, gilled, and mens hands to bee put into their mouthes. They diuined by lots six moneths of the yeere together, at Patara in Lycia, in Apolloes Temple. But Saturne hath swallowed his owne Children; and Time, which brought forth these, both Gods and Religions, hath also consumed them, not leauing any such memoriall of them, as might satisfie any curious searcher: yet in relation of the Greekish Rites (from which these, for the most part, haue not much swarued) you may expect a more full and ample Discourse. It is now time at last to rest our wearie limbes: enough and more hath the Pilgrim tolde you of the Arabian Deserts, of the Monster Mahomet, and his Vicars theCalipha signifieth Vicar. Scal. of this vnlike likenes. See Fox: Brightman and others vpon the Reuelat. Caliphaes (euen in this title they will parallel Rome) of their Rapines answerable to  theirSarak. Theeu^sh. name: of their Viperous off-spring the Turkes, and of the elder Inhabitants of that Asian Tract. Let mee here a little breathe mee, before I ascend the Armenian Hils.




 OF THE ARMENIANS, MEDES, PERSIANS, PARTHIANS, SCYTHIANS,  TARTARIANS, CHINOIS, AND OF THEIR RELIGIONS. The fourth Booke.

CHAP. I. Of ARMENIA MAIOR, and GEORGIA: and the neighbouring Nations.
SLOWLY hitherto haue wee proceeded in the discouerie of a part of Asia; sometime the store, sometimes the want, of conuenient matter, detaining our pen: In the one, Time, the Consumer of things, causing much time and paines to  be spent in curious search, that wee might produce some light out of darknesse: In the other, store of Stories, and varietie of varying Authors hath dimmed our weaker eyes with multiplicitie of lights; vncertaine in so many Tracts and Tractates, where to begin, and when to end. Now at last are wee passed Euphrates, into a Countrey that often exalteth it selfe, as though it would pierce the skies, and as often receiueth the due punishment of aspiring pride, being cast downe into so many lowly valleyes and deiected bottomes. The World, which after the Floud was repeopled from hence, still carrieth in the seuerall Ages, Places, Peoples, and Men thereof, the resemblance of her Cradle, now vp, now downe, in all varietie and vicissitude  of chance and change, constant in vnconstancie, treading this Armenian Measure with vnequall paces, ouer Hills and Dales, like it selfe onely in vnlikenesse. Here Noes Arke setled, and here must our Ship hoyse sayle.

@. I. Of the Armenians and Turcomanians.
ARMENIA hath a great part of Cappadocia and Euphrates on the West; Mesopotamia  on the South; on the North part, Colchis, Iberia, Albania; on the East, the Caspian Sea, and Media. Part of this greater Armenia is now called Turcomania, the other part is contained in Georgia. PtolomeyPtol. l. 5. c. 13^ reckoneth in it principall Mountaines, the Moschici, Paryarges, or Pariedri, Vdacespes, Antitaurus, Abos, and theIun. in Ann^t^ Gen. 8. Gordaei,
 which the Chaldean Paraphrast calleth Kardu; and Q. Curtius, Cordei; Berosus, Cordyes.
On these Hils the Arke rested, whereof wee haue spoken in the first Booke.Haithonus, or Antonius. Armenius. Haithon (if wee beleeue him of his owne Countrey, where hee was of royall linage) calleth this Mountaine Arath, little differing from the Scripture-appellation Ararat, and addeth, That although, in regard of abundance of Snow, alway possessing the top thereof, none be able to goe vp thither, yet there alway appeareth in the top a certaine blacke thing, which the vulgar people esteeme to be the Arke. Perhaps it may be some cloud or mist, which grosse vapours doe often cause on the tops of high Hills. For before Haithons dayes, Beniamin Tudelensis telleth that one Ghamar ben Alchetab had taken thence the remainder of the Arke, and therewith built an Ismaeliticall Meschit. And yet a man may herein doubt also: for concerning  reliques pretending such Antiquitie, Faith can finde no foundation in such ruinous rubbish;Lib. 1. c. 8. and wee haue before shewed out of Berosus and Nicolaus Damascenus of old, and Cartwrights later trauels, what may be thought thereof.
Armenia (as StraboLib. 11. affirmeth) receiued the name of one of Iasons companions, which followed him in his Nauigation out of Harmenia, a Citie of Thessaly, betweene Pherae and Larissa. The wealth of this Region appeared, when Ptolomey appointing Tigranes to bring in to the Romans sixe thousand Talents of Siluer, he added voluntarily, beyond that summe, to euery Souldier in the Campe fiftie drammes of Siluer, to euery Centurion a thousand, to euery Deputie of a Countrey, and Chiliarch, a Talent.  
Their Religion must at first be that which Noah and his Family professed; after by time corrupted. Here (Pseudo Berosus, lib. 3. saith our Berosus) Noah instructed his posteritie in Diuine an Humane Sciences, and committed many naturall secrets vnto writing, which the Scythian Armenians commend to their Priests onely; none else being suffered to see, or reade, or teach them. He left also Rituall Bookes, or Ceremoniall, of the which hee was termed Saga, that is, Priest, or Bishop. Hee taught them also Astronomy, and the distinction of yeeres and moneths: For which, they esteemed him partaker of D^uine Nature, and surnamed him Olybama and Arsa, that is, the Heauen and the Sunne, and dedicated to him many Cities; some (saith he) remaining at this day, which beare th^se names. And when hee went from thence to gouerne Cytim, which now (as bee affirmeth) they call Italy, the Armenians were much affected  to him, and after his death accounted him the Soule of the heauenly bodies, and bestowed on him Diuine Honors. Thus Armenia where hee began, and Italy, where he ended, doe worship him, and ascribe to him Names, Heauen, Sunne, Chaos, the Seed of the World, the Father of the greater and lesse Gods, the Soule of the World, mouing Heauen, and the Creatures, and Man; the GOD of Peace, Iustice, Holinesse, putting away hurtfull things, and preseruing good. And for this cause both Nations signifie him in their writings with the course of the Sunne, and motion of the Moone, and a Scepter of Dominion, persecuting and chasing away the wicked from among the societie of men, and with the chastitie of the bodie, and sanctimony of the minde, the two keyes of Religion and Happinesse. They called alsoThe wife of Noah. Tidea, the mother of all, after her death, Aretia, that is, the Earth; and Esta, that is, the Fi^e, because shee had beene Queene of the Holy Rites, and had taught maidens to keepe the holy euerlasting  fire from euer going out. Noah, before he went out of Armenia, had taught men Husbandry, more ayming at Religion and Manners, then Wealth and Dainties, which prouoke to vnlawfull things, and had lately procured the wrath of GOD. And first of all men he found out and planted Vines, and was therefore called Ianus, which to the Aramaeans soundeth as much as The Author of Wine. Thus farre Berosus lib. 3. and in the fourth Booke hee addeth, that Nymbrot (the first Saturne of Babylon) with his sonne Iupiter Belus, stole away those Rituall or Ceremoniall bookes of Iupiter Sagus, and came with his people into the land Sennaar, where he appointed a Citie, and laid the foundation of a great Tower, a hundred thirtie and one yeeres after the Floud; but neither finished this, nor founded the other. Old Ianus when hee went hence, left Scytha, with his mother Araxa, and some inhabitants, to people  Armenia, being the first King thereof; Sabatius Saga being consecrated High Priest, from Armenia vnto the Bactrians: all which space (saith he) in our Age is called Scythia Saga. In his fifth booke hee reporteth, That Iupiter Belus, possessed with ambition of subduing the whole world, closely endeuoured to make (or take) away Sabatius Saga, who, being not able otherwise to escape his treachetie, fled away secretly. But Ninus the sonne of Belus, pursued his fathers intent against Sabatius, who substituted his sonne Barzanes in his place, and fled into Sarmatia, and after from thence into Italy, to his father Ianus. Barzanes was subdued by Ninus.
But to come to an Author of better credite,Stra. l. 11. Strabo saith, The Armenians and Medes  haue in veneration all the Temples of the Persians; but the Armenians especially esteeme the Temples ofTanais an Armenian Goddesse; Some terme her, Anaitis. Tanais, as erecting them in other places, so in Acilesina. They dedicate vnto them men-seruants and women-seruants: the most noble of that Nation there (dedicating
 shall I say? or) prostituting their daughters; where after long prostitution with their Goddesse, they are giuen in marriage, none refusing such matches. How much can the shadow, how little can the substance of Religion perswade men to? The Image of Tanais, or Anaitis was set vp in her Temple, all of solid gold: and when, as Antonius warred against the Parthians, this Temple was robbed. The sameCoel. Rhodiq. l. 18. c 29. went, That hee which first had layed sacrilegious hands on the spoyles, was smitten blind, and so diseased, that he died thereof. But when Augustus, being entertained of an ancient warriour at Bononia, asked him of the truth of this report, he answered, Thou now, O Emperour, drinkest that bloud; for I am the man, and whatsoeuer I haue came by that bootie. This Goddesse is supposed to be the same with  Diana. A Region of Armenia bare the same name Anaitis.
How bloudy Rites the Armenians sometimes vsed, appearethGramays Armen. by the Historie of the Riuer Araxes, before called Halmus, borrowing this later name of a King there raigning; to whom, in warres betwixt him and the Persians, the Oracle prescribed the sacrifice of his two faire daughters. Pietie forbade what pietie commanded; and whiles the King would be an Vmpire between Nature and the Oracle (which is the vsuall euent in arbitrements) he satisfied neither. That the Oracle might bee fulfilled, he sacrificed two of noble birth, of notable beautie: that Nature might not be wronged, hee wronged Iustice (the true touch-stone of true pietie) hee spared his owne, and offered the daughters of Miesalcus: but so hee lost both his daughters by Miesalcus reuenging sword, and himselfe in this Riuer by himselfe  drowned. Bacchus loued Alphoesibaea, an Armenian Damsell, and while Tygris, then (if you beleeue the Story) called Sollax, was too coole a Mediatour betweene the two hot louers, hee swam ouer on a Tygers backe. Hence the Fable of his Metamorphosis into a Tygre: hence that name left to the Riuer. Armenia was subdued to the Persians by Cyrus: one part thereof payed to the Persians twentie thousand Colts for yeerely tribute.Valer. Max. l. 9. c. 11. Sariaster, sonne to Tigranes the Armenian King, conspired against his father: the Conspirators sealed their bloudie faith with a bloudie ceremonie; they let themselues bloud in the right hands, and then dranke it. Wonder, that in such a treachery (as immediately before the same Author affirmeth of Mithridates his sonne) that any man would helpe: or that hee durst importune the Gods: no wonder, that so bloudie a seale was annexed to such euidence.
 The Temple of Baris (mentioned by Strabo) may happily be some Monument of Noahs descent, by corruption of the word Lubar, as before said,Antiq l. 1. c. 5 Iosephus out of Nicolaus Damascenus calling it Baris, with losse of the first syllable.
Iuuenal accuseth the Armenians of Sooth-saying, and Fortune-telling, by viewing the inwards of Pigeons, Whelpes, and Children. His words are in Sat. 6.

Spondet Amatorem tenerum, vel diuitis orbi
Testamentum ingens, calidae pulmone columbae
Tractato, Armenius vel Commagenus Aruspex
Pectora pulmonum rimabitur, exta catelli,
Interdum and pueri:

 That is,
A tender Louer, or rich Legacie,Of child-lesse Rich man, for your destinie,Th'Armenian Wizard in hot Lungs doth spieOf Pigeons; Or of Whelpes the inwards handling,Or sometimes (bloudie search) of Children mangling.
The MountainesPius 2. of Armenia pay tribute vnto many Seas: by Phasis and Lycus vnto the Pontike Sea; Cyrus and Araxes vnto the Caspian; Euphrates and Tygris vnto the Red or  Persian Sea: these two last are famous for their yeerely ouerflowings, the former of them arising amidst three other Seas, yet by the incroaching violence of the beetle-browed Hils enforced to a farre longer, more intricate, and tedious way, before hee can repose his wearied waues: the other, for his swiftnesse, bearing the name of Tygris, which with the Medes signifieth an Arrow. Solinus cap. 40. saith, That it passeth through the Lake Arethusa, neither mingling waters nor fishes, quite of another colour from the Lake: it diueth vnderSimocatta hath Melabasus, which is a part of Taurus. l. 2. c. 10. Taurus, and bringeth with it much drosse on the other side of the Mountaine, and is againe hidden, and againe restored, and at last carrieth Euphrates into the Sea. The Armenians, besides their naturall Lords, haue been subiect to the Persians; after that, to the Macedonians, and againe to the Persian; after to Antiochus Captaines: then, to the Romans and Parthians, tossed betwixt  the Grecians and Saracens; subdued after successiuely to the Tartarians, Persians, and Turkes. Of these present Armenians Master CartwrightPreachers Trauels. reporteth, That they are a people very industrious in all kinde of labour: their women very skilfull and actiue in shooting and managing any sort of weapon, like the ancient Amazons. Their Families are great, the father
 and all his posteritie dwelling together vnder one roofe, hauing their substance in common: and when the father dieth, the eldest sonne doth gouerne the rest; all submitting themselues vnder his Regiment: after his death, not his sonne, but the next brother succeedeth; and so after all the brethren are dead, to the eldest sonne. In diet and clothing they are all alike, of their two Patriarches, and their Christian profession, wee are to speake in fitter place.
The Turcomanians (later inhabitants) are as other the Scythians or Tartarians, (from whence they are deriued) theeuish, wandring vp and downe in Tents without certaine habitations, like as the Curds also their Southerly neighbours, their cattell and their robberies being their greatest wealth. Of their Religion (except of such as after their manner bee  Christians, which wee must deferre till a fitter time) wee can finde little to say, more then is said alreadie in our Turkish Historie. This wee may here deplore of the vnhappy sight of Armenia, which though it repeopled the world, yet is it least beholding to her viperous off-spring, a Map of the worlds miseries, through so many ages. For being hemmed alway with mightie neighbours on both sides, it selfe is made the bloudie Lists of their ambitious encounters, alway losing whosoeuer wonne, alway the Gauntlet of the Challenger, the Crowne of the Conquerour. This (to let passe elder times) the Romans and Parthians, Greeke Emperours and Saracens, Turkes and Tartarians, Turkes and Mamulukes, Turkes and Persians, doe more then enough proue.  


@. II. Of IBERIA.
PTOLOMBY placeth to the North of Armenia, Colchis, washed by the Pontike Sea; Albania by the Caspian; and betwixt these two Iberia, now together with some part of Armenia) called Georgia; either for the honour of their Patron Saint George, or haply because they descended of those Georgi, which PlinieLib. 6. c. 13. nameth  among the Caspian Inhabitants. StraboStrab. l. 11. recordeth foure kindes of people in this Iberia: of the first sort are chosen two Kings, the one precedent in age and nobilitie, the others Leader in Warre, and Law-giuer in Peace: the second sort, are the Priests: the third, Husbandmen and Souldiers: the fourth, the vulgar seruile people. These haue all things common by Famili^s, but hee is Ruler with his eldest; a thing obserued of the Armenian Christians (as before is said) euen at this day. Constantinus PorphyrogenitusConst. de administrando imperio ad Romanum F. c. 45. the Emperour writeth, That the Iberians boast and glorie of their descent from the wife of Vriah, which Dauid defiled and of the children gotten betweene them. Thus would ^hey seeme to bee of kin to Dauid and the Virgin Mary: and for that cause they marry in their owne kindred. They came (say they) from Ierusalem, being warned by Vision to depart thence, and seated  themselues in thes^ parts. There departed from Ierusalem Dauid, and his brother Spandiates, who obtained (say they) such a fauour from GOD, that no member of his could bee wounded in warre, except his heart, which hee therefore diligently armed; wh^reby he became dreadfull to the Persians, whom hee subdued, and pl^ced the Iberians in these their habitations. In the time of Heraclius they ayded him against the Persians, which after that became an easie prey to the Saracens. Of the Roman conquests and exploits inDion Cassius lib. 37. and 49. Aga^hias lib. 4. Iornandes de reb. Get. Armenia, Colchis, Iberia, Albania, I lift not here to relate.


@. III.  Of ALBANIA.
ALBANIABoterus Coelius Rodiginus lect. Antiqua^um. lib. 18. cap. 27. Pius secundus, Asia. (now Zuiria) lyeth North and East, betwixt Iberia and the Sea, of which Strabo affirmeth, that they need not the Sea, who make no better vse of the Land: for they bestow not the least labour in husbandrie, and yet the earth voluntarily and liberally yeeldeth her store: and where it is once sowen, it may twice or thrice be reaped. The men were so simple, that they neither had vse of money, nor did they number aboue an hundred; ignorant of weights, measures, warre, ciuilitie, husbandrie: there were in vse among them sixe and twentie languages. They hadSansouinus and Pius secundus, report of such Spiders in Italy, in Calabria, called tarantulae. Spiders which would  procure death vpon men smiling, and some also which did men to die weeping.
They worshipped the Sunne, Iupiter, and the Moone, whose Temple was neere to Iberia. The Priest, which ruled it, was next in honour to the King: hee performeth the Holy Rites,
 ruleth the Holy Region, which is large and full of people: of the sacred Seruants, many being inspired, doe Diuine or Prophecie. Hee which is most rauished with the spirit, wandreth alone through the Woods: him the Priest taketh and bindeth with a sacred Chaine, allowing him sumptuous nourishment the space of a yeere, and after bringeth him to bee slaine with other sacrifices to the Goddesse. The Rites are thus: One which is skilfull of this businesse, holding the sacred Speare, wherewith they vse to slay the man, stepping forth, thrusteth it into his heart: in his falling they obserue certaine tokens of diuination: then doe they bring out the bodie into some place, where they all goe ouer it. The Albanians honoured olde-age in all men, death in none, accounting it vnlawfull to mention a dead man; with  whom they also buried his wealth.Plin. lib. 7. Plinie out of Isigorus affirmeth, that a people called Albani (not these I thinke, if any) were hoarie haired from their childhood, and saw as well by night as by day.


@. IIII. Of Colchis or Mengrelia.
MENGRELIA (sometime ColchisMoletius tradit Colchidens, Albaniam, and Iberiam, vno hodie nomine CON^ANIA vocari. Ortel. Thes. Geog.) adioyneth to the Euxine Sea, in which Countrey  Strabo mentioneth the Temple of Leucothea, builded by Phryxus: where was also an Oracle, and where a Ram might bee slaine. This Temple was sometimes very rich, but spoiled by Pharnax, and after of Mithridates. This country the Poets haue made famous by the fables of Phryxus, and Iason. Phryxus the sonne of Athemas, Prince of Thebes, and of Nephele, with his sister Helle fled from their cruell stepdame Ino, vpon the backe of a golden Ram, from which Helle falling into the water, gaue name thereto, of her called Hellespont: Phryxus comming safe into Colchis; sacrificed to Iupiter, and hanged vp the fleece of his Ram in the Groue of Mars; which custome was yeerely practised  of his posteritie. Iason after by command of Pelias (seeking by a barbarous enemy, or a dangerous Nauigation to destroy him) with fourescore and nineteene other companions in the Ship, called Argo, fetched this Fleece from hence by the helpe of Medaea: and the Ship and the Ram filled Heauen with new Constellations. That fableDiod. Sic. l. 4^ Nat. Com. l. 6. Iustin. 42. had ground of Historie, howsoeuer by fictions obscured. For the Riuers here in Colchis are reported to carrie gold downe with their streames and sands, which the people take with boords bored full of holes, and with fleeces of Wooll. Spaine hath of late yeelded many such Argonauts, with longer voyages, seeking the golden Indian Fleece,Strab. l. 11. Suid. in voce (...) Delrio disq. Mag. l. 4. which their Indian conquest may make the Ensigne of their Order more fitly, then the Burgundian inheritance. Suidas applieth this Fleece and Ram, to Bookes of Alchymie, written in parchments made of Rams skins, which Delrio accounteth an Art of Naturall Magicke, and possible, howsoeuer these Colchians, as  well as the Armenians, Egyptians, Persians, and Chaldeans were infamous for that other, which hee calleth Deuillish: and Medaea is most renowned for that science, the ignorance whereof is best learning.
HerodotusLib. 2. is of opinion that Sesostris left some of his Armie here at the Riuer Phasis, perswaded hereunto by the agreement of the Colchians and Egyptians in the same ceremonie of Circumcision, and in the like workes of Hempe. Vadianus citeth out of Valerius Flaccus the like testimonie. Plinie in his sixth Booke, and fifth Chapter, reporteth of DioscuriasDioscurius. a City of Colchis, whilome so famous, that Timosthenes affirmeth that three hundred Nations of differing languages liued in it, and afterwards the Roman affaires were there managed by an hundred and thirtie Interpreters.Annal. l. 6. Cornelius Tac. saith, that they accounted it vnlawfull to offer a Ram in Sacrifice, because of Phryxus his Ram, vncertaine, whether it were a  beast, or the ensigne of his Ship. They report themselues the issue of the Thessalonians.


@. V. Of the present Mengrelians and Georgians.
THe present Mengrelians are rude and barbarous, defending themselues from the Turkes by their rough Hils and ragged Pouertie: so inhumane,Quadu^* that they sell their  owne children to the Turks. I reade not of any other Religion at this day amongst them but Christian, such as it is. Some adde these also to the Georgians. The wiues of diuers of these people, reported to bee exercised in Armes and Martiall feates, happily gaue occasion to that Fable or Historie of the Amazons.

BusbequiusAug. Busbeq. Epist. 3. saith, that Colchos is a very fertile Countrey, but the people idle and carelesse: they plant their Vines at the foot of great Trees, which marriage proueth very fruitfull, the husbands armes being kindly embraced, and plentifully laden. They haue no money, but in stead of buying and selling they vse exchange. If they haue any of the more precious metals, they are consecrated to the vse of their Temples, whence the King can borrow them vnder pretence of publike good. The King hath all his tributes payed in the fruits of the earth, whereby his Palace becommeth a publike store-house to all commers. When Merchants come, they giue him a present, and he feasteth them: the more wine any man drinketh, the more welcome hee is. They are much giuen to belly-cheere, dauncing, and loose Sonnets of loue and dalliance. They much caroll the name of Rowland or Orlando, which  name it seemeth passed to them with the Christian Armies, which conquered the Holy Land. No maruell if Ceres and Bacchus lead in Venus betwixt them; which so ruleth in these parts, that the husband bringing home a guest, commends him to his wife and sister, with charge to yeeld him content and delight, esteeming it a ceedite, that their wiues can please and bee acceptable. Their Virgins become mothers verie soone; most of them at ten yeeres old can bring witnesses in their armes (little bigger then a great frogge, which yet after grow tall and square men) to proue that there is neuer a Maide the lesse for them. Swearing they hold an excellent qualitie, and to bee a fashion-monger in oathes, glorious: to steale cunningly winnes great reputation, as of another Mercurie; and they which cannot doe it, are holden dullards and blocks. When they goe into a Church, they giue meane respect to other Images:  Saint George is so worshipped, that his horses hoofes are kissed of them. Dadianus the King of Colchos or Mengrelia, came a suiter to Solyman, while Busbequius was there. Betwixt them and the Iberians their Neighbours, is much discord. And thus much of their present condition.
HaithonHaiton. cap. 7 the Armenian, extending the confines of Georgia to the great Sea, saith, In this Kingdome is a thing monstrous and wonderfull, which I would not h^ue spoken nor beleeued, had I not seene it with mine owne eyes. In these parts there is a Prouince called Hamsem, containing in circuit three dayes iourney; and so farre is it couered with an obscure darknesse, that none can see any thing, nor dare any enter into it. The Inhabitants thereabouts affirme, that they haue often heard the voyce of men howling, cocks crowing, neighing  of horses; and by the passage of a Riuer, it appeareth to haue signes of habitation. This is reported by the Armenian Histories, to haue come to passe by the hand of GOD, so deliuering his Christian seruants (by Sauoreus a Persian Idolater, Lord of this place appointed to dye) and so punishing with outward darknesse, the inward former blindnesse and rage of those persecuting Idolaters. Thus Haithonus or Antonius a Churchi (for so Ortelius nameth him) but this darknesse seemeth more ancient, and to haue beene the cause of that prouerbe,Tull. in Academ. Cimmerij quibus asspectum solis, siue Deus aliquis, siue Natura ademit, siue eius quem incolunt loci situs. Cimmeriae tenebrae.
The Georgians (girt in with two mightie aduersaries, the Persian and the Turke) haue endured much grieuance from them both: and, in the late warres, especially from the Turke, whoIo. Bot. Ben. hath taken and fortified many of their principall places of importance, Gori, Clisca,  Lori, Tomanis, Teflis the chiefe Citie of Georgia, vnto which from Derbent, there yet remaines the foundation of a high and thicke wall built by Alexander. Ortelius esteemeth Derbent to be Caucasiae portae, which PliniePlin. l. 6. c. 11. calleth a mightie worke of Nature, etc.


@. VI. Of the Circassians.
WEstward from hence is entrance into the Circassian Countrey, extending it selfe  on Meotis fiue hundred miles, and within land two hundred. Christians they are in profession: from hence the Soldans of Egypt had their slaues, of which were raised their Mamalukes. Their chiefe Cities are Locoppa and Cromuco: at the mouth of Tanais, the Turke hath fortified Asaph. They liue in great part on robberies. In old time in this Tract was Phanagoria, and therein the Temple of Venus surnamed Apaturia,Serab. lib. 11. because, that when the Gyants assaulted her, she implored the aide of Hercules, who slew them all one, after another. Cimmerium a Towne at these straits, gaue name thereunto, of Cimmerius Bosphorus. But little can be said of these in particular, more then generally may be said of the Scythians, to whom they are reckoned.
Georgius InterianusApud Ramus. hath written a Tractate of these Zychi, or Circassi, called of themselues  Adiga; expressing their vnchristian Christianitie, and barbarous manner of liuing; which I hold fittest in our discouerie of the diuers professions of Christian Religion to relate.



@. VII. Of the Curdi.
SOmeG. Bot. Be^^ Abr. Hart. M. Paul. Ramus. adde vnto Armenia, in their moderne Maps and Discoueries, besides the Turcomani, a people that came thither out of Tartaria, the Curdi, both still retaining the Tartarian and Arabian manner of life in Tents, without Cities, Townes, or Houses. Their Religion halteth betwixt diuers Religions of the Turkes, Persians, and Christians, of the Iacobite and Nestorian Sects. In heart, they are neither fast to  GOD nor Man; dissembling with the Persian and Turke; and better skilled in robberie, murther, and faithlesse treacherie (their daily practise) then mysteries of Faith and Religion. They are also Lords of Bitlis, and some other Cities and Holds in those parts. They are called Courdines by Sir Anthony Sherley; who saith, they know no other fruits of the earth,Sir A. S. his Trauells into Persia. but what belonged to the sustenance of their cattell, vpon the milke, butter and flesh of which they liue, ruled by certaine Princes of their owne, which giue partly an obedience to the Turke, partly to the Persian, as they are neerest the confines of the one or the other. Yet in that simplicitie of liuing, through ambition, warres grow daily among them, euen to the extirpation of a whole Nation. As we found freshly when wee passed by one of their Princes, called Hiderbeague, all whose people were deuoured by the sword, or carried away captiue by Cob^theague;  and himselfe remained onely with some twentie soules in a Rocke. Ten thousand of their Courdines, subiect to the Turke, abandoned their Countrey, and requested some waste land to be giuen them by Abas the present Persian, which gaue them entertainment: one occasion of quarrell betwixt him and the Turke. They are supposed to be a remnant of the ancient Parthians, and neuer go abroad without their Armes, Bowes, Arrowes, Scimitars and Bucklers, euen when age seemeth to haue fastned one foot in the graue. They adoreCartwright^ Trauells. and worship the Deuill, that hee may not hurt them, nor their cattell: they are cruell to all sorts of Christians: their Countrey is therefore called Terra Diaboli. One of their Townes is named Manuscute, a mile from which is an Hospitall dedicated to Saint Iohn Baptist, much frequented as well by Turkes as Christians, whom superstition hath perswaded, that whosoeuer  will bestow Kidde, Sheepe, or Money, to releeue the poore of that place, shall both prosper in his iourney, and obtaine the forgiuenesse of his sinnes.



CHAP. II. Of the Medes.
ARmenia extending it selfe (if IustineLib. 42. haue measured rightly) eleuen hundred miles, on the East encountereth Media, in which lieth our next perambulation.  It receiued the name of Madai the sonne of Iaphet, not of Medus the sonne of Medea and Iason. It limitedStrab. lib. 11. on the North, with the Caspian Sea; on the South, with Persia; on the East, with Parthia. Ecbatana, the chiefe Citie, built (as PliniePlin. l. 6. c. 14^ affirmeth) by Seleucus, (indeed farre more ancient, and by them happily reedified) is distant from the Caspian straits twentie miles. These Straits are a narrow way made by hand thorow the Hills, scarce wide enough for a Cart to passe, eight miles in length, the Rocks manifesting their indignation at this interruption, by obscure frownes, and saltSol. cap. 50. teares continually streaming from them, which I know not by what sudden horror are presently congealed into Ice; also all the Summer time armies of Serpents  keeping the passages. Well may this bee the house of Enuie: so fitly doth that fable of the PoetOuid. Metamor. lib. 2. agree with the nature of this place.

--Domus est imis in vallibus huius,
Abdita, lose carens, non vlli peruia vento,
Tristis, and ignaui plenissima frigoris, and quae
Igne vacet semper, caligine semper abundet.
--videt intus edentem
Vipereas carnes, vitiorum alimenta suorem,
INVIDIAM--

 Of Ecbatana we reade in the Historie ofIud. 1. Iudith, that Arpachshad built the walls of hewen stones, seuentie cubits high, and fiftie cubits broad, etc. HerodotusLib. ^. affirmeth, ^hat after the Assyrians had raigned in Asia fiue hundred and twentie yeeres, the Medes rebelled, and chose Deioces to be their King, and at his command builded him this Royall Citie, and a Palace of




 great beautie (the timber whereof was Cedar, ioyned with plates of siluer and gold; it was seuen furlongs in compasse) his successours are there reckoned, Phraortes, Cyoxares, Astyages. IustineIustin. lib. 1. reporteth that Arbactus or Arbaces, Lieutenant of the Medes vnder Sardanapalus, rebelled against him for his effeminate life, and translated the Empire from the Assyrians, with whom it had continued thirteene hundred yeeres to the Medes. Diodorus SiculusDiodo. Sicul. l. 3. c. 7. Mclan. Chro. l. 2. addeth in this conspiracie, vnto this Arbaces the Mede, Belesus, whom some call Phul Beloch the Babylonian, who shared the state betwixt them; the Babylonian possessing Babylonia and Assyria; and Arbaces, Media and Persia. Of this more isSee l. 1. c. 13. said before.
In the time of Ninus, Farnus (saithDiodor. Sic. lib. 3. 1. Diodorus) was King of Media, who, encountring with Ninus in battell, was there taken, with his wife and seuen sonnes: all which the bloudie  Conquerour commanded to be crucified. And thus remained Media hand-maid to the Assyrians, till the time of Sardanapalus; but not without some disquiet. For in Semiramis time the Medes rebelled, and destroyed Nineue. But Semiramis inuaded their Countrie with a mightie Armie: and comming to the Hill Bagistanus, sacred to Iupiter, there pitched her Tents; andDiodorus. l. 5. cap. 5. in the plaine fields made a garden, containing twelue furlongs. Beyond the garden, shee cut a Rocke seuenteene furlongs high, grauing therein her owne Image, and an hundred others, bringing her gifts. SomeStuck^us de sa^ris Gentium. tell this otherwise, that shee pourtrayed her owne Image in that huge quantitie, and appointed an hundred Priests continually to attend the same with offerings and diuine worship. At Chaona a Citie of Media, shee espying another huge Rocke in the Plaine, caused another Garden to bee made in the middest thereof,  with sumptuous houses of pleasure therein, whence shee might behold all her Armie, and there gaue her selfe a long space to rest and voluptuousnesse, making choice of the likeliest Gallants in her Campe for her bed-fellowes, all whom she after did to death. Thence to Ecbatana she made the way shorter, and more passeable, casting downe Hills, and exalting the Valleyes into a plaine, still bearing her name. At EcbatanaEcbatana was built before Deioces, yea before Semiramis time. she built a Palace, and brought water thither from the Hill Orontes, by a laborious and costly channell. And thus did shee not onely subdue the rebellious Medes, but made a conquest of Nature in ostentation of her puissance. The sameDiodor. Sic. lib. 4. cap. 3. Author telleth, that multitudes of Sparrowes which eate vp their seeds, forced the Inhabitants to leaue their soile; as did Mice cause some parts of Italy, and Frogs (rayned out of the clouds) the Attariotae, and (as wee haueLib. 3. cap. 15. obserued) the Fleas chased  away the Inhabitants of Myus. How great is the Creator, that of the smallest of his creatures can mufter Armies to the conquest of them, which swell in conceit of their owne greatnesse? Wee like Gyants by our wickednesse defie the Heauens, and defile the Earth, saying (by our workes)Iob 21.15. Who is the Almightie, that wee should serue him? When as yet the Lord of Hosts need not tame vs with Legions of Angels (one could destroy Senacheribs Host) nor set the Heauens in their courses to fight his battells (as against the Canaanites) nor arrange the Elements with an ouer-whelming Chaos to confound vs, by a Sodomiticall fire, or ayrie pestilence, or deluge of waters, or deuouring of the earth: nor needes hee Lyons to challenge a part of his glorie to their strength and prowesse:Et quae non prosunt singula, multa iuuant. Et quod non possunt singula, multa nocent. Frogs, and Lice, and Flies shall bee Pharaohs Challengers, Conquerors, Iaylers: And how many Nations in Africa haue the insulting triumphing  Grasse-hoppers exiled from their natiue dwellings? Proud MAN, well may the basest of thy basest seruants thus make thee to see thy basenesse; and by rebelling against thee, argue thy rebellions against their and thy Creator.
But that wee bee not too farre transported with this not vniust passion; let vs returne to our Prouince of Media; which ArbacesReade lib. 1. cap. 13. deliuered from Assyrian seruitude, and subiected it together with the Easterne Empire to himselfe, vnder whose posteritie it continued three hundred and two and twentie yeeres. Astyages, the last, was by Cyrus his Nephew, conquered, according to two dreames, which had fore-signified this vnto him. In the first hee dreamed, that he saw so much vrine streaming from his daughter Mandane (his onely child) that all Asia was drowned therewith: in the other, a Vine grew from her, which shadowed  all Asia. His MagiHerodot. l. 1. Val. Max. etc. told him, that hereby was fore-told his Nephewes greatnesse, with the losse of his Kingdome. To preuent this, hee wedded his daughter to Cambyses a Persian: and when shee was deliuered of a child, hee committed it to Harpagus (one of his trustie Councellers) to be made away. He fearing reuenge from the daughter, if shee should after succeed her father, deliuereth the Infant to Mitradates the Kings Heard-man, commanding him in Astyages name, to expose it on the Mountaine. Hee returning home, found his wife newly deliuered of a dead child, which, by her entreatie was laid forth in stead thereof. Her name was Spaco, which in the Median language signifieth a Birch: whence the fable grew, that Cyrus being so exposed, was nourished by a Bitch. This Infant growing vp,  and called by the Heard-mans name, after ten yeeres was knowne by this occasion.Iustin. lib. 1. A company of boyes playing together, chose this strippling for their King, who vsed his childish Royaltie, with more then childish discipline. For he ordained diuers Officers, some of them
 to be his Guard, some Builders, Messengers, etc. as hee thought fit. Amongst whom was a sonne of one A^tembares, a man of great estimation, who for neglecting his office, was by this young Kingling seuerely chastised. He complained thereof to his father, and the father brought the child to the King, accusing the indignitie of the fact, that his Heard-mans sonne should deale so malapertly and cruelly, shewing his beaten shoulders to Astyages. The Heard-man and his supposed sonne was sent for, that Artembares might bee satisfied: where the young King gaue so good account of that his fact, that Astyages, much amazed, tooke the Heard-man aside, and with busie inquirie learned of him all the truth of this matter: wherewith enraged against Harpagus, who ought himselfe to haue done that dismall execution,  but dissembling the same, he told him that hee would doe sacrifice for the childes safetie, and bade him send his child to beare Cyrus company, inuiting him also to sup with him, where hee feasted him with the flesh of his owne sonne, whose head, fingers, and toes, were set before him at the last seruice. Harpagus bare it as patiently as hee could, till fitter occasion of reuenge offered it selfe, which thus fell out. The Magi told Astyages, that in this childish Kingdome of Cyrus, the danger of his dreame was alreadie passed, and that hee needed not to feare any further danger. Wherefore hee was sent into Persia to his Parents. After he was now a man, Harpagus, hauing secretly sollicited the Medes to rebellion against their cruell Soueraigne, acquainted Cyrus with his proiect, to that end enclosing a letter in a  Hares belly, which hee sent to Cyrus by one of his Hunts-men: which was with such industrie and successe prosecuted, that Astyages lust his Scepter, and Cyrus translated the Empire to the Persians. For Harpagus being made Generall of the Armie of the Medes, reuolted to Cyrus, with all such as he had made acquainted with his treason. And when the Medes after rebelled in the time of Darius, they were forced againe to subiection. The Magi were by Astyages command, crucified: and he himselfe re-enforcing his power, and bidding battell to Cyrus the second time, was taken aliue, and by his Nephew set ouer the Hyrcans.
The Magi had large and fertill possessions (thus reportethAmm. Marcel. l. 23. Ammianus) assigned them in Media. Their Science, called Magia, is by Plato termed Machagistia, which mysticall word  signifieth the purest worship of the gods: to which Science Zoroastres of Bactria in olde times added many things out of the mysteries of the Chaldees. But because the Persians had from hence their Empire, and this Religion, by whose Armes they were made knowne to the World: there shall bee fitter place to speake of these Magi, when wee treat of the Persian Rites. In this Region was made the oyle Medicum, wherein their Arrowes were steeped, which being shot out of a looser Bow (for a swifter shot extinguished it) did burne the flesh in which it did sticke, and if water were applyed to it, the fire thereof encreased. Nor could any remedie cure the same, but hurling dust thereon. It was composed of Naphta. The Medes made league with this ceremonie.Boem. lib. 3. Francisco Thamara, lib. 2. They wounded the Souldiers of each partie, either licked others bloud. The North parts of Media were barren, and therefore they liued on Apples dryed and stamped together: of rosted Almons they made bread, and wine of the  roots of herbs. This and venison was there food. In one plainePius Secundus Asia. of Media were pastured fiftie thousand Mares, belonging to the King: the herbe whereon they principally fed, is stil called Medica. The race of Horses, called Nisaei, were here bred, and hence dispersed allouer the East.
AmongAlex. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 23. the Medes, none might be King by the Law of the Countrey, except hee were in stature and strength eminent. All the Medes (saith BardesanesBar. apud Euseb. de Praeparat. Euang. l. 6. c. 8. a famous Chaldaean) nourish Dogs with great care, to which they cast men readie to die (whiles they are yet breathing) to be deuoured of them.
The MedesPlutarch de Orb. Lun. Gramaye. Curtius, l. 3. worshipped the fire, with barbarous honours done thereto. Their Kings held such Maiestie, that none might laugh or spit before them. They were seldome seene of their people: They had alway Musitians attending them. Their wiues and children accompanied them in their battells.
 The name of the Medes remained famous after the Persian Conquest, as appeareth by the stile which the ScriptureDan. 6.8. Ester 1.8. giueth them: The Law of the Medes and Persians which was vnchangeable, the King himselfe not hauing power to reuoke his sentence.
As for the Catalogue of the Kings which succeeded Arbaces, vntill the time of Astyages, and the times of their raigne, wee haue before shewed it out of Scaliger,Scalig Can. Isag. in our first Booke, Chap. 13. True it is that all agree not in that account. ReinerusR. Reinec. Syntag. de Famil. etc. tom. 1. Reineccius leaueth out diuers of them, and numbreth the yeeres of the Median Dynastie but 261. whereas our former account hath 322. But I had rather referre the Reader to that Catalogue, then trouble him with new out of this or other Authors.
 Media hath beeneMaginus Thesaur. Geog. diuided into Media Maior, and Atropatia: the former containeth Tauris, supposed by Ortelius to be the forenamed Ecbatana (yet now wanting walls altogether) containing in circuit sixteene miles, and of people two hundred thousand; subdued to the Turke 1585. and before by Selim and Soliman; but since recouered by the Persian.
 SultaniaG. B.B. famous for the fairest Moschee in the East. Casbin, to which the Persian hath remoued the Royall Seat from Tauris. The Lake of Van three hundred miles long, and an hundred and fiftie broad (after StraboStrab. l. 11., Manlianus Lacus) of salt-water the greatest next to Meotis. GylliusPet Gyll. in Ortelij. Thes. affirmeth, that eight great Riuers runne into it, without any apparant issue to the Sea.
Atropatia is now called Seruan; the chiefe Citie is Sumachia, or Shamaki, in which the Sophi not long sinceHak. Ant. Ienkinson. built a Turret of flint and free-stone, and in a ranke of flints therein did set the heads of the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Countrey, for a terrour to the rest: the quarrell was pretended for Religion, intended for Soueraigntie.
Their ancient ReligionPlut. de facio in Orb. Lun. differed not much from the Persian, and such also is it still. Their  KingsStrab. l. 11. had many wiues, which custome extended after to the Villages and Mountaines, in so much that they might not haue lesse then seuen. The womenCoel. l. 18. c. 29 also esteemed it a credit to haue many husbands, and a miserable calamitie to haue lesse then fiue. Cyrus subdued them to the Persians, Alexander to the Macedons. What should wee speake of the Parthians? who made Ecbatana their Seat Royall in the Summer time: and of the Saracens, Tartars, Persians and Turkes, who haue successiuely vexed these Countries?
Not farre from Shamaki, saith Master IenkinsonHak. Voyag. Tom. 1., was an olde Castle, called Gullistone (now beaten downe by the Sophi) and not farre from thence a Nunrie of sumptuous building, wherein was buried a Kings daughter, named Ameleck Channa: who slew her selfe with a knife, for that her Father would haue forced her (shee professing chastitie) to haue  married a Tartar King; vpon which occasion the Maidens euerie yeere resort thither to bewaile her death.
There is also a high Hill called Quiquifs; vpon the top whereof (theyA fabulous report of the Medes. say) dwelt a Gyant named Arneoste, hauing on his head two great Hornes, and Eares, and Eyes like a Horse, and a tayle like a Cow, who kept a passage thereby, till one Haucoir Hamshe (a holy man) bound him with his woman Lamisache, and his sonne After; who is therefore had in Saint-like reputation.
Obdolowcan King of this Country vnder the Sophi, besides gracious entertainment, granted vnto Mr. Anthony Ienkinson for our English Merchants great priuiledges, Anno 1563.
Gilan, also anciently Gelae, is reckoned to Media. Into these Cities of Media the2. Reg. 17.6. Israelites  were transported, together with their Religion by Salmanesar the Assyrian: GOD in his manifold wisdome so punishing their sinnes, and withall dispersing some sparks of diuine truth.


CHAP. III. Of the Parthians and Hyrcanians.

@. I.  Of Parthia.
PArthia is placed by PlinieLib. 6.29. in the rootes of the Hills: hauing on the East the Arians; on the West, the Medes; on the South, Carmania; on the North, Hyrcania, rounded with desarts. Hee affirmeth, that the Kingdomes of the Parthians were eighteene. Eleuen of them neere to the Caspian Sea; and the other seuen neer the Red Sea. The word Parthian signifieth with the Scythians an exile. Their chiefe Citie was Hecatompylos, now (as someMaginus. affirme) Hispaham, for the excellencie thereof called of the Persians, Halfe the world. These Scythian  exiles in the times of the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and Macedonians, were an obscure people, the prey of euery Conquerour, which after seemed to diuide the world with the Romans. Their speech was mixt of the Median and Scythian: their Armies consisted most part of seruants, which they held in great respect, instructing them in feats of Armes. In an Armie of fiftie thousand wherewith they encoutred Antonie, there were onely eight hundred freemen. The ParthiansIustin. 41. had no vse of gold or siluer, but in their armour. They had many wiues, whereof they were so iealous, that they forbad them the sight of other men. They performed all businesse priuate and publike on horse-backe; this being the distinction of free-men from seruants. Their buriall was in the bellies of birds, or dogs. Their naked bones were after couered with earth: they were exceedingly superstitious in the worship of their  gods: a stout, vnquiet, seditious, vnfaithfull people. Arsaces, first a famous thiefe, after, the Founder of that Kingdome, left no lesse memorie of himselfe amonst the Parthians, then Cyrus
 among the Persians, or Alexander among the Macedonians. The day wherein hee ouerthrew Seleucus, was solemnly obserued euery yeere amongst them, as the beginning of their libertie. Of him they called all their Kings Arsaces, as the Roman Emperors are named Caesars. TheyAmm. Mat. lib. 23. called themselues the brethren of the Sunne and Moone, which are in those places worshipped. This Arsaces was worshipped after his death. They were no lesse bloudie to their brethren, when they came to the Crowne, then the Ottomans are at this day. PhrahartesIustin l. 42. slew thirtie of his brethren; and before them his father; and after, his sonne; rather then he would endure a possibilitie of a Competitor. AboutVad anus. see fol. 5. 224. yeeres after Christ, Artabanus the last Persian King, being slaine by Artaxeres, or Artaxares the Persian, the Empire  returned to the Persians, who were thereof depriued by the Saracens; and they againe by the Tartars: and is now for the greatest part vnder the Sophi: they had their cup-quarrels, striuing who should draw deepest: which custome wee need not goe into Parthia to seeke. Strabo mentioneth among the Parthians, a Colledge or Senate of Magi and Wise-men. Their ancient religious Rites I finde not particularly related.
The Parthian affaires are thus by someIustin. l. 41. Dion Cassius, lib. 40. Pius Secundus Asia. Gramaye Parthica; P. Bizarus Rerum Persicarum, l. 30. related. After Alexanders death, none of the Macedonians vouchsafing so meane a Prouince, Stragonor a forrainer obtained it: after which (the Macedonians contending in ciuill quarrels for the Soueraigntie) Parthia wauered in vncertaintie, till in the time of Seleucus the nephew of Antiochus, Theodotus, Deputie of Cachia, entituled himselfe King: so giuing example of rebellion to the Easterne Nations, which  Arsaces among the Parthians easily followed. Hee combining himselfe with Theodotus, and after his death, with his sonne, strengthened himselfe in his new erected gouernment of two Cities. But Seleucus taking armes against him, was by him ouerthrowne in battell: which day first gaue light to the Parthian greatnesse, not vnworthily obserued therefore of their posteritie with solemnitie. For Seleucus being by more important affaires called home, the Parthians had leisure to establish their hopes. Athenaeus reporteth that Arsaces tooke him prisoner, and after gentle vsage he sent him home.
After this first, came a second Arsaces, who encountered with Antiochus the sonne of Seleuchus, comming against him with an Army of an hundred thousand foot-men, and twentie thousand horse. The issue was, they parted friends in mutuall league. Priapatius, or Panpatius  was their third King, to whom Phraates his sonne succeeded; and next, his brother Mithridates, who subdued the Medes and Helimaeans, enlarging the Parthian Empire, from Mount Caucasus to Euphrates. Hee tooke Demetrius King of Syria prisoner: and died in his old age. His sonne Phraates was the fourth: on whom Antiochus warred, and the Parthian opposed against him his brother Demetrius, till then detained prisoner. But whiles he warred against the Scythians, by treason of his owne subiects hee was slaine; and Artabanus his Vncle placed in his roome. He also soone after died of a wound receiued in the field: and his sonne Mithridates succeeded, whom the Parthian Senate expelled and deposed. But others reckon betweene Artabanus and Mithridates, Pacorus, and his sonne Phraates. So vncertaine is the Parthian Historie; for which cause alsoReade l. 1. c. 13 Scaliger blameth Onuphrius for being too  peremptory in such vncertainties.
Next in orders reckoned Orodes or Herodes, who besieged his said brother Mithridates in Babylon, and tooke both it and him, and caused him to be slaine in his sight. Against him Crassus the Roman Consull (moued with couetousnesse,L. Florus l. 1. c. 11. hatefull to GOD and man, saith Florus) led the Roman Legions to win the Parthian gold: And by the wayIoseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 12. passing through Iudaea, spoiled the sacred Treasury which Pompey spared, amounting to two thousand talents, and robbed the Temple of eight thousand talents besides. Hee also carried away a beame of solide gold, weighing three hundred Minae (euery Mina is two pound and a halfe Roman) deliuered vnto him by Eleazarus the Treasurer, vpon condition to take nothing else.  But Crassus violated the oath which he had giuen to Eleazarus, and carried all he liked. M^ny dismallStadius in Ilorum. presages prohibited Crassus his expedition, as the curses of the Tribune, whom Dion, Plutarch, and Appian call Atteius Capito. Those curses were denounced with inuocation of some vnknowne gods. Also the Roman ensignes were drowned, with sudden tempests in Euphrates: and whenPlutarch. Crassus. Liuij Epitome l. 106. Eutropij l. 6. Dion. Cas. l. 40. Sim. Maioli die^ Canie. Colloq. 1^. hee had sacrificed to Venus, his sonne stumbled and fell, and Crassus with him. He reiected the Legates of the Parthian, alledging the former league with Pompey. Thus posting to his destruction, one Mazarus (as Florus calls him; or as Plutarch, Ariamnes; Dion, and Appianus name him Augarus) encountred him, not with Armes, but with Arts and wiles, professing great hostilitie to the Parthians. Crassus following his aduice, led his Army into by-wayes and deserts, till being brought into the Parthian snares, his new  guide forsooke him, and the couetous Consull, with his sonne were slaine, and eleuen Roman Legions taken or left in the place. His head and periured right hand vvere sent by Surinas the Parthian Generall (vvho vvas said to haue then in the field vvith him twelue hundred Concubines, and a thousand Camels laden vvith his own furniture) vnto King Orodes: vvho
 contumeliously, (if contumely and merite can ioyne societie) vsed the same, powring into his jawes (sometimes greedie of that metall) molten gold. Orodes enuying Surinas the glory of his victorie, slew him, and committed the remnants of that warre to be pursued by his sonne Pacorus, adioyning to him in that exploit Osaces. In the ciuill warres they tooke part with Pompey against Caesar. Pacorus being receiued into societie of the Kingdome with his father, inuaded Iudaea, and placing Antigonus in the Kingdome, captiued Hircanus. But whiles he aspired to greater hopes, hee lost himselfe and his Armie, in which were twentie thousand Horse-men, in a battell with Ventidius; who by a wily Stratageme, counterfeiting flight and feare, and suffering the Parthians to come vp to their Tents, that they had now no space for their Arrowes, effected this ouerthrow.  
Pacorus his head reduced the Cities of Syria to the Roman subiection, without further warre. This newes made his father madde, who before boasting of the conquest of Asia by Pacorus, now in many dayes did neither speake nor eate: but when hee once did open his mouth, all his speech was Pacorus, who still seemed present vnto him. In this extaticall mood, Phraates, one of his thirtie sonnes, which he had by so many Concubines, slew him, and after them his brethren, with a sonne also of his owne. This crueltie caused many Parthians to betake themselues to voluntary exile, among which Monaeses prouokedFlor. l. 4. c. 10. Dion. lib. 49. Antonius to warre vpon this Tyrant. Hee did so, but with bad successe, of sixteene Legions scarce bringing the third part backe againe. Phraates, impotent and vncapable of so glorious aduentures, grew  into such insolencies, that the people exiled him, and placed Tiridates in his roome; who was soone after displaced by the Scythians, and Phraates restored to his place. Tiridates fled to Augustus (then warring in Spaine) for refuge and aide, carrying with him the sonne of Phraates, whom Caesar sent backe againe to his father without any price, maintaining neither partie against the other, but allowing liberall prouision to Tiridates.
But after this,Suetonius in vita Augusti, cap. 21. Augustus going into the East, the Parthians fearing ill measure, redeliuered all the Roman captiues, and ensignes, and gaue hostages also, his two sonnes, with their wiues and children, and resigned Armenia to the Romans. Phraatax his sonne slew him, with greatest iniustice, repaying that which was most iust, and due to his former paricide. This Phraatax, vsing incestuous acquaintance with his mother, Thermusa (an Italian, whom Augustus  had bestowed on Phraates, and by whose helpe hee was slaine) was killed in an vprore, leauing his sonne Orodes his successor. Hee also in a conspiracie was killed: and VononSueton. in vitae Tiberij, cap. 49. substituted, whom the Parthians not long enduring, forced to seeke helpe of the Romans, where he was perfidiously slaine.
Artabanus obtained the Empire,Mat. Burghlehner. thes. hist. lib. 6. tom. 1. from whence hee was after chased by Vitellius, who placed Tiridates in the Throne, which hee had scarce warmed, when Artabanus recouered it, and after left it to his sonne Bardanes; the Arsacian stocke being now dispossessed. This BardanesCornel. Tacit. Annal. lib. 11. whiles hee minded warres against the Romans, is killed of his owne. Gotarzes his brother succeeded to the Scepter: which he held, notwithstanding the decree of the Roman Senate for Meherdates the sonne of Vonon, whom hee tooke and cut off his eares: Vonones  was his successor, a little while, and presently after Vologaeses his sonne. The next was Artabanus, and after him Pacorus; and in the next place Cosdroes his brother: against whom Traian warred with good successe, who extended the Roman Empire to the Indians. But Adrian renewed league with the Parthian. Parthanaspates succeeded: and soon after Vologaeses, who left heire his sonne of the same name, depriued by his brother Artabanus. He being vniustly dealt with by the Romans trecherie, draue them to sue for peace: which, after that AntoniusHerodiani Macrinus. the author of the breach was dead, was easily obtained by Macrinus his successour. But Artaxares a Persian preuailed better, in a third battell ouerthrowing him, and reducing the Kingdome after such a world of yeeres to the Persian name. Some reckon this 472. yeeres from Arsaces, and 228. after Christ. ScaligerIos. Scal. Canon. Isagog. l. 2. reckoneth the time of the Parthian Dynastie 479. yeeres. The number of their Kings after this computation is nine and twentie. They  which list to see further of their warres with the Romans, may reade the Roman Authors, which haue written the same: the summe whereof is here presented to your view.
Cornelius TacitusCor. Tac. l. 12. tells a merry tale (for I thinke these Tragedies haue wearied you) and pertinent to our purpose, of a good-fellow-like Hercules, whom the Parthians worshipped. This kind-hearted god warneth his Priests in a dreame, that neere to his Temple they should set his horses readie furnished for hunting, which they doe, lading them with quiuers full of Arrowes. These after much running vp and downe the Forrest, returne home at night blowing and breathlesse, their quiuers being emptied. And Hercules (no niggard of his venison) acquainteth the Priests at night by another vision, with all his disport, what woods hee hath  ranged, and the places of his game. They searching the places, finde the slaine beasts.
Better fellowship, certaine, had their Hercules, then their Kings, when they inuited any to their Feasts. For the KingAthenaeus lib. 4 cap. 14. had his table alone and loftie, the guests sit below on the ground,
 and like dogs, feed on that which the King casteth to them. And many times vpon occasion of the Kings displeasure, they are haled thence and scourged, and yet they then prostrate on the ground, adore their striker. TheyHerodiani Macrinus. worshipped the Sunne at his rising. BardesanesEusebius de praepar. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. in Eusebius, saith of them, that to kill his wife, or sonne, or daughter, or brother, or sister (yet vnmarried) was not prohibited by the Law to any Parthian, nor any way subiect to punishment. The ParthianSueton. Caligula. 5. Ensigne was a Dragon; the Royall Ensigne a Bow: their stile was, King of Kings; they ware a double Crowne. They had an ointment made of a certaine composition, which no priuate man might vse. Nor might any else drinke of the waters of Choaspes and Eulaeus. None might come to the King without a present. The Magi were in great  authoritie with them. Their Rites were mixt of the Persian and Scythian. Nothing was more seuerely punished then adulterie. A seruant might not bee made free, nor might be suffered (except in the warres) to ride, or a free-man to goe on foot. Their fight was more dangerous in flying, then in standing or giuing the onset.



Terga
Seneca in Oedip.
conuersi metuenda Parthi.



The Parthians flight doth most affright.


They accountAm. Marcel. lib. 23. them the most happy which are slaine in battell. They which die a naturall death are vpbraided with cowardise. Their fight LucanLucanus. describeth:
Pugna leuis, bellumque fugax, turmaeque fugaces, Et melior cessisse loco, quam pellere, miles:Illita terra dolis, nec Martem cominus vnquamAusa pati virtus; sed longe tendere neruos.
That is,
Light skirmish, fleeing warre, and scattered bands,And better Souldiers when they runne away,Then to beare off an enemy that stands,Their craftie caltrops on the grond they lay:Nor dares their courage come to right-downe blowes,But fighteth further off most trusting to their Bowes.
 Many Cities amongst them, and two thousand Villages are saidPius secundus Gramaye Parth. to haue been ouerwhelmed with Earthquakes. They are said to bee of spare diet, to eate no flesh, but that which they take in hunting: to feed with their swords girt to them, to eate Locusts: to be false lyers and perfidious: to haue store of wiues and strumpets. Their Countrey is now called Arach; in it is made great quantitie of Silkes. Isidorus CharacenusIs. Char. (...). hath set downe the seuerall Countries, with their dimensions, how many Schaeni each of them containeth, with their chiefe Cities, and their wayes and distances: which giueth great light to Geography, and the knowledge of the Parthian greatnesse. Schaenus is accounted threescore furlongs.


 @. II. Of the Hircanians Tappyri and Caspians.
HYrcania (now called Straua or Diargument) hath on the West, Media; on the East Margiana; on the South, Parthia; on the North, the Sea, which hereof is called the Hyrcane, otherwise Caspian. Famous it hath beene, and is, for store of woods and Tygers. There are also other wilde beasts. Here in the Citie Nabarca was an Oracle,  which gaue answeres by dreames.
Some Riuers in this Countrey haue so steepe a fall into the Sea, that vnder the waters the people resort to sacrifice or banquet; the streame shooting violently ouer their heads, without wetting them. Iouius writeth, That the ayre is vnwholsome by reason of the Fennes. Straua the chiefe Citie aboundeth in trafficke for Silke. The Ilands before it in the Sea, were no lesse refuge to the Inhabitants in the Tamberlaine-tempest, then to the Italians in the time of Attila, whose places,Contaren. hist. of Venice. where now Venice standeth. Their Religion, as the State, both in times past and present, hath followed the Persian, of whom we are next to speake.
It is reportedStrab. l. 11. of Tappyri, inhabiting neere to Hyrcania, that their custome was to bestow their wiues on other men, when they had borne them two or three children: so did Cato his  wife Martia, on Hortensius: and such, saith Vertomannus, is the custome at this day of the Indians in Calechut, to exchange wiues in token of friendship.
They had wine in such estimation, that they anointed their bodies therewith. TheCaelius Rhod. lib. 18. cap. 28. Caspij shut vp their parents, after they are come to age of seuentie yeeres, and there in respect of
 pietie (what more could the impious doe?) starue them to death. Some say, That after that age they place them in some desert, and a farre off obserue the euent. If the fowles seize on them with their talents, and teare them out of their coffins, they account it a great happinesse: not so, if dogges or wilde beasts prey thereon. But if nothing meddle therewith, it is accounted a miserable and lamentable case. The Derbices account all faults (though neuer so small) worthy of the vtmost punishment. The Earth was their Goddesse: to their holies they admitted nothing female, nor to their tables. They killed such as were aboue seuentie yeeres old, calling to that bloudie banquet their neighbours, esteeming such miserable, as by disease were intercepted and taken away. Old womens flesh they eate not; but strangled, and then buried them: they likewise buried such as died before that age.  



CHAP. IIII. Of Persia, and the Persian State, in the first and second Persian Dynasties.
PErsia, if wee take it strictly, is thus bounded byLib. 6. cap. 40. Ptolomey: It hath on the North, Media; on the East, Carmania; on the West, Susiana; on the  South, part of the Persian Gulfe. But this name is sometimes stretched as farre as that wide and spacious Kingdome; all that Empire being often called in Authors, Persia, and differing in the bounds and limits, according to the enlarging or contracting of that Monarchie. It is supposed, that the Persians descended of Elam, the sonne ofGen. 10.22. Shem; whose name remained vnto a Region called Elymais, mentioned byPtol. lib. 6. c. 2. Ptolomey, placed in the North parts of Media. Plinie mentionethPlin. l. 6. c 18. the Elamitae, on the South next to the Sea, which name IeromeHieron. in Es. 13. Xenophon. in his dayes gaue to one of that Nation, frater quidam Elamita, etc. Xenophon also nameth the Tribe of the Elamites. Moses telleth of the raigne and power of Chederlaomer King of Elam,Gen 14. in that morning of the world extended to the borders of Canaan.Herodot. li. 7. Herodot. reports, that they  were called of the Greekes Cephenes; of the neighbouri^g Nations, Artaei. SuidasSuidas in verb. Magog. affirmes, that they were called of the Inhabitants Magog and Magusaei. Other names are by OrteliusOrtelij Theat. and Thesaurus. added, Chorsori, Achaemenij, Panchaia, etc. It was called Persia of Persaeus the sonne of Danae, or of Perses the sonne of Andromeda; or (as others) of Perses the sonne of Medaea.

@. I. Of the beginning of the Persian Monarchie by CYRVS.
FRom the time of Chedorlaomer, whom Abram with his houshold-armie ouerthrew,  vntill the time of Cyrus, little mention is made of them, hee freed them from the Median seruitude, and erected first that mightie Persian Monarchie. BizarusP. Biza^. Historia rerum Persicarum. Christ. Pezel. mellific. histori. pars 1. (which hath written twelue bookes of the Persian affaires) supposeth that in that time of their subiection to the Assyrians and Medes, they had Gouernours, and Lawes; of their owne: onely owing a tributary subiection to the other, as their supreme Lords. This hee collecteth out of Xenophon. Cyrus was by name foretold by EsayEsa. 44.28., and the re-building of Ierusalem and the Temple, by his authoritie, before that Babylonian Monarchie was erected which destroyed them. GOD after reuealed to Nebuchadnezzar and Daniel by dreames, this Persian both rising and fall. And by dreames did he make way vnto the  effecting of his decree; as appeareth in Herodotus, Iustine and others. For AstyagesHerodot. l. 1. Iustin. lib. 1. dreaming that hee saw a Vine growing on the wombe of his daughter Mandane, which couered all Asia (interpreted by his Wizards, of the subuersion of his Kingdome by his daughters future issue) married her, as before is said, to Cambyses, a Persian, descended of the stocke of Perseus sonne of Iupiter, and Danae, and the sonne of Achaemenes,Of this family and o^her of the Persians, see Remeccius, tom. 1. so that in that remote Region, meanes might faile vnto any aspiring designes. The Chaldaeans report, as Alphaeus recordeth out of Megasthenes, that Nabuchodonosor hauing conquered all Libya, and Asia, as farre as Armenia, at his returne rauished with diuine fury, cryed out, That a Persian Mule should come and subdue the Babylonians. This agrees some what both with the dreame, and the madnesse recorded of that King by Daniel, Chap. 2. and 4. The Oracle of Delphos made  like answere to Croesus, That the Lydians should then flee, when a Mule should gouerne the Medes. He was termed a Mule,Christ Pezel. Mellif. histor. p. 15. 1. because of his more noble parentage by the mother, then
 the father, and their diuersitie of Nation. StraboStrab. lib. 15. thinkes he was called Cyrus of a Riuer in Persia, being before called Agradatus. PlutarchPlutarch. in v^ta Artaxerxit. saith, hee was called Cyrus of the Sunne, which with the Persians hath that name. PolyoenusPolyoenus l. 8. strat. calleth his wife Nitetis, daughter of Aprias King of Egypt. Suidas saith it was Bardane, and that shee was daughter of Cyaxares, otherwise called Darius Medus. Hee conquered the Median Empire first; and after added two other, theA. M. 3402. Lydian and3409. Caluis. Babylonian. Croesus the Lydian consulting with the Oracle about the successe of his warre, receiued answere:
(...),
That is,
Croesus passing Haile, great state shall make to fall.
This he interpreted of the ouerthrow of Cyrus, but proued it in himselfe; Croesus his sonne had beene mute, till (now seeing the sword of his enemy readie to giue the fatall stroke vnto his father) violence of sudden passion brake open those barres, and stops which Nature had set before as impediments to his speech, and by his first most fortunate-vnfortunate language, cried to the bloudie Souldiers to spare hisGreat were the Treasures which Cyrus gate in his warres; but his expenses in his daily diet (engrauen in a Pillar, which Alexander caused to be razed) seeme incredible: the particulars whereof, see in Polyaen. lib. 4. and Opmeerus. pag. 105. father. After his many great exploits, hee warred vpon Thamyris the Scythian Queene, where he lost his life. I know not how, Diuine Prouidence seemeth to haue set those Scythian stints to the Persian proceedings; those great Monarches, both in the elder, and our later world, euer finding those Northerne windes crossing,  and in some dismall successe prohibiting their ambition that way.
Cyrus was of so firme memory, that hee could call all the souldiers (some say, but all that had any place of command) by their proper names. He ordained, that his souldiers should in the first ioyning with the enemy sing certaine Hymnes to Castor and Pollux, that by this meanes they should not bee surprised with sudden feare. He gaue leaue to the Iewes to returne and re-people their Countrey, and to re-build the Temple.Scalig. Caluisius. Alij. A. M. 3421. Ezra 1.2. Scal. Proleg. ad Em. T. ed. vlt. and in not. Frag. Dan. 5.28. A.M. 3419. Ezra calleth this the first yeere of Cyrus; not the first of his reigne, but of his Easterne Monarchie, as in his Edict himselfe proclaimeth; The Lord GOD of Heauen hath giuen mee all the Kingdomes of the Earth. For after he had ouercome Darius Medus (whom Berosus calleth Nabonnidus) in battell, and forced him to keepe himselfe in Borsippa: hee besieged and obtained Babylon,  where spending some time for the setling of his affaires, he after that forced Darius to yeeld; and returning to Babylon, made a conquest of Susiana. All which atchieued, the ninth yeere after the taking of Babylon, the seuentieth of the Iewish Captiuitie, the nine and twentieth of his raigne, and the first of that his Babylonian Empire, hee made the decree aboue mentioned, and dyed the second yeere after. It is probable also, that the Persians who held Cyrus in such veneration, began their Aera, or new Computation, from this time of his setled Empire: an honour giuen after by the Easterne world to Alexander in like manner. The Babylonian Kingdome was thus diuided and giuen to the Medes and Persians; first to Darius, by bloud and descent a Mede, and after, by conquest to Cyrus a Persian.
We haue large Fragments of Ctesias (who was present in the battell betweene Artaxerxes  and Cyrus, as was Xenophon also,Xen. de exped. Cyri. Iun. who hath written the same at large) collected and reserued by Photius, who saith, hee had read foure and twentie Bookes of this Ctesias his Persica, in which hee much differeth from the reports of Herodotus; professing,Phot. Bibliothec. 72. that hee had either seene those things which hee writeth, or receiued them of the Persians themselues. He affirmeth that Astygas (so he calleth Astyages) was nothing of kinne to Cyrus, but being by him conquered, was first imprisoned, and after inlarged, and kindly intreated; Cyrus taking his daughter Amytis (her husband Spytama being slaine) to his wife. He subdued the Bactrians, and tooke Amorges King of the Sacae prisoner. But his wife Sparethra with an Army of three hundred thousand men, and two hundred thousand women, came against Cyrus, and  taking him and Parmyses the brother of Amytis prisoners, in exchange of them redeemed her husband Amorges, after this helped Cyrus in his warres against Croesus, who (the Citie being taken, and his sonne, which had beene giuen in hostage, slaine before his face) fled vnto Apollos Temple, whence by Magicall illusions he made an escape; and being taken againe and bound faster, his bands with thunder and lightning were loosed, whereupon Cyrus freed him, and gaue him the Citie Barene, neere to Ecbatana. Cyrus after that warred against the Derbices, who by the helpe of the Indians and Elephants, ouerthrew Cyrus, who receiued there a wound by an Indian, whereof hee three dayes afterwards died. But by helpe of Amorges the Derbices were ouercome, and their King Amoraeus slaine with his two sonnes. Cyrus before his death made Cambyses his eldest sonne his heire, and Tanyoxarces his younger,  Lord of the Bactrians, Choramnians and Parthians, and set Spytades sonne of Spytama ouer the Derbices. He reigned thirtie yeeres.



@. II. Of the succession of CYRVS: and of CAMBYSES.
CAMBYSES (Ctesias addeth in his twelfth Booke) sent his fathers bodie into Persia. He warred vpon Egypt, and sent Amyrtaeus the King with sixe thousand Egyptians Captiues into Susa, hauing slaine fiftie thousand Egyptians, and lost seuen thousand and two Persians. In the meane time Sphendadates one of the Magi, being corrected by Tanyoxarees for some offence, accused him to Cambyses his brother, who  caused him to die with a draught of Buls bloud, deceiuing his mother and his brothers followers, as if hee had put the Magus to death for that slander. And so neerely did they resemble each other, that Sphendadates was sent to the Bactrians, where fiue yeeres after, the mysterie of this iniquitie was detected by Tybetheus an Eunuch (by him chastened) vnto Amitis, who, when shee could not obtaine him of Cambyses to punishment, poysoned her selfe. Cambyses after hee had reigned eighteene yeeres, died at Babylon of a wound which he had receiued in his thigh, by whitling a sticke to passe away the time, hauing receiued before direfull presages of this disaster, in his sacrifice not bleeding, and Roxane bringing him forth a sonne without a head. Bagapates, and Artasyras his chiefe Eunuches procured the Kingdome  to the Magus, reigning with the name of Tanyoxarces, till Ixabates detected him, who fleeing into a Temple was drawne thence and slaine. But seuen chiefe men, Onophas, Idernes, Norodabates, Mardonius, Barises, Ataphernes, and Darius sonne of Hystaspes, conspired against the Magus, and by the helpe of Artasyras and Bagapates, slew him in his bed-chamber, hauing reigned seuen moneths, ordaining the solemne festiuall Magaphonia in remembrance thereof. Darius being mounted to the Throne by the neighing of his Horse (as these Princes had before agreed) built him a Sepulchre in his life time, in a Hill; which when hee would haue seene, the Chaldaeans forbade him, and his parents curious of that sight, were let downe by the Priests with ropes: but they terrified by the sudden sight of Serpents, let goe their hold, and Darius for that losse of his parents slaine in the fall, cut off the heads of the  Priests, in number fortie. He marched with eight hundred thousand men into Europe against the Scythians; but returning with losse, dyed after hee had reigned one and thirtie yeeres.
Plutarch in the life of Artaxerxes accuseth Ctesias of absurd fables. etc.But before we follow Ctesias any further, let vs see what the common report by Herodotus and others hath deliuered of these proceedings: and let the iudicious Reader chuse whom hee wil embrace. Scaliger and others, rather follow Herodotus, who relateth of Cambyses, that succeeding his father, hee tooke, and after slew Psammenitus King of Egypt. And when hee would haue added AethiopiaHerodot. l. 3. to his new Conquests, with the spoiles of the Temple of Ammon, for which purposes he sent two Armies; the one was almost consumed with famine, the beasts and prouisions failing, and that barren desart denying grasse; the remainder by consuming one another, were (a strange remedie) preserued from consumption,  euery tenth man being by lot tythed to the shambles, and more returning to their fellowes mawes, then on their owne legs. The other Armie was quite buryed in the sands. At his returne, finding the Egyptians solemnizing the feast of their Idoll Apis, hee slew the same (it was a Bull which they worshipped:) and after dreaming that Sm^rdis reigned, hee sent, and slew his brother which was so called, in vaine seeking to frustrate this presage, which was fulfilled in another of that name. He fell in loue with his sister; and asking whether it were lawfull for him to marry her, the Iudges (whose authoritie with the Persians lasted with their liues) answered, that they had no such law, but they had another, that the King of Persia might doe what him liked; whereupon hee marryed her. His crueltie appeared, in that Prexaspes presuming to admonish him of his too much inclination to drunkennesse, he answered,Seneca de Ira, l. 3. c. 14. he should see proofe of the contrary, and presently sending for Prexaspes his sonne,  with an arrow shot him to the heart: the father not daring but to commend his steadie hand and Art in shooting. He dyed of his owne sword, which falling out of his scabberd as hee mounted his horse, killed him, not fearing in this Countrey of Syria any such disaduenture, because the Oracle of LatonaBizar. l. 1. in Egypt had told him he should dye at Ecbatana; which he vnderstood of Media, and was fulfilled at another Ecbatana (more obscure) in Syria. Hee caused a Iudge, which had beene corrupted with money, to be flayed, and made of his skin a couering for the Tribunall. Polyoenus tels, That against the Egyptians hee vsed this stratageme; to set the gods (dogs, cats, sheepe, etc.) in the fore-front of his battell. He neither deserued nor obtained that honourable funerall which Cyrus had, who was buryed at Pasargadae, a Tower shadowed with trees, hauing in the vpper part a Chappell furnished with  a bed of gold, a table, cups, and vessells of the same metall, with store of garments and furniture, set with iewells. Certain Magi were appointed to attend it, with daily allowance of a
 sheepe, and once a moneth a horse for sacrifice. His Epitaph was, O man, I am CYRVS, King of Asia, Founder of the Persian Empire; therefore enuy me not a Sepulchre. Alexander opened the same in hope of gold, but found nothing, sauing a rotten shield, a sword, and two Scythian bowes: he crowned it with gold, and couering it with his owne apparell, departed. These thingsStrab. 15. Arrian. 6. Curtius. l. 9. Strabo, Arrianus, and Curtius report.


@. III. Of the succeeding Monarchs vntill ALEXANDERS Conquest.
NExt to3428. Cambyses succeeded, for a small time, one Smerdis, which was slaine as an Vsurper, by the seuen Princes; and3429. Darius, the sonne of Hystaspes, succeeded, designed to that greatnesse by the first neighing of his horse. For when no male issue Royall was left, these Princes agreed, That meeting in a place appointed, he whose horse first neighed, should be acknowledged Emperor. Darius his horse-keeper, the night before, had suffered his horse there to vse his brutish lust with a Mare; which the place presently causing him to remember, he there (by his lustfull neighing) aduanced his Master to the Scepter. Darius for his couetousnesse (first exacting tribute) was called a Merchant, Cambyses a Lord, Cyrus a Father of his people. Babylon rebelled, and was3436. recouered by the  costly stratagem of ZopyrusIustin. l. 2. Plutarch. in Apophtheg., who cut off his nose and eares, and fleeing in that deformed plight to the Babylonians, accused Darius of that crueltie. (Ctesias telleth this of Megaby^us.) They beleeuing, entertained him, and knowing his Nobilitie and Prowesse, committed their Citie to his fidelitie, which he vpon the next opportunitie betraied to his Master. Darius warred against the Scythians, but vnfortunately. His Army was of 700000. men. After Darius his death, Xerxes3466. Scal. Animad. in Euseb. pag. 101. reigned; whom Scaliger proueth to bee Assuerus, the husband of Esther. This Esther is by some thought to be Amestris, whom the Ethnike writers blame for crueltie: moued haply thereto by the execution committed vpon Haman, and the Iewish enemies in the booke of Esther related. They adde (perhaps in slander and hatred) that shee  killed fourteene children in one bloudie vow, and other things which I will not rehearse; but returne to Xerxes.
He made league with the Carthaginians, warred vpon the Grecians with an Armie (as HerodotusHerodot. l. 7. numbreth) of 1700000. foot-men, 80000. horse-men, 20000. Chariot-men: Others say, That there were 2317000. foot-men in land-forces, besides 1208. ships. Ctesias hath only 800000. men, besides Chariots, and 1000. sayle of ships. Before the Army was drawne the sacred Chariot of Iupiter, by eight white horses; no mortall man might ascend the Seat. Hee offered to Minerua at Troy 1000. oxen. He, taking view of his huge Army, wept, in thinking, that of all that number in a hundred yeeres none would be aliue. At the passing of the Hellespontike straits, he (besides other deuotions performed) at the Sun-rising took a golden Viall  full of sacred liquor, and cast the same into the Sea, with a golden Bowle and a Persian Sword; vncertaine whether in honour of the Sun, or in satisfaction to the angry Hellespont, which a little before, in more then madde arrogance, he had caused to be whipped, and hurled fetters therein, with many menacing threats. Hee wrote letters with like threatnings to Mount Athos, and accordingly pierced his bowells, and made way by force thorow that high and huge Mountaine. This Expedition was in the yeere of the World 3470. Leonides, with his Spartans, enlarged his glory at the Thermopylaean straitsXerxes sent first 15000. after 20000. and lastly 50000. choyce men against them, which all had the worse: till a Traytor taught Xerxes another way where to passe and come vpon their backs: and then Leonides in the night entred the Persian Campe, and slew 20000. with his 500. men, which were killed being wearie with killing., or narrow passage, which a long time, with a handfull of men, hindred the Persians from passing. Mardonius was slaine, and Xerxes fled out of Greece, after hee had taken Athens, and lost great part of his Army, which  in two yeeres space receiued fiue ouerthrowes, at Thermopylae, at Artemisium, at Salamis, at Plataeae, at Mycale. Xerxes being slaine of Artabanus his kinsman, A. M. 3485. Artaxerxes succeeded, in whose time Egypt rebelled, helped therein by Inarus and the Grecians.
Among other the mad parts of Xerxes, it is reported, That he fell in loue with aAelian. Var. Hist. l. 1. Plane tree in Lydie, which hee adorned with chaines and costly furniture, and appointed a Guardian thereto. Artaxerxes writ to Hystanes, Gouernour of Hellespontus, That hee should giue Hippocrates Cous (who then liued, and whose writings still remaine the Physicians Oracles) as much gold and other things as hee would, and send him vnto him. In his time the Egyptians rebelled, and created Inarus their King, to whom the Athenians sent three hundred Gallies for defence; but by Artabazus and Megabyzus they were subdued. Artaxerxes  dyed, An. M. 3525.
After this Artaxerxes, surnamed Long-hand, another Xerxes succeeded and reigned a small time, as did also Sogdianus, or Ogdianus, or (so Ctesias calleth him) Secyndianus, whom Darius Nothus slew, and possessed the Throne. Ctesias nameth him Ochus, and saith that hee
 changed his name to Dariaeus. In the time of this King was the Peloponnesian Warre, which Thucydides hath related. Artaxerxes Mnemon his sonne succeeded, An. M. 3545. He slew his brother Cyrus; Ctesias was there present with Artaxerxes, whom hee cured of a wound giuen him on the brest by Cyrus, with whom was then present and partaker, that great Philosopher, Captaine, and Historian hereof Xenophon. Artaxerxes was a name giuen (as some write) to all the Persian Kings: it signifieth a great Warrior, as Brisson and Drusius obserue. This Mnemon reigned fortie yeeres. After his death succeeded Ochus, and reigned three and twentie yeeres. Next to him was Arses, or Arsames; and last of all Darius, whom Alexander ouerthrew the second time at Arbela, An. M. 3619. and conquered that Persian Monarchy to the Macedonians. Of the Macedonian successors of Alexander (so much as concerneth this  place) is before handled in our Syrian relation. They were depriued of these parts by Arsaces, of whom and all his Parthian followers, euen now ye haue read in the Chapters of Parthia.


@. IIII. Of the Persian Chronologie.
COncerning these Persian Kings, Chronologers (after their wont) differ not a little. MasterLiuely his Chronologie of the Persian Monarchie. Liuely hath taken great paines in this Argument; besides the painefull  labours of Scaliger, Iunius, and many others, both Rabbins, and Greekes, and Latines, in whose streames Elephants may swim, and the greatest Students may finde enough to busie their studious braines: for mee, it is sufficient to taste, or at least to enter so farre as a Lambe may safely wade, without perill of drowning. The Hebrewes, through ignorance of the Olympiades, and humane Authors (where they are destitute of their owne) are most absurd, someAben. Ezra. reckoning but foure Persian Kings in all, till Alexanders time: some accountRab. Moses. fiue: and someR. Sadiab and Abr. Dauison. three. Against these, Pererius and TemporariusTemporar. l. 3. most sharpely (and not vnworthily) enueigh, as also against theirSeder Olam Rabba, Sedar Olam Zota, Historicall Cabala. See l. 2. c. 3. Chronicles, which ascribe to the Persians, from the first yeere of Darius the Mede, but two and fiftie yeeres. Iosephus better seene in Ethnike Authors dissenteth from them. As for Metasthenes of Annius, wee haue before  shewed him to be counterfeit, and the rest of his brethren, to bee either the bastards of Annius, or Changelings, which hee hath nursed, and would father vpon those Authors, whose names they beare. ViuesL. Viues, in prooem. l. 18. de Ciuit. Dei. calls them Portentosa, and vel solo auditu horrenda; monstrous reports, dregs, friuolous pamphlets of vncertaine Authors; which, if any bee in loue with, hee may enioy without him his corriuall.Gorop. B^cceselan. Goropius bestowes much paines in the vncasing of them; and learned menMercator. Ios. Scaliger, Volaterranus, Pererius, Temporarius, etc. doe now generall distaste them. IosephusIoseph. contra Ap. lib. 1. cites Megasthenes in quarto Indicorum, the fourth Booke of his Indian Historie; from whence Petrus Comestor alledgeth the same testimonie, with deprauing the word Indicorum, and making it Iudiciorum. Annius addes, not onely the corrupting of the name Metasthenes for Megasthenes, but a Historie vnder hisMetasthenes Annij. name, de Iudicio Temporum and Annalium Persicorum, wherein no maruell if hee proceed  in the Storie, as he began in the Title. BeroaldusBeroaldi Chron. l. 3. Vid. Reinec. p. 2. D. Angelo. Chrono. l. 1. etc. in the Persian Chronologie faineth diuers names to the Persian Kings; as Assuerus, Artaxerxes, Darius Assyrius, Artaxerxes Pius. Liuely, and other moderne Writers out of the Greeke Olympiads and Histories, haue giuen truer account of the Persian Times and Gouernment, beginning with the fiue and fiftieth Olympiad, and continuing the same to the third yeere of the hundred and twelfth.
Scaliger and Caluisius (as you haue seene before) doe a little differ from this account of Master Liuely, which he liuely proueth by conference of other Histories, both Humane and Ecclesiasticall, Clemens, Eusebius, Herodotus, Diodorus, Polybius, Xenophon, Thucydides, Dionysius, Halicarnassaeus, Liuie, and others. As much adoe is made about the beginning and ending of Daniels weekes, and the time of the building and finishing the second Temple, both which are much illustrated by the right knowledge of the Persian Chronologie.Iun. Annot. in Dan. 9. Iunius,  LiuelyLiuely his Chronnlogie., and some others begin the account of the threescore and ten weekes, and reckon the building of the second Temple, in the second yeere of Darius NothusOlymp. 89. An. 3., to whose reasons I referre the Reader, and returne to our Persian affaires. How this Persian Empire agreed to the dreame of Nabuchodonosor, and the visions of Daniel; BroughtonBrought. Concent. Eliae. Reusneri Isag. hist. l. 2., Reusnerus, and others haue written; it were too tedious here to relate. Artaxerxes (others call him, perhaps more truely, Artaxares) recouered the Persian Name and Empire fiue hundred thirtie eight yeeres, as Bizarus, Lib. 4. reckoneth, after Alexander the Great had extinguished them, and in the yeere of our Lord 230. Others say it was in the yeere of Christ 233. and in the yeere of the World 4182. and 563. after Alexanders Conquest: others otherwise. The Catalogue ofOf this later P^rsian Dynastie, See Agathias, Bizarus, Pezelius, and Lampadius in Mellificio Hist. part. 2. and 3 Cedrenus and Zonaras, An. l. 3. etc. the  Persian Kings in that their second Dynastie, you may reade before, Lib. 1. c. 13. But for better satisfaction of the Reader, we will here present a short view of their Historie.



@. V. Of the second Persian Dynastie.
ARTAXARESArtaxares. being a man of hautie spirit, fought three battells with Artabanus the Parthian, and at the third time depriued him of life and Scepter together. Hee proceeded to subdue the neighbouring Barbarians; and passing ouer Tygris, disturbed the Romane Prouince of Mesopotamia, deuouring in hope, and threatning in termes, all those Asian Prouinces, sometimes subiect to the Persians, before the Macedonian  deluge. Alexander Seuerus (sonne of Mammea) the Emperour writ to him, to stay his course: But Pikes, not Pens, were like to preuaile with Artaxares, who brought into the field seuen hundred Elephants, and eighteene hundred Chariots, and many thousands of Horse-men, but with much bloud-shed was forced to leaue the honor of the day to the Romanes. Herodianus seemeth to write harder fortunes of the Romans in this warre. But Lampridius, Eutropius, Orosius, and Zosimus write, That Seuerus obtained the victory, and tooke Ctesiphon and Babylon, and subdued also Arabia. AgathiasAgathias. l. 2. affirmeth, That Artaxares was called Magus.
Valerianus was ouer-throwne by Sapores,Sapores. the successor of Artaxares, in Mesopotamia, and there taken, and was made a foot-stoole for Sapores, on whose necke he vsed to tread, when he  tooke horse; and at last was flayed aliue, and sprinkled with salt. Zosimus saith, That he was treacherously taken at a meeting for conference: and Trebellius Pollio ascribeth it to the treason of his guide. This cruell Tyrant afflicted the Roman Prouinces, to Cilicia and Cappadocia, filling with dead bodies the broken spaces betweene the Hils, feeding (as it were) those deformed gaping iawes with cruell banquets of mans flesh. Odenatus Palmirinus brought some light to the Romans in this darkened and dreadfull Eclipse of their Sun, and recouered the Roman Territories. His wife Zenobia after his death, like another Semiramis, proued a fortunate Generall and Warrior against the Persians, and also against the Romans, from whom  she withheld Syria, til Valerius Aurelianus carried her to Rome, being by vnexpected accident surprised. As for Valerianus, it was the iust iudgement of God for his cruell persecution of the Christians, whom he had at first fauoured, till one of the Egyptian Priests had perswaded him to this, and other wickednesse, as humane sacrifices, and such like. Euseb. l. 7. c. 9. He was taken of Sapores, An. Dom. 260. after Caluisius computation. Buntingus hath two yeeres lesse.
In the time of Probus the Persians sued for peace, and obtained it; he procuring such peace in the East (saith Vopiscus) that a rebellious Mouse was not heard to peepe. Carus his successor warred against the Persians, and hauing entred their Country as farre as Ctesiphon, was slain with a Thunder-bolt (no Roman Emperour, by, I know not what secret destinie, from the time of Crassus, passing those parts, without vnfortunate successe.) This was An. Dom. 283.
Diocletian sent Galerius against Narses the Persian, sonne to Varranes, or Varaaranes, the  second: (for after Sapores, Hormisda his sonne had reigned a yeere; Varranes the first, three yeeres; Varranes the second, sixteene; and a third of that name onely foure moneths, as Agathias reckoneth.) But not farre from Carrhae (fatall to the Romans) Galerius Caesar lostOros. and Pom. Latus, A.D. 296 almost all his Armie, and therefore found homely welcome at his returne, Diocletian suffering him to lacquey (in his purple Robes) some miles after his Chariot. Indignation supplying his former defects, he recouered his credit with the ouer-throw of the Persians; Narses fled, leauing his wiues, sisters, and children to the Conqueror. A league was made, with returne of Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria to the Romans.
Misdates the Persian, began his reigne An. Dom. 301. To him An. 309. succeeded his sonne Sapores,Sapores 2. and reigned (which I think was neuer read of any) longer then he liued in view of the World, beginning his reigne before his birth, which he continued threescore and ten  yeeres. For MisdatesAgathias. l. 4. dying without issue male, and leauing his wife great with child, the Princes consulted with the Magi, whether this future birth would bee male; which they affirmed, obseruing their predictions by a Mare, then ready to foale; and the Princes set on the Crowne, or Royall Ensigne, on the mothers belly, acknowledging him for their King. This Sapores, in a letter to Constantius the Emperour, intituled himselfe King of Kings, partaker of the Starres, brother of the Sunne and Moone: he demanded all that had before belonged to the Persians, to bee restored. Betwixt them grew a bloudie warre, as Ammianus relateth. Sapores tooke Singara and Bezabde, An. Dom. 359. but was repelled into Persia by Constantius. Iulian his successor seeking to subdue the Persian, lost himselfe. The best part of himselfe  he had lost before in Apostasie, which plucked this destruction vpon him, An. 362. It is vncertain whether diuine or humane hand executed this iustice on him. Iouinian was presently saluted Emperor, but forced to agree on dishonourable conditions with the Persians, leauing the Rabdicens, Carduens, Rhesens, Zalens, and Nisibis to the Persian Dominion. And a
 little of^er, in the reigne of Valens, the league was broken by Sapores, who wonne Ctesiphon: Valens intending this war, was by the Gothes ouerthrowne, and burnt aliue, before he could effect any thing, An. 377. When Theodosius reigned, the peace was renewed.
After Sapores succeeded Artaxerxes; and after him Sapores his sonne, both which reigned nine yeeres. Then followed Varanes Cermasat eleuen yeeres, to whom succeededA 400. Bunt. Isdigertes. Isdigertes, who held peace with the Romans. Procopius writes, That Arcadius the Emperour on his death-bed, Ann. 407. ordained in his last Will, this Isdigertes the Tutor and Protector to his sonne and heire Theodosius, which he faithfully performed. Agathias also acknowledgeth it a currant report.Niceph. Callist. lib. 14. cap. 18. Maruthas was in credit with this King. Hee was a Christian Bishop, and by his prayers had cured him of a grieuous sicknesse, which the Magi with their Fierie superstition,  and all their labour, could not effect. The Magi conspiring against Maruthas, watched opportunitie, that when the King should come (after the Persian wont) to worship the Fire, a man (whom they had hidden before within the earth for that purpose) cried aloud, That the King should goe forth, as being accounted of their god impious, who so loued a Christian Bishop. Hereupon the King bethought him of sending him away. But Maruthas suspecting the knauerie, counselled the King to cause the earth to be didded vp; for the Fire, saith hee, cannot speake. The King going into the Chappell or Sanctuarie, and hearing this voyce againe, followed Maruthas his counsell, and found out their packing, and punished the authors, allowing Maruthas to build a Church, wheresoeuer hee pleased in  Persia. And whiles the Magi yet added to their treacheries, he not onely punished their persons, but distasted their Religion, and purposed to become a Christian, but by death was preuented, which happened An. 421. Varanes or Vararanes his sonne, followed not his steps, but both brake league with the Romans, and persecuted the Christians. Narses his Generall, with his forces, were defeated, Azamaea wasted, Nisibis besieged by the Imperialls: The Saracens, which ayded the Persian, stricken with a strange furie and amazement, drowned themselues in Euphrates. It is said, a hundred thousand men perished. Theodosius then Emperour, knew these things by PalladiusSocrat. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 19., who in three dayes did ride from Constantinople hither, and backe againe in as many, vsing to flie in this manner to any the remotest parts of the Empire, with such admirable, and almost miraculous expedition; with his celeritie  making that spacious Empire seeme but narrow and strait. Vararanes sent an Armie of those expert Souldiers which were among them, for their excellencie, called Immortall, but the Roman swords soone proued them mortall. Thus succeeded that Warre which he had begun, for despight to the Christian Religion and profession. He was forced to seeke peace, and ended or mitigated his persecution. To him succeeded, Ann. 441. another Izdigerdes, who reigned seuenteene yeeres; and after him Perozes, who reigned foure and twentie yeeres: after him, his brother Obalas (Bizarus calls him Bleses) ruled foure yeeres. Cabades his successour renewed the Warres with the Romans: and no maruell, for hee was cruell to his owne people, and warred euen against Nature: for hee ordained (as some report) That women should be common, any wedlock-bands notwithstanding. Whereupon his Nobles conspired  against him, depriued and imprisoned him. Bleses was enthronized (Scaliger hath Zamaspes) who foure yeeres after resigned the State vnto Cabades againe, who hauing before reigned eleuen yeeres, added thereto thirtie more. NecephorusNiceph. Callist. l. 16. c. 36. Cearenus, Zouar. An. l. 3. tells, That hee became friend to the Christians, and permitted free libertie of that Religion vpon this occasion. Betweene Persia and India was a Castle, called Tzundadaer, wherein Cabades had heard, that much money and iewells were kept. Cabades vsed all meanes to obtaine it, but in vaine; so strongly was it (as the Storie saith) garded with Deuills. Hee therefore vsed all the Persian Exorcismes to dispossesse them; and when they preuailed not, he sought to effect it by the Iewes, but with the former successe. At last hee made vse of the Christians, who expelled the spirits, and deliuered the Castle vnto him.
It is reported, that he slew Zeliobes, King of the Hunnes, for playing on both hands, and  comming to helpe him in his Warres against the Romans, hauing before sworne to assist the Emperour. About these times were the ManicheesManes, first Author of his Heresie, was flayed aliue, and east to the Dogs Niceph. lib. 6. cap. 22. destroyed in Persia, for corrupting his sonne Phatuarsa with their infectious leauen. He therefore slew their chiefe Prelate Indagarus, and many thousand Manichees, all in one day, hauing assembled them with a wile, professing, that he would make that his sonne King. He assembled also the chiefe of the Magi, Glonazes; and Boazanes a Christian Bishop, for the greater solemnitie, with like deuotion as Iehu sacrificed to Baal, with the presence and assistance of Iehonadab, 2. Kings 10. Caluisius saith this was done An. 523. Cabades dyed, An. 531.
His sonne CosroesCosroes. the Great succeeded, and reigned eight and fortie yeeres. Hee about the thirteenth yeere of Iustinians Empire, An. 539. inuaded the Roman Dominions, tooke  Surus, burnt Berraea, destroyed Antiochia, and with lesse successe besieged Edessa. Agathias preferreth this Cosroes for his great exploits before Cyrus and Xerxes. Yet was his end
 ignoble, and vnworthy his high spirit. For Mauritius in the time of Tiber^is, entred into the Persian Dominions, and burnt some Villages neere to the place where Cosroes then was for his recreation, and saw this burning spectacle: wherewith Indignation and Griefe mustering greater multitudes of fearefull, vnquiet, enraged thoughts in his heart, then Mauritius had Souldiers in his Armie, vnable to beare such vnwonted sights of hostile flames in his Countries, and such vnwonted fights of inward perturbations, euen greatnesse of spirit made way to Pusillanimitie, and being weakned with colluctation of contrary passions, a feauer, taking that occasion and aduantage, apprehends him, and soone after kills him.
Some say, his sonne Ormisda reigned seuen yeeres with his father.Simocatta Hist. Maur. l. 3. c. 16. Hee succeeded and  reigned eight yeeres. Hee was exceeding cruell, by reason of a prophecie that his subiects should dispossesse him, which caused him to dispossesse thousands of them of their liues: and made him so odious, that they easily after apprehended the occasion to fulfill that subtill deuillish Oracle. Against him Mauritius performed worthy attempts, which made way vnto him for the Romane Empire. And then also hee had good successe against the Persians, by the valour of Philippicus his Generall: insomuch, that the Persians moued with these and other discontents, by incitement of Varamus, deposed Ormisda, killed his wife and sonne before his eyes; which hauing remained to performed vnto him that their last, vncouth, vnnaturall seruice, were presently after put out, with burning needles thrust into them; himselfe first imprisoned, and after beaten to death with clubs, by Cosroes his sonne. That Varamus  had, a little before, beene sent as Generall against the Roman Armie: which his seruice being found vnseruiceable, and the Romans preuayling, he was not onely depriued of his place; but, to his further disgrace, was, by the Kings commandement,Simocat. l. 3. c. 8. and l. 4. c. 3. clothed in womans attyre: which indignities he repayed, not in words alone (in his letters stiling Ormisda, The Daughter of Cosr^es) but with those vnnaturall and disloyall practises: which hee continued also against Cosroes, sonne and heire of Ormisda, forcing him to flee to Mauritius the Emperour for succour. For Varamus did not approue his succession, but writ vnto him to relinquish his royaltie, for feare of succeeding in his fathers fortunes. In that letter he stileth himselfe,Simoc. l. 4. c. 7, 8. Friend of the Gods, Enemy of Tyrants, Wise, Religious, Vnblameable, Happy, Prouident, etc. CHOSROES giueth him an answere, wherein he thus writeth, CHOSROES King of Kings, Lord of Lords,  Ruler of Nations, Prince of Peace, Saluation of men, amongst the gods a man good and eternall, amongst men a god most Illustrious, most glorious Conquerour, rising with the Sunne, giuing eyes (Starres) to the night, Noble from his ancestrie, etc. But for all these great Titles, he was compelled to flee, as is said, and write in a lower stile to Mauritius.
Theophilactus Simocatta, speaking of the Abares, a Scythian Nation dwelling neere Ister,Simoc. hist. Mauric. l. 1. c. 3. and 8. saith, that they were descended of the Hunnes, and that Bocolabras (which word signifieth one that is a Priest and Magus, for their Priests were their Diuiners) hauing offended Chagan, the Prince of these Abates, fled vnto their originall Nation, dwelling in the East, neere to the Persians, commonly called Turkes. This I mention to shew the Turkish originall,Turcomannia. and their common descent with the Hunnes (with whose posteritie in Hungarie they now hold such  continuall dissentions) by the testimonie of an Author, which writ his Historie a thousand yeeres since. In his third Booke and sixth Chapter, hee saith, the Hunnes which dwell in the North-East, whom the Persians called Turkes, were subdued by King Hormisdas; and whereas before the Persians had vsed to pay them fortie thousand pieces of gold to buy their peace, they now forced these Hunnes to pay so much for tribute to the Persians. The Persian Gold bred such surquedrie and excesse amongst the Turkes, that they had their Beds, Tables, Horse-furniture and Armours of solide Gold: which prodigalitie made them couetous, and to demand larger contribution from the Persians; hence arose those warres and that thraldome of the Turkish Nation. This Author, first of all other to my knowledge,  mentioneth the Turkish warres, which since haue yeelded matter for Authors more then enough.
These Turkes areBizari hist. Pers. lib. 5. Simocat. lib. 5. cap. 10. said to helpe Varamus in his rebellion; but both hee and they receiued discomfiture by Narses the Roman Generall, and sixe thousand were taken and slaine. The Turkes being asked why they helped Varamus, answered, That they were forced thereto by famine: they were also marked with a Black Crosse, which (they said) they learned of the Christians, thereby to expell hunger. Cosroes thus recouered the Kingdome by aide of the Empire, which Varamus had vsurped to himselfe.
HeeNiceph. l. 17. and 18. ex Simocat. lib. 5. c. 15. was deepely seene in the Chaldaean mysteries, and being by a Roman Gouernour reproued for some excesse, in those times when he so much needed their helpe: he answered,  That the times did aduantage him to those reproofes: but know (saith hee) that calamities shall also befall the Romans, and the Babylonian Nation shall rule them three weekes of yeeres. After that, in the fifth weeke, the Romans shall subdue the Persians: which being come to passe, a day shall come that shall haue no night, and the expected end of the Empire
 shall be at hand; in which time corruption shall be abolished, and men shall liue according to Diuine Ordinance. This, either false or vncertaine prophecie (according to that Deepenesse of Satan) he vttered, but what effect answerable hath followed, I know not.Simocat. l. 8. c. 1. In his time the Saracens, confederate with the Romans, spoyled the Countries of Babylonia.
This Cosroes reigned nine and thirtie yeeres. He held peace with the Romans whiles Mauritius liued; but when Phocas cruelly and trecherously had slaine him, a world of euills at once assaulted the Empire. The Germans, Gaules, Italians, Hunnes, and Persians, by their Armies afflicted the publike State; and the Roman Bishop then began to aspire to an vniuersall Souereigntie, which that Murtherer first entituled him vnto. That Armie which was yet ted with the bloud of Mauritius, by the Persians sword was punished, and died in their owne  bloud: who hauing ouerthrowne the Romans in two battailes, made way for further conquests. Thus did God punish that Murtherer, and besides (to pay him in his owne coyne) Priscus, Heraclon, and Heraclius conspired against this Conspirer, and murthered the Murtherer, and hauing cut off his Priuities, and his Head, hurled him into the Sea, and destroied his Issue.
Horaclius succeeded in this troubled state of the Empire; Chosroes preuailing by his victorious Armies entred Apamea,Cedrenus pag. 334. Edessa, Caesarea, Cappadocie, and subdued Asia, whiles the Auares, or Abares wasted and spoiled Europe: the Saracens also (as in preludes of their future fortunes) committed great spoyle in Syria. This in the third yeere of Heraclius: in the fourth, the Persians tooke Damascus; in the fifth, Ierusalem (carrying awaySup. l. 2. c. 22. the Crosse)  and slew therein by instigation of the Iewes 90000. and subdued Palaestina. In the seuenth, he inuaded Egypt and Africa, and conquered all, euen to Ethiopia. In the ninth, the Auares entred Thrace with an Armie, and Chagan chased Heraclius into the Citie, spoiling many Townes: but the next yeere compounded on peaceable conditions; the Persians at the same time tooke Ancyra a Citie of Galatia. In the twelfth yeere of Heraclius, a certaine Astrologer, Stephanus Alexandrinus, prophecied, that the Saracens should rule in power and dominion three hundred and nine yeeres, and then should endure much disquiet and trouble fiftie sixe yeeres. What he saw in the Starres we know not: but their Fates were longer-liued. Saes at this time sent with an Armie from Chosroes wasted all the East, and held fraudulent conference with Heraclius, who sent with him seuentie chiefe men Embassadours to  Chosroes. All these Saes treacherously lead captiues and bound into Persia, which yet could not satisfie his tyrannicall Master, who (because hee had seene Heraclius, and had not brought him aliue) caused him to bee flaied quicke: and sent Sarbarus against the Romans. Heraclius beganne his expedition with penitent, and lowly seeking peace with GOD, who made his warres prosper against the Persians. Some say he sent Embassadours to Chosroes, who refused all conditions, except they would renounce their crucified GOD. This GOD preuailed against that presumption, and deliuered Gazacum into the hands of Heraclius, in which Citie was the Temple of the Sunne, the treasure of Croesus, and imposture of Coles. There he found the abominable image of Chosroes, in the Globe-fashioned(...), etc. roofe of the Palace, as it were sitting in heauen. About this were the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, which hee worshipped  superstitiously, and certaine scepter-bearing Angels standing about the same. There were certaine deuices to imitate showers of raine, and the noise of thunder. These all, together with the Temple of the Fire, and the Citie, Heraclius committed to the deuouring, not the deuotion of the fire. Hee after ouerthrew Sarbarazai, and Sarbarancas, and Sais, Persian Generalls, with all their forces; and so preuailed, that Chosroes in impious reuenge, robbed all the Christian Churches in his dominion of their gifts and treasures, compelling all the Christians (a worse sacriledge) to the Nestorian heresie. He also sent Sais with a great Army against Heraclius, and Sarbarus with another against Constantinople, stirring vp the Slauins and Gepeds to helpe him, with the Westerne Hunnes or Auares. Heraclius send one Army to the safeguard of the Citie, another against Sais, and with the third hee went to the Lazikes,  seeking to winne the Easterne Turkes, called Chazari, to his partie. These breaking through the Caspian Straits vnder Zebeelus next in dignitie to Chagan, committed exceeding spoyles. Heraclius meane while ouerthrowing Sais, who dying with indignation of this losse and griefe for his Masters displeasure, could not thus appease his fury, but his carkasse was despightfully intreated; although the Heauens fought for Heraclius, and with a sudden shower of Haile caused that Persian ouerthrow. Tenne dayes was Constantinople besieged, but by diuine power preserued,Chron. Alexandrinum de his reb. fus. us; quod and hoc illo tempore scriptum videtur. as Cedrenus and others write, by a miraculous Vision. Chosroes makes Razastes his Generall, who encounters with Heraclius, not farre from Niniue, and lost his life and the field. This victoriously he proceeded, chasing Chosroes before him fiue and twentie miles in a day, which could not before go fiue. And when some had accused Sarbarus,  as inclining to the Romans, he sent to Cardarichas his Colleague to kill him; which letter being intercepted, caused Sarbarus to become such indeed; who adulterating his
 Masters letters, and putting in other foure hundred chiefe men, called an assembly, and publikely reading the letters, caused a rebellion. And in the yeere 626. Cosroes now at his wits end, or rather quite beyond them, appointed Medarses his sonne to bee his successour and hei^e apparent* wherewith Siroes, his elder sonne, being discontented, conspired to betray his father and brother to Heraclius: and soone after caused them both to bee slaine at Ctesiphon. PeaceIn Chro^. Alex. you may reade the letter of Siroes to Heraclius. was concluded with the Romans, and their Prouinces restored. Onely Arabia was by Mahumet holden, as a Seminary of a greater mischiefe, vnder which the world with griefe and amazement still groneth. Lope Obregon in a large Spanish booke, of the confutation of the Alcoran, which, hee saith, hee gathered out of the Moores writings, tells that Mahemet  serued Heraclius in his warres against Cosroes, with more then ten thousand horse-men; Vbiqu^r, Homar, Hozmen, and Hali, being chiefe Commanders vnder him, and being after the victorie denied pay, conquered a great part of Persia to himselfe. And when Siroes successour to Gosroes* withstood him; he gaue him the ouerthrow, and therefore the Persians chose a new King to represse these Arabians: and that after this, Heraclius sending for the Crosse which hee had recouered from the Persians, from Ierusalem to Constantinople, (this Palladium being go^e) hee wanne Ierusalem, and the Countries about. Other prodigious miracles hee farseth into his storie, and describes a Throne which Cosroes had made a Tower of siluer garnished with precious stones, vnder the same on one side the Sunne, on the other the Moone, and iust with it the Crosse, which he had taken from Ierusalem, and that hee  would be adored for King and Lord of the World. But I will not ingage my selfe farre for this Historian.
Sir^es, Adeser, Barazas, and Baram the daughter of Cosroes, in their order of succession in that disordered and turbulent estate, had scarse two yeeres allowed to them all: to whom succeeded Ormiz de Iezdegird, who about the yeere 63 ^. was ouerthrowne and slaine by the Saracens: and that Persian Kingdome (then weakened by ciuill dissentions) was subdued to Saracenicall seruitude; and that second Persian Dynastie (continued as ScaligerIos. Scalig. Can. Isag. reckoneth in eight and twentie successions, the space of foure hundred and two yeeres) had an end. From thence vnto this time their Religion is Saracenicall: their State gouerned by the Calif^^,Io. Lampadius Mellific. Hist. part. 3. and our third booke sh^weth the order in succession of them. and such Commanders or Sultans as they had placed ouer them, till their Sultans warring  with the Califa for Souereigntie, procured aide from the Turkes: who dispossessed them of their Kingdome presently, after they had disburthened them of their enemies: The Turkes were displaced and chased away by the Tartars. Of these both Saracens and Turks, you haue the historie in the former booke, and therefore needlesse here to be related: Of the Tartars shall follow in their order. Now let vs a little looke backe to the Greatnesse, and other things most remarkable in the Persian Kings.



CHAP. V. Of the Persian Magnificence, and other their Antiquities.
THe time of the first Dynastie, howsoeuer Dionisius Halicarnass. contracteth it to two hundred yeeres, and Cedrenus to two hundred and fourteene: yet Q. Curtius (who writ the ouerthrow of the same by Alexander, in the time of Claudius, vnder whom, if BrissoniusBris. de Reg. Pers. lib. 1. Curt. lib. 4. Her. in Dan. 9. Clem. Strom. l. 1. hath gathered truly, he was Proconfull of Africa) and Hierom, and Clemens Alexand. and others little disagree from that our former account reckoning two hundred thirtie one. In which space the greatnesse of their Kings appropriated the Title of the Great King vnto themselues,  as Drusius in his Obseruations, and Brissonius out of Dio. Chrysostomus, Aristides, Isocrates, and others haue obserued: so Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7.12. calleth himselfe King of Kings, which the Parthian after annexed to his Stile. The Kingdome was Hereditarie both in Persia and Parthia, the eldest Sonne begotten in Wedlocke, suceeding. In long Expeditions the Heire apparant was nominated. They vsed to be inaugurated or crowned (after our Phrase) at Pasargadae,Plut. in vita Artaxerxis. by their Priests, which Plutarch thus describeth. The designed King goeth into a Chappell of the Goddesse of Warre (it may be thought Minerua) and there putting off his former Habit, puts on that which Cyrus ware before he was King: then doth he eate a lumpe of Figges, and Turpentine, and drinkes a cup of sowre Milke: their other Ceremonies are not knowne. On his head was set a Cidaris or Tiara;Tiara what it was, de hac plura vid. ap. Seldens Tit. Hon. this was a kind of Cap or  Turbant, not like a Felt of wooll, but of diuers pieces of cloth sewed together, Tritis pilea suta de lacernis; the Kings differing from the common sort, because his ascended strait with a sharp top not bowed any way; to the other Persians it was deadly to weare a Tiara, except the top bowed (in token of subiection) to their forehead. Only the posteritie of those, which
 with Darius Histaspis slew the vsurping Magus, might weare them bending to the middle of their head, and not hanging downe to their browes, as the other. The Kings Tiara was properly called Cidaris, and was set on by the Surena, which was an hereditarie dignitie next to the King. About this Cidaris hee wore a Diadem, which some AuthorsDrus. Obseru. lib. 12 cap. 12. Bris. l. 1. pag. 44. confound, and make to be the same; others otherwise: it was a purple band, or of blew colour, distinguished with white, which was wreathed about the Tiara. The right or strait Tiara, with that purple and white band; was the note of royaltie, as the Crowne in these parts. The Diadem inDiademasasciola: andid^, etc. Am. Marcel. other Countries, was a white band wreathed about the forehead. The new King was placed also in a golden Throne, and (if hee pleased) changed his former name, as Codomannus to Darius.  
His subiects adored him as a god (so did the Greekes,Isoc. in Paneg. Ester 13.14. interprete it, and Mordecas which refused this ceremonie to Haman) prostrating themselues on the ground with a kinde of veneration; turning their hands behind their backe, if they had any sute to the King. Sperchies and Bulis Lacedemonians, and CononIustin. lib. 6. the Athenian refused this Rite: IsmeniasAelian. V. hist. lib. 1. the Theban dissembled it with taking vp his ring, which for that purpose hee lot flip from his finger, when hee came before the King. TimagorasValer. Max. lib. 6.3. was put to death by the Athenians for doing it. In the time of ApolloniusPhilost. lib. 1., none might come to the presence of the King, which had not before done the like adoration to his Image. They also when they came into the presence of the King, held their hands within their sleeues; for default herein, Cyrus Iunior slew Antosaces and Mitraeus, as Xenophon writeth. Likewise, for the greater Maiestie they seldome were  seene of the people, and then neuer on foot: neither might any enter the Palace without licence of the King, signifying his attendance first by a messenger: this honour was reserued to the Princes which slew Smerdis, which might enter at all times, but when the King was in bed with his wife; which Intaphernes (one of the seuen) transgressing, therefore lost his head. Yea, the ScriptureEster 5. and 6. noteth the danger hereof in Haman, the Kings greatest fauourite, and Ester the Queene, neither of which had libertie of entrance, without the Kings call or admission. It was a capitall offence to sit on the Kings Throne, to weare the Kings garment, or in hunting to strike any beast before the King had stricken. The King (as before is noted, of Cambyses) was not subiect to any law: the people were held in much slauery, if that may be so called which is voluntarie. In this affection, they which wereStob. ser. 12. scourged at the Kings  command, were thankefull to him, for that they were had in remembrance with him. Their obedience appeared, when XerxesHerodot. l. 8. being in a ship in danger, many at his word leaped into the Sea to lighten the ship. Yea, they would be their owne executioners when they had offended theAmbros. Hex. 5.21. King. None might salute him without a present. His birth-day was obserued a sacred and solemne festiuall. His death was bewailed with a silence of lawes and sutes fiue daies, and with extinguishingDiodor. Sic. lib. 17. that Fire, which euery one obserued in his house, as his household deitie.
The Kings abode was according to the season: seuen moneths saith ZonarasZon. Annal. 1. in Babylon, three in Susa, and two in Ecbatana. Aelian therefore compares them to Cranes, and Aristides to the Scythian Nomades: alway by this shifting, enioying a temperate season. Susa or Shushan, was so called of the abundance of Lillies, which in that language are so named, saith  Stephanus: a Region so defended by high mountaines from the Northerne blasts, that in the Summer the vehement heat parched theirStrab. l. 15. and Eustath. in Dionys. Barly (it is Straboes report, and therefore they couered the roofes of their houses with earth two cubits deepe) and it killed the snakes as they crossed the wayes. It was situate on Choaspes, and entertained the Kings Court in Winter, as Ecbatana in Summer the chiefe Citie of the Medes. Sometimes it also remoued to Pasargadae; and sometimes to Persepolis, the richest Citie, if DiodorusDiodor. Sic. lib. 17. bee beleeued, vnder the Sunne, wherein was a Tower enuironed with a three-fold wall, the first of which was sixteene cubits high, and made with battlements, the second twice as much, the third square, and sixtie cubits in height of hard stone with brazen gates: on the East thereof was  a Hill of foure acres, wherein were the Sepulchres of the Kings. Alexander in reuenge of the burning of Athens, and by instigation of wine, and Thais his Concubine (Mars, Bacchus, Venus, three heauy, vnruly, tyrannicall enemies, conspiring) burned this sometime Treasure-house of Persia.
The Persian Court or Palace had many Gates, and Guards which took turnes by lot: (you reade the words of Aristotle in his booke de Mundo, hereby manifested to bee his, or at least as ancient, in that he writeth of the Persian State flourishing before Alexander in his time had subuerted it) some, hee saith, were called the Kings eares, others his eyes, and others had other offices, by which the King learned whatsoeuer was any where done, and therefore holden as a God: And besides his Posts which brought newes, by Fires or Beacons, he might  in one day learne the State of that huge Empire, extended from the Hellespont to India. The Palace-roofe admirably shined with the brightnesse of Iuorie, Siluer, Amber, and Gold. His
 Throne was of Gold, borne vp with foure Pillars, beset with gemmes. His bed was also of Gold (which was propounded the reward to Zorobabel and his companions, Ezra 3.3.) yea, Herodotus tells of a Tabernacle of Gold, of a Plane tree, and a Vine of Gold giuen to Darius by Pithius the Bythinian. This Vine AthenaeusAthen. l. 12. vid. Bud. de As. l. 4. reporteth, was adorned with iewels, and hung ouer the Kings bed, the Grape-clusters being all precious stones: in a Parlour at his beds feet were three thousand Talents of Gold, in another at the head, called the Kings bolster, were fiue thousand Talents. Gardens wereEster 7. adioyning, which they called Paradises: some very large, wherein were kept wild beasts, as Lions, Beares, Bores, for the Kings game, with spacious Woods and Plaines, inclosed in wall.Cic. de Senectu^^ Tully out of Xenophon relateth the industrie  of Cyrus, which with his owne hand had measured, planted, ordered, and husbanded, one of those pleasant Paradises. Alexander enriched them with Trees and Plants out of Greece. The Persian Kings dranke the water of Choaspes onely, which to that purpose was boyled, and carried with them in Siluer vessells wheresoeuer they went. The Parthian Kings dranke of thisPlin. l. 6.27. and l. 36 3. Dan. 8.2. and of the Riuer Eulaeus (a Riuer rising in Media, which after it hath buried it selfe, againe recouering the light, compasseth the Tower of Susa, and the religious Temple of Diana. Daniel calls it Vlay; it seemeth to be, or to become the same with Choaspes; and so doth Ptolomey confound them) they dranke also onely Chalybonian wine, made at Damascus in Syria, and their bread was made of the wheat of Assos in Phrygia. Their sumptuous feastingEster 1. appeareth in the Scripture, beyond what is read in any storie of any King:  in which was somewhat of eueryAthen. l. 3. Nation subiect to him, set before him: his Salt was brought out of Egypt. Amongst the baggage and stuffe of Darius, which Parmenio tooke at Damascus, were found two hundred seuentie seuen Cookes, nine and twentie Scullians, thirteene which had charge of white-meates, seuenteene which were to minister water, seuentie which belonged to the wine-celler, fortie which looked to the oyntments, and sixtie sixe which made Crownes. How many may we thinke, were there in his setled Court?Idem. l. 12. His dining-roome was full of musicall women, whereof one began the song, the rest followed: three hundred of these creatures singing, playing, dancing, spent the night in his bed-chamber.  HeeCic. Tusc. quaest. l. 5. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 2. which could deuise any new pleasure, was highly rewarded: for which purpose Xerxes promised largely to such Epicurean-Masters by an open Proclamation. The King vsually sate alone, sometimes his mother and wife were admitted: other guests sate where hee might see, but not be seene of them: yea, they had slauish sauce to their sweet meates, being narrowly watched by the Eunuches, whether they cast any liberall lookes towards any of the Kings women. Yet, the P^rthian guests had more seruile entertainment, as euen now wee shewed. Concerning the multitudes of their women, and curiositie of their lusts, the booke of Ester yeelds ample testimonie. Cicero addeth,Cic. in Verr. l. 5. that they bestowed for the maintenance of their wiues robes, and dresses; one Citie for their haire, another for their necke; yea, the reuenues of whole countries on such excesse. Socrates in Platoes Alcibiades telleth of an Embassador into Persia, which was almost a whole day in trauelling through a Region, called the Queenes  Girdle, another called the Queenes Head-tire, and so for euery other part of her Wardrobe.
The KingsVid. Xenoph. Sard. l c 11. A du verdier. Brisson. Keckerman. polit. etc. children (especially the eldest sonne) were presently after their birth committed to Eunuches, which beside education did compose and order their lims: at seuen yeeres of age they learned to ride and hunt, hauing skilfull instructers for that purpose: at foureteene yeeres they were committed to the discipline of the Royall Masters, which were foure choisely learned; the first in Prudence, which taught the Magia of Zoroastres, and the institution of a King: the second, in Iustice; who taught to speake and deale truly: the third, in Temperance, wherein hee instructed his new disciple: as the fourth in Fortitude. The Persian King had one, whose office was to salute the King with these words; Arise, O King, and thinke on such things as Mesoromasdes would haue thee. Almost euery day hee performed his holy Rites, for which cause were slaineAthen. l. 3. euery day one thousand sacrifices, amongst which  were Oxen, Asses, Harts, the Magi being present. Before their sacrifices they discoursed of pietie: and when they went to this their deuotion, there were men on both sides the way set in rankes, with officers called Mastigophori, who suffered none but great personages to enter. First, were led Bulls, foure and foure together, which were sacrificed to Iupiter. After them, were led Horses to bee offered to the Sunne. Then followed a Chariot drawne with white Horses, hauing a golden beame, and crowned, sacred to Iupiter: after that, the Chariot of the Sunne like the former. Then a third Chariot, the Horses couered with Scarlet; after which followed men carrying fire, and next, the King in his Chariot; before which went foure thousand Target men, and two thousand Speare-men about it: There followed  three hundred with Darts on horse-backe: two hundred horses with golden bridles; and after them three thousand Persians, and in the last place the Medes, Armenians, Hireans. Xenophon indeed, which writes this in his Institution of Cyrus, intends rather the frame of a iust Empire, then the truth of History, yet professeth to relate no other Rites and Customes then
 which the Persians embraced: neither doth hee in these things disagree from Herodotus and Curtius. The Kings Chariot was drawne with white horses, the drowning of one of which was the cause of dryingSen. de Ira. l. 3 c. 21. the Riuer Gyndes. For Cyrus enraged for the losse of his white Palfrey, diuided the riuer by force of men into three hundred and twentie rills; so that it wilderd and lost it selfe in those many by-wayes: an argument what Diuision can doe. These horses were of the Nisaean race in Media. When the King descended from his Chariot, a golden stoole was set him to step on: one alway attending his Chariot with such a stoole. While hee rode in his Chariot, hee spent the time in whitling with a knife, not in reading, or any graue meditation, and therefore was vnlearned. When hee went on progresse into Media,Aelian. v. b. 14.12. and l. 15. de Animal. c. 26. he enioyned the Countrey to spend three dayes before to hunt Scorpions, which there  abounded; allowing rewards therefore. They vsed by themselues or their Legats, to visite their officers in the Prouinces, and to punish or preferre them according to their merits. In iudgements they not onely considered the crimes and accusations, but the counterpoise also of their vertues: and the clemencieAm. Marcel. l. 30. of Artaxerxes (in their irreuocable law) appeared in cutting off the Tyarae of condemned persons, in stead of their heads.
As often as the King entred into Persepolis, euery Matron was to haue a piece of gold giuen her: the men also were rewarded which multiplied children: but especiall rewards were bestowed on them which were called Orosange, which had deserued well of the King, whose names and facts were therefore recorded,Ester. 2. Aemil. Probus. as we reade of Mordecai, and his recompence. Themistocles receiued of the Kings bountie the Citie Magnesia, to finde him bread (which Region  was worth fiftie Talents yeerely) Lampsacum for wine, Myus for cates. The chiefe gift giuen to any was a mill of gold. The Kings birth-day was a solemne feast calledHerod. l. 9. Tycta, that is perfect, for the magnificence thereof: in which hee gaue gifts to the people: yea, hee might not denie any petition then made to him. The King nourished so many Indian dogs for hunting, that foure great villages in the plaine of Babylon were assigned to their sustenance. Artaxerxes caused Megabyzus (as Ctesias writeth) to bee beheaded for striking a Lyon with his dart, which was readie to assault the King, because he therein transgressed the Law, and preuented the Kings triall of his valour. The reuenues of the tributes were 14560. Euboike Talents: the siluer and gold were melted and kept in earthen vessels, which were  broken when they came to vse the same. Besides this, the subiect prouinces yeelded to the maintenance of the King other things: as Armenia, horses; Babylonia, foure moneths victuals, and the rest of Asia the other eight; and other Regions their peculiar commodities. The Kings ordinarie guard, night and day guarded the Palace, the most of them Persians: another band of 10000. choice horse-men were wholly Persian, and were called Immortall: one thousand of the best of them, called Doryphori and Melophori, were chosen into the Kings guard.Curt. l. 3. They receiue no money but allowance of victuall for their wages. Curtius mentioneth a guard next to the Kings person, called the Kings kinsemen, which were 15000. But it were too tedious to recite the Homotimi,Ber. de reg. Pers. Megistanes, and other his court-officers and attendants, the Surena which was the chiefe Magistrate and others, whereof Brissonius hath written. As their liues were burthened with voluptuousnesse, so they prepared for their deaths  (that they might descend suddenly into the graue,Iob. 21. Psal. 73. as Iob saith of the prosperitie of some wicked, without any bands, to vse Dauids phrase, of a lingring death) certaine poysons, tempered of the excrementsAelian. de Animal. l. 4. c. 41. of the Dircaerus an Indian bird, which in short time, without sense of griefe depriued them of life. After the Kings death they extinguished the SACRED FIRE, which rite Alexander obseruedDied. S. l. 17. in Hephaestions funerall. In Persepolis were erected vnto them stately Monuments, with Titles and Epitaphs inscribed. The Monuments of the Kings there,Garcias. Figueroa. Epist. with other Antiquities haue conquered Time and Alexanders Fires, yet remaining so fresh, as if they were new made, many still shining like glasse. Among which a Iasper Table is remarkable, inscribed with letters which none can reade, all of a Pyramide or Delta forme in diuersifyed postures. Twentie such Pillars remaine of admirable greatnesse, beautie,  and likenesse, of a lasting Marble, with Images in long habits like the Venetian Senators, with wide sleeues and long beards: others sitting as in high arched seats, with footstooles in great Maiestie. There are also huge Colossean horses, with giantly riders, of Marble. And although a goodly fertile Countrey doth inuite habitation, of ten leagues extent euery way, yet is there now but one poore village of foure hundred housholders, called Margatean, in this plaine of Persepolis. Our Author acknowledgeth Diodorus his relations iustly agreeing with his eyes: and esteemeth these Monuments farre beyond all other the worlds miraculous Artifices.
I might here terrifie the delicate and already-wearied Reader, with representation of their Martiall marching, discipline, numbers, armors, and the like; of which Brisson hath  written a whole booke. Yet because wee haue thus farre waded in matters of the Persian Magnificence; let vs take a little view of the Heyre and Successour to that Greatnesse, Great
 Alexander, in state entring Babylon, thus by Curtius related. Many came forth to meet him: the wayes were all strowed with flowers and garlands, on both sides were erected siluer Altars, laden with Frankincense and all kinde of odors. There followed him for presents droues of Horses and Cattell: Lions and Leopards in grates were carried before him. The Magi after their manner of Procession singing, had the next place; after them the Chaldaeans, and the Babylonians both Diuiners and Artificers, with musicall Instruments. Then the Horsemen, furnished beyond magnificence in excesse of prodigalitie.Sac Cer. Rom. Ec. l. 1. The King with his Armie followed, and last of all the Towns-men. Hee that will compare with these relations, that which in the bookes of the Romane Ceremonies is written of the Popes strait Tiara, enuironed  with a triple Crowne: the veneration performed to him by all, euen Emperours kissing his feet, holding his bridle and stirrop, putting their shoulders vnder his Chaire, when hee lists to ride on mens shoulders, holding water to his hands, and bearing the first dish to his Table: the change of his name at his election: his Palfrayes alwayes white, like the Nisaean, led before him, one of which carryeth his God vnder a Canopie: his Scala, Processions, and other Rites; shall see some hence borrowed, most exceeding the Persian Excesse. Once, all Religion with them seemeth turned into State and Ceremonie, the soule being fled, and this (bodily exercise) bodie of exercise, in exercise of the body, onely left.


CHAP. VI. Of the Persian Magi.
THe name of Magi is sometimes applied (say some) to all the Persians,B^skhieri (...) Coeli. or else to a particular Nation amongst them: sometime it signifieth the most excellent in Philosophie, and knowledge of nature, or in sanctitie and holinesse of life. ThusSuidas inv. Magus. Psellus de Daem. Scal. ex 327. Suidas calls the Persian Magi, Philosophi, and Philothei, studious of  knowledge, of nature, and of God. Sometimes it signified such as wee now call Magicians, practisers of wicked Arts. Among the Persians this name was ancient and honourable, saithPeuecrus de diuinat. c. de Magia. and Delrio disquis. Mag. l. 1. Proclus de An. and daem. Peucerus, applyed onely to the Priests, which liued in high reputation for dignitie and authoritie, being also Philosophers, as the Chaldaeans were. To these were committed the custodie of Religion, of ancient Monuments, of later Histories, of publike records, and the explanation of the Persian wisdome, whose account appeareth in that after Cambyses death, one of them is reported to succeed in the Throne. Now, whereas the Ethnicks had a tradition of twoBrutus was terrified with such a spectrum^ the like they tell of Marius and many others Genij, which attend euery man, one good, the other euill; proceeding (in likelihood) from Diuine Truth, concerning good and euill Angels, which are either ministring Spirits for mans good, or tempters vnto euill: curious men hence tooke occasion to deuise new Arts, which were called (...) and (...); by the  one calling vpon the good Daemon or Genius; by the other on the euill: which euill One could easily turne himselfe into an Angel of light, to delude blind people, being indeed (as in our White and Blacke witches at this day) worse when an Angel, then when a Deuill.
Hereof were diuers kindes;(...) Necromancie, which inuocated the spirits of the dead:Diuers kindes of Diuination. of which smoaky Soot, the Heathens Diuine Poets, and our Poeticall Diuines in the tales of Hell and Purgatory, striue who shall haue the blackest tincture. They had also their Lecanomanciae, which was obserued in a Bason of water, wherein certaine pla^es of gold and siluer were put with Iewels, marked with their iugling Charactars, and thence after pronuntiation of their words were answeres whispered;(...). Cum multis alij de quibus Peucerus and Reginold. Scot. in Det^ct Mag. and Calius Calcag. A^at. Mag. Comp. Agri^^a de van. s^i. c. 42. and seq. Gastromancie procured answere by pictures, or representations in glasse-vessels of water, after the due Rites. Catoptromancie receiued those resemblances in cleere glasses: Chrystallomancie, in Crystall; Dactyliomancie, was a diuination  with Rings (which perhaps Gyges vsed) consecrated by certaine position of the heauens, and diuellish Inchantments. Onymancie, with Oyle and Soote daubed on the Nayle of an vndefiled Childe, and held vp against the Sunne: Hydromancie, with water: Aeromancie, with ayre. But what should I adde the many more names of this Artlesse Art, vnworthy the naming? Tibi nomina mille, Mille nocendi artes; Infinitely diuersified are these blind by wayes of darknesse and mischiefe. Delrio hath other diuisions of Magicke, which from the efficient hee diuideth into Naturall, Artificiall, and Diabollicall: from the end, into Good and Bad; and this bad (which is by explicite or implicite compact with Deuills) into Magia specialis, Diuinatio, Maleficium, and Nugatoria. Zoroaster is supposed Author both of the good and bad  vnto the Persians. Naturall Magicke is by Delrio diuided into that which worketh wonders (not miracles) and that which diuineth. But I am weary of this Magicall search. Leaue wee them in their Mazes, Circles, Labyrinth of Errour, and let vs take view of the Persian Magi, from whence PliniePl^n. l 10. c. 1. deriueth the first originals of Magicall Vanities; which are (saith hee)
 compounded of three Arts, that exercise most imperious power ouer the mindes of men; Physicke, and that offering her selfe more sublimate and pure, in the sacred name and rites of Religion, beautified also with the addition of Mathematicall Sciences; (a threefold cord not easily broken, like a three-headed Cerberus, or trible crowned Prelate holding the world in feare, or loue thereof) Xoroastres (who liued at Eudoxus testifieth, sixe thousand yeeres before Plato) first inuented it in Persia. Hermippus affirmeth, that Agonax taught him. Apusorus a^d Zarates among the Medes, Marmaridius the Babylonian, Hippocus the Arabian, and Zarmocenidas the Assyrian, haue been famous for their practise and writings of this Art. Pythagoras, Empedocles, Domocritus, Plato sailed farre to learne it, vndertaking long exiles (rather the pilgrimages or peregrinations) to that end. He impiously addeth Moses and Iochabel  (it may be he meaneth Ioshua) to this impious number. The Scripture tels of Iannes and Iambres,Hier. in Dan. 2. Plin. l. 30. c. 1. and Simon Magus famous in this infamie. Hierom saith, they were the Philosophers of the Chaldaeans, and that the Kings did all things after the direction of their Art; which (they are Plinies words) in the East ruleth the King of Kings. Porphirius affirmeth, that they which were wise in diuine mysteries, and performed them, were called of the Persians Magi: the same, saith Picus, that Philosophers were amongst the Greekes. The like hath Philo, and Proclus, and Arnobius of Hosthanes Magus. They were studious in prayers, instituted sacrifices,Vid. Patric. Zoroast. and mysteries, as the Indian Brachmanes, and Graecian Theologie; acknowledged Angels, Paradise, the soules immortalitie. Patricius also addeth to this their Philosophie and Theologie, Astronomie and Physicke, and all knowledge of Nature. It is like that  in the Persian Magi concurred both a certaine stocke or kindred, which were also so called (as is said) and the Philosophicall Inquisition of Nature, and the Priestly function, and also some either implicite or explicite societie with Deuils. The same they were, at least in profession and reputation, that the Philosophers with the Greekes, the Priests in Egypt, Gymnosophistes in India, Chaldaeans in Babylon, Druydes in Gallia, and in this our Ile, the Italian Aruspices, and other religious persons (the Treasurers of their Theologie and Philosophie) in other places. As for those Magi mentioned in theMatth. 2.1. Boskhier Ara Coeli. Gospell, some suppose them to come from Aethiopia; some from Arabia; some from Mesopotamie; some from Chaldaea; and some from Persia; and some from diuers of those Regions. Whencesoeuer they came, they had a brighter Starre to guide them with diuiner light, then those Magicall brans of hellish  fire could yeeld.
PlatoPlato Alcib. Apul. Apolog. Persarum lingua Magus est qui nostra sacerdos. commends this Magia, and cals it Machagistia, and (...) the worship of the Gods; and saith, that the Kings of Persia learned it, as a knowledge of Diuine Mysteries, wherein by the worlds Common-wealth, they were instructed to gouerne their owne. Others, as they were led by differing affection, doe as much discommend them. And truely (as in the Chaldaean, and Aegyptian Priests) their searching out the mysteries of Nature cannot but deserue commendation, but their abusing this naturall Philosophie to vnnaturall conspiracie with deuils, cannot but be detested of those which are not themselues detested of GOD. And either from this deuillish conspiracie, or ouer-curious vanitie, did arise their predictions of future euents: in which respect the Ethnikes had them in high reputation. Ammianus  MarcellinusAm. Marcellin. l. 23. saith, that Zoroastres added much to this Art from the Chaldaean mysteries, and Hystaspes, the Father of Darius, from the Brahmanes, which hee in his Indian trauels had found in a woodie solitarinesse, and learned of them the motions of the Starres, and pure rites of sacrifices: which he taught the Magi, and they, together with the skill of diuination, deliuered to their posteritie by Tradition: and that progenie is alway consecrated to Diuine Seruices, and keepe continually burning certaine fire which first came from heauen; a small portion whereof was wont to bee carried before the King of Asia. There were but a few of them at the first: and it was vnlawfull to touch the sacrifice, or approach to the Altar, before the Magus, with a certaine set speech had powred on his sacred preparatiue liquors. Afterwards being increased in number they grew into an entire Nation, and inhabited  vnwalled Townes, being gouerned by their owne lawes, and honoured for Religion. Cicero writeth,Cic. de Diuin. l. 1. that the Magi did assemble together in Fana, into certaine Temples or consecrated places, to consult about their diuinations. They presaged to Cyrus thirtie yeeres reigne. They dranke the herbe Theangelis, and vsed also the herbe Aglaophon or Marmaritis when they would diuine.Plin. l. 24.17. Vel. Pater l. 2. They diuined by the notes and markes of the bodie: they foretold the euents of prodigies. They might not teach any but Persians the mysteries of their science, without the Kings leaue. And yet Plinie saith, that Plato, Democritus, Empedocles, and Pythagoras,Plin. l. 30. vndertooke exiles (as is said before) rather then trauels, to learne the same, which after their returne they taught. Apollonius also for the same cause went into Persia  and India: whose Philosophie plainly appeareth by the history of his life to bee soyled with Magicall impuritie. And although some commend one sort of Magia, as being their Theologie and Philosophie, yet seeing their Philosophie was corrupted with curiositie, and their
 Theologie with superstitious Idolatrie, it could not be free from some kinde of (at least implicite) sorcerie, as the examples of thoseApollinius, Hosthanes, Charendas, Democritus, and Pythagorici and Platenici. which were most eminent herein, do shew. Such as one Pases was, who by enchantments would make shewes and resemblances of sumptuous feasts, with many attendants: and had a MagicallSuidas, hence came the Prouerbe, (...). or enchanted halfe-peny, which would returne to him againe, when he had bought any thing therewith. Yea, howsoeuer, Patricius would not excuse only, but highly commend the Oracles (as he termeth them) of Zoroaster, yet doth he cite out of him, that Barbarous names must not bee changed. For all things haue their names of God, which haue an vnspeakeable power in holy things: which words seeme to incline to Charmes, which are commonly in barbarous vnsignificant termes. Other things which he  with great paines hath gathered out of the Platonikes, stamped with Zoroasters name, are many of them diuine, being interpreted in the best sense. For they are for the most part obscure, and many exceeding the sense of such weake Readers, as I confesse my selfe. Some I haue here expressed.
In all the world shineth the Trinitie, of which the beginning is Vnitie.Zoroas. Orac. 324. ap Patric. Vid. etiam Heur. Duret, etc. The Father perfected all things, and deliuered them to the second Minde, which all mankinde calleth the First: He remaineth in the paternall profunditie. It is the minde of the Minde which is framer of the fierie world. All the world is of fire and water; and earth, and ayre. Hee fastned a great company of not-wandring Starres, and seuen wandring creatures, ioyning fire to fire, the earth in the midst, and the water in the receptacles of the earth, and the ayre  aboue them. Let the immortall soule lift her eyes vpwards, not downewards into this darke world, which is vnstable, mad, heady, crooked, alway emcompassing a blind depth, hating the light, of which the vulgar is carried. Seeke Paradise. The soule of man will after some sort bring God into it selfe: hauing nothing mortall, it is wholly rauished of God. It resoundeth the harmony, vnder which is the mortall body, extending the fiery minde to the worke of pietie. I desire not sacrifices and inwards, these are playes, flee these things if thou wilt open the sacred Paradise of piety, where vertue and wisdome, and the good law, are gathered together. If these things are harsh, what would these obscurities be in his Theologie, wherein he first placeth One beginning, then a paternall profunditie of three Trinities, euery of which hath the Father, the Power, the Minde. Next in order is the Intelligible Iynx, and  after it Synocheus, Empyraeus, and Aetherealis, and Materialis; and after these the Teletarchae: after which the Fontani Patres, Hecate: and such a rabble of names follow, that the recitall would seeme to coniure the Reader into some Magicall maze or circle. They which are curious of those inextricable labyrinths, may resort to Psellus, Patricius, and the Platonikes, which ascribe these things to the Assyrians and Chaldeans, as they doe to Zoroaster also. Delrio and Patricius finde sixe of the Zoroasters mentioned in Authors, (Goropius after his wont, paradoxicall, none at all) the first of which was inuentor of this Magike, a Chaldaean, supposed to liue in the time of Abraham. Berosus first, and afterSuidas in verbo Iulianus. Iulianus a Magician, both Chaldaeans, communicated these mysteries to the Greeks: and diuers of those HeretikesVid. Iren. Tertul. August. and ad eum. Dan. etc. in the prime age of the Christian Church, were not a little sowred with this Magicall leauen,  as appeareth by Iraeneus, Epiphanius, Augustine, and others that write against them. Basilides his Abraxas (the mysticall Characters of which name make three hundred sixtie fiue, the number of dayes in the yeere, and of heauens after his opinion) is supposed the same with Mitbra the Persian Deitie, and hence to haue deriued his Magicall descent: which wee may note of others, if this belonged not to another labour.
The Magi had one chiefe among them in their Societie, called by Sozomene,Sozom. l. 2 c. 9 Princeps Magorum. CiceroCicero de diuinat. l. 1. affirmeth, that none might be Kings of Persia, before they had learned the discipline of the Magi: neither was it any more lawfull for euery one to bee a Magus, then to be a King: Such was their estimation in Persia. StraboStrabo. l. 15. Nam Magus ex matre and gnato gignatur oportet (saith Catullus) Sivera est Persarum impia religio. Sic. Luc. l. 8. tels that they vsed carnall  company with their mothers: and when they are dead are cast forth vnburied, to bee a prey to the Birds. Heurnius maketh Zoroaster Author of incestuous copulations of all sorts, andOtho Heur^ Indicus. c. 28. of the not-burying rite, but either to burne or cast forth the carkasse, (yea Authors write that he himselfe desired and obtained to be consumed with fire from heauen.) Nothing seemed to them more vnlucky, and signe of former lewdnesse, then that no bird or beast would prey on their dead. And the souldiers which sickned in their Armies, were laid forth yet breathing, with bread, water, and a staffe to driue away the beasts and fowles, which yet when their strength failed them, easily deuoured both the meat and keepers. If any recouered, and returned home, the people shunned him as a ghost, nor would suffer him to follow his former trade of life, till he were expiated by the Magi, and as it were restored again to life.  The Romans in pittie, passing thorow some part of Persia, where they found a carkasse in the field, buried it; but the night following, in a vision, a graue old man in habit of a Philosopher, reproued that fact, willing them to leaue the naked bodie to the dogs and birds,Agath. l. 2. and the mother Earth (saith hee) will not receiue those which haue polluted their mothers. Which in
 the morning they found verified, the earth hauing vomited vp that carkasse, which there lay on the top of the graue. The Magi hereby appeare to haue had int^rcourse with the deuill: as by their predictions also,Cic. Tusc. 1. of Sylla, Ochus, Sapores, and others, mentioned by Paterculus, Aelianus, Agathias, and other Historians. Thus were the Magi buried in the bowels of beasts and birds. Tully saith, that the other Persians were wrapped in waxe, and so preserued. The Ostanae and Astrampsychi are by Suidas reckoned successours of the Magi. HieromeIouin. l. 2. citeth out of Eubulus three kindes of the Magi; the most learned of them liued onely on meale and hearbes. PausoniasPausan. l. 6. reporteth, that in Lydia, in the Cities Hierocesarea, and Hypaepo, he saw Temples hauing Persian surnames, and in euery of those Temples a Chappell and Altar, whereon were Ashes, not like in colour to the ordinary sort. The Magus entring  into the roome, layeth drie wood on the Altar, after that hee hath set his mitre on his head, and then at the name of ^ certaine God, singeth barbarous hymnes (which the Greeks vnderstand not) out of the bo^ke: which being done, the heape is fired, and the flame breakes forth. Diogenes LaertiusDiog. Laert. de vit. Philos. l. 1. relateth, that these Magi spent their time in the seruice of their Gods; offering vnto them prayers and sacrifices, as if none but they might bee heard; they disputed of the substance and generation of the Gods, whom they reckoned to bee the Fire, Water, and Earth. They reprehended Images, especially such as made a differing sexe of Male and Female, among the Gods. They discoursed of Iustice. To burne their dead bodies, they held it impious: but to lye with their owne mothers, or daughters, they accounted  lawfull. They practised Diuinations, and fore-tellings, affirming, that the Gods appeared to them, that the ayre was full of formes(...). or shapes, which subtilly, and as it were by euaporation, infuse themselues into the eyes. They forbad outward ornaments, and the vse of gold. Their garments were white, the ground their bed, Hearbs, Cheese, and Bread, their food, Aristotle saith, that they held two beginnings, a good spirit and an euill, calling the one Iupiter and Oromasdes; the other Pluto and Arimanius. (EmpedoclesEmpedocles. translated this plant into Philosophy, and long after,Manes father of the Manichees. Manes a Persian heretike into Diuinitie.) Theopompus addeth these opinions of theirs; That men should againe be restored to life, and become immortall, and that all things consisted by their praiers; Hecataeus that the Gods were begotten: Clearchus, that the Gymnosophistae descended from the Magi. Thus farre Diogenes.  
Plut. de Osir. and Isid.Plutarch in his Treatise de Osir. and Isid. citeth, approueth, and applyeth the opinion of the Magi vnto many others, which they conceiued touching their two beginnings, Arimanius and Orimazes: for whereas they saw such a mixture of euill in euery good, (which made Salomon to brand them all with the title of vanitie) they gathering that good could not bee either cause or effect of euill, found out this remedy worse then the disease, to hold two Authors of all things, callingOr Ormisda^, or Oromazdes: this was the Sunne. Orimazes a God; and Arimanius; the fountaine of euill, a deuill; the one cause of light: the other of darkenesse. Betwixt these two they placed Mithres as Mediator or Intercessor, Zoroastres was author of this opinion. To the first of these was praise and vowes offered: to the later mournfull deuotions. For, rubbing a certaine hearbe called Omomi, they call on Dis Pater and Orcus, then they wash it with the bloud of a  slaine Wolfe, and carry it into a shadowie place, where they powre it out. They assigne plants partly to the good, partly to the bad God: as they doe also quicke creatures; the earthly creatures to the good, the watery to the bad, and therfore esteem him happy that hath killed most of them. Oromazes, say they, begotten of pure light, and Arimanius the childe of darknesse, warre one against another. Tho first created six Gods, Beneuolence, Truth, Politie, Wisdome, Riches, Honest delight: the later as many contrarie. When Oromazes had thrice enlarged himselfe, he was as farre beyond the Sunne, as the Sunne is from the Earth, and formed the Starres: Of which, one he fixed as a Gardian and Watch-man, the Dogge-starre: hee made other twentie foure Gods, which hee closed in an Egge. Arimanius did as much, but his twentie foure brake their shell; and so became good things and euill mingled. But a fatall time shall come, when Arimanius the Author of plague and famine shall perish, and  then shall bee one societie of all mankinde in happinesse, vsing but one language. Theopompus saith, according to their opinion, that one of these Gods shall raigne three thousand yeeres, the other being discomfited; and other three thousand they shall fight and labour to destroy one another: at last Dis Pater shall be destroyed, and men shall bee happy. This opinion of the Magi, the Chaldeans haue applied to their Astronomy; in the seuen Planets, making two good, two bad, three indifferent: The Grecians to their Iupiter, Dis Pater, and Harmonia: Empedocles to his Friendship and Discord: Aristotle to his Forma and Priuatio: Pythagoras to his One and Two: Plato to his Idem and Alterum Manes to his deuilish heresie, as before is said. The Persians in this respect, as some expound their mysteries, called Mithra  triplex, as a third person and reconciler of the other two. And there haue not wanted, which ascribe this threefold Mithra to that threefold day, as they interprete that Signe of the Sunnes going backe ten degrees, in the dayes of Hezekiah, which if there were houres
 made, the day twice ten beside the ordinarie twelue houres. But (as in Hercules his generation) a threefold night attends these mistie mysteries, which I could as willingly construe of some misconstrued notice of the blessed Trinitie.Ap. Briss. Dio Chrysostomus telleth of Zoroaster the Author of this science, that enflamed with the loue of vertue, hee forsooke the world, and went apart into a mountaine. And afterwards leauing that habitation, he seemed (to those to whom hee would shew himselfe, which was onely to the Magi) to shine with a fire which came downe from heauen vpon him. This perhaps was borrowed and peruerted from the shining face of Moses.
Onely Persians, saithGramay Asia. Gramay, were chosen into their number. The name Magi is among  Authors applied also to the Chaldeans, which in Babylon professed the same Arts and superstitions: the Disciples (saithLuciani. Necrom. Lucian) of Zoroastres, of whose cunning in charmes you may reade in his Necromantia, a pleasant discourse: Mithrobarzanes, a Chaldean Magus and Menippus, whom hee washed twentie nine dayes in Euphrates by the Moone, and in the morning sets him against the rising Sunne, with long charmes: after that spitting three times in his face, hee brings him backe againe, not once looking aside. Their meate was Acornes, their drinke Milke, Mulse, and the water of Choaspi, their lodging on the wide field on the grasse. After all this, he brought him about midnight to Tygris, where washing him, hee purifieth him with a Torch, and the herbe Squilla, and other things, etc. which howsoeuer Lucian suteth to his scoffing humour, yet I haue inserted, as somewhat expressing their superstitions,  obserued in charming and diuinations.


CHAP. VII. Of the religious, and other rites of the ancient Persians.

@. I. Of their Gods and superstitions out of HERODOTVS.
 LEauing these Magi, let vs take a view of the Persian religious rites whichHerodotus lib. 1. Herodotus thus describeth. The Persians neither erect Images, nor Altars, nor Temples, and impute it to madnesse in such as doe: therefore, as I thinke, because they are not of the Greekes opinion, that the Gods haue risen from men: Their custome is ascending vp the highest Hils, to offer sacrifice to Iupiter, calling the whole circle of heauen Iupiter. They sacrifice to the Sunne and Moone, and Earth, to the Fire, and Water, and Winds; to these onely they haue accustomed to sacrifice from the beginning. They sacrifice also to Vrania, which they haue learned of the Assyrians and Arabians. The Assyrians call Venus, Militta; the Arabians, Alitta, the  Persians, Metra.
Their rites in sacrificing are these. Being to sacrifice, they neither set vp Altar, nor kindle fire, nor vse vestments, pipes, cakes, or libaments; but he which intendeth to sacrifice, placing the sacrifice in a cleane place, calleth vpon that God, wearing their Tiara,See sup c. 5. girded about with myrtle. The sacrificer prayeth not for himselfe alone, but generally for all Persians, and especially for the King. And after that the sacrifice is cut into small pieces, he streweth vnder the sudden flesh, small herbes, chiefly Trisoly; and setting the flesh in order thereon, the Magus standing by, singethTheogonia. some hymnes (of the generation of the Gods) which they hold to be a most effectuall inchantment. Without one of their Magi no sacrifice  is accounted lawfull. After all this, the sacrificer vseth the flesh at his pleasure.
Of all daies, euery man accounteth his owne birth-day to be most solemnly obserued: and then maketh greatest cheare. The richer sort then set whole Beeues, Camels, Horses, Asses, baked in an ouen or furnace, on the Table the poorer, smaller beasts. The Persians are small eaters: but in their drinking, consult of the weightiest affaires. Of which they deliberate fasting, but pronounce sentence after they are well in drinke. To vomit or make water openly, is vnlawfull to them. Those that are equall, salute when they meete each other with a mutuall kisse; which is fastened on the cheeke only, if they be of vnequall degree. They hold themselues the best of all men, their neighbors so much better, how much neerer them they dwell. They are much addicted to Venerie with both sexes. Next vnto Martiall valour, they repute  excellent the pro^reation of many Children; the King allowing annuall presents to him who hath begotten most Children, and therefore they vse many women. The childe commeth not in his fathers sight till hee be fiue yeeres old, but liueth with the women, that if hee die before, his father should thence conceiue no griefe. From that time till hee bee
 twentie, hee learneth three things, to ride, to shoot, to speake truth. For to lie is with them the most shamefull thing; the second, to be in debt. For one fault onely no man ought to bee punished. Whatsoeuer is not meet to be done, ought not to be spoken. A Leprous person, if hee bee a Citizen, may not enter into the Citie, nor haue any societie with men: for this disease is sent (say they) for some offence against the Sunne: if hee bee a forrenner, they banish him out of their Region, and for the same cause carry into that Region white Pigeons. In a Riuer they neither spit, nor make water, nor wash, but haue them in very religious veneration. They might not cast any carkasse or pollution therein. These things, saith Herodotus, I affirme of the Persians out of mine owne knowledge: that which followeth I doe not so well know; that they burie not their dead bodies before they bee  torne of some Fowle or Dogge: but I well know that their Magi doe wrap them vp in Waxe, and then bury them. These Magi differ both from other men, and from the Egyptian Priests in this, that these pollute themselues with the death of nothing but their sacrifices, but the Magi with their owne hands kill any thing: except a man and a dogge: yea, they esteeme it some great exploit, if they haue killed very many Ants or Serpents, or other things which creepe or flye. Thus farre Herodotus.


@. II.  Of the same and other Rites out of STRABO.
STRABOLibr. 11. nameth Anaitis, Amanus, and Anandatus, Gods of the Persians: When the Persian Emperors had ouerthrowne theThese Goropius with Dutch Etymologies, and interpreta^ions bringeth from the Cimmerians and Saxons. See his Saxonica. pag. 606. Sacae, they encompassed with a wall a certaine rocke situate in a field, and erecting a Temple of the aforesaid Gods, there instituted yeerely solemnities, named Sacae, which of the inhabitants of Zela are yet celebrated (so they call the place.) That Towne in great part belongs to them which are called Sacred Seruants, to which Pompey added a great Country. Some report that Cyrus, hauing ouercome the Sacae, attributing this victory to diuine power, consecrated that day to his Country-Goddesse, naming it Sacaa, and wheresoeuer the Temple of that Goddesse is,  there also are celebrated those Sacaean feasts, in manner of the Bacchanals, day and night, the men and women drinking themselues drunken. Strabo in the end of the same eleuenth Booke mentioneth their Temples, and amongst others the Temples of Tanais, which before in Herodotus is denied to be the vse of the Persians:Cit. de Leg. lib. 2. Cicero blameth the Magi, for procuring Xerxes to burne all the Temples of Greece, because they included their Gods in walls, and to whom the whole world was a Temple and house. Their deuotion to the Sun and Moon, made them spare Delus, sacred to Apollo or the Sun, and the Temple of Diana, or the Moone at Ephesus, as an Interpreter of Aristophanes hath glossed. Some hold that Xerxes burnt the Graecian Temples for reuenge of the burning of Sardis, and the Temple of Cybele by the Athenians, and not for hatred of all Temples. The Greekes would not permit the Temples so burned to bee re-edified, that those ruinous places might be places of argument for reuenge to all posteritie.  The Ionians, as Isocrates testifieth, cursed them which should repaire them.Strab. lib. 15. Strabo thus also reporteth of the Persians: They haue neither Images nor Altars: they sacrifice in an high place, they thinke heauen to be Iupiter: they worship the Sunne, whom they call Mithra, the Moone also and Venus, and the Fire, and the Earth, and the Windes, and the water: they sacrifice in a cleane place, and present their sacrifice crowned: and when as the Magas, ruler of this businesse, hath diuided the flesh in pieces to euery one, they goe their wayes, leauing no part thereof to the Gods, who (say they) are satisfied with the soule of their sacrifice. Some, as it is reported, lay a part of the Numbles on the fire. They sacrifice especially to the Fire and to the Water, laying on the fire drie stickes, the barke^ pulled off, and laying thereon fat  Tallow, and powring on the same, Oyle, they kindle the same, not blowing with their breath, but fanning, or otherwise enforcing the winde thereto: If any bloweth the fire, or cast any dead thing or durt therein, he is punished with death. They performe their Water-ceremonies in this sort: Comming to a Lake, Riuer, or Fountaine, they make a Ditch, and there slay a sacrifice, with great heed that none of the next water be touched with the bloud: after laying the flesh on Myrtle and Lawrell, the Magi burne the same with small twigs, and making certaine prayers, sprinkle oyle mixed with milke and honey, not in the fire or water, but on the earth. They are a long while muttering their prayers, holding a bundle of small Tameriske-twigs. That which in one place Strabo saith they worshipped Mars onely, is a fault of the negligent Writers, asIs. Cas. Annot. in Strab 15. Strabo lib. 15. Casaubon hath obserued in his Notes.  
In Cappadocia, where is very great store of the Magi, which (of the Fire) are called Pyrethi, and many Temples of the Persian gods, they slay not the sacrifice with a knife, but a
 club or mallet, wherewith they beat it. The Pyreitheia are great inclosed places, in the midst, whereof there is an Altar: thereon the Magi keepe much ashes, and a fire continually burning, whither they euery day resort, and make their prayers about an houres space, holding a bundle of twigges before the fire, hauing their heads couered with a kind of labelled Mitre, hanging downe on both sides, that the strings couer their lips. These things are done in the Temples of Anaitis and Amanus. For there are their Temples, and their Image of Amanus is carried in procession. These things we haue seene.
It seemeth, that whereas Herodotus reporteth they had no Temples, Altars, nor Images: and Strabo so often mentioneth their Temples, and here the Altar and Image of Amanus;  that in Herodotus dayes they had none: which grew afterwards in vse, as a forraine rite brought in among the Persians after the Macedonians had conquered them: or else that there were differing Sects among their Magi, some (as these in Cappadocia) embracing Altars, Images, and Temples, some refusing some or all these. For otherwise Strabo disagreth not onely from Herodotus, but from himselfe, before denying them the vse of Altars and Images, and here affirming it of the Cappadocian Magi (in other things) of the Persian Religion. Perhaps the burning of the Graecian Temples purchased to them that conceit with the vulgar: we know they honoured the Temple and Altar at Ierusalem. And lesse matters set on the Friers lasts, make seely Papists beleeue now, that Protestants haue no Churches not Religion,  nor scarcely the shape of men.
Iulius FirmicusIul. Fir. cap. 4. and 5. in his Treatise of the mysteries and errors of prophane Religions to Constantine and Constans Emperours, speaketh of the Assyrians and Persians: that the Assyrians ascribed the principalitie of the elements to the ayre, the Image whereof they worshipped, stiling it with the name of Iuno, or Venus the Virgin, whom the Quires of their Priests worshipped with effeminate voyces and gestures, their skin polished, and attire fashioned like women. Yea their Priests became impure Ganymedes, and sustained the Sodomiticall lusts of others in the Temples, not shaming, but glorying of such deuotions, and composing themselues to all delicate, lasciuious, filthy behauiour: and thus wantonly dressed, with much minstrelsie  call vpon the Goddesse to infuse into them a diuining and propheticall spirit. Easily may that Impure spirit finde accesse and entertainment in such impure bodies. But the Persians and all the Magi preferre the fire. These diuide Iupiter into two powers, metamorphosing his nature into both sexes. They make the woman with a three formed countenance, wound about with monstrous Serpents (fit ensignes for the Deuils worship:) and worship a man which had driuen away kine, applying his holies to the power of the Fire: him they call Mithra, whose blinde deuotions were done in places answerable, namely in hidden Caues.


@. III.  Of the same out of Christian and other Authors.
HESYCHIVS saith, that Mithras, or the Sun was chiefe god with the Persians: and therefore the most religious and inuiolable oath of the King was by Mithra. And this is confirmed byIul. Firm. de errore pro. rel. cap. 5. Firmicus also, who saith, that the Persians preferre the Fire before all the other Elements, and that they call the same Mithra. (The reason is, because they held, as in the beginning of this worke we noted out of Zoroaster, that the Sun and all the Stars are celestiall fires.) They perfo^med their deuotions to the same in dark Caues, where they could not see the brightnesse of that light. This Hierome calls Mithras Den: and Tertullian affirmeth that Mithras Knights or Souldiers were initiated in the same. To whatsoeuer god they sacrificed, they first called vpon the Fire, and poured out their praiers  thereto. To this Fire they dedicated certaine Chappels or Oratories, wherein to keepe it alway burning; these were called Pyreia: of which Claudian: penetralibus Ignem Sacratum rapuere aditis. They supposed that it came downe from heauen. They worshipped all (...) whatsoeuerEustath. in Dionys. had any resemblance of fire, as the Carbuncle stone. They obserued differing ceremonies in their Fire tnd Water-deuotions. To the FireMax. Tyr. they vsed these set words when they added fewell thereto, Lord Fire eat. They offered wine in a cup, which they called Condy. The costly sacrifices of their Kings wee haue alreadie mentioned. PlutarchPlutarch. in A^tax. tels that Artaxerxes married his owne daughter Atossa, (Heraclides addeth his other d^ughter Amestris.) And when Atossa was leprous, his loue notwithstanding continued, and he besought Iuno for  her, touching the ground with his hands, replenishing the way between the Temple and Palace (which was sixteene furlongs) with off^ring of gold, siluer, purple, horses. PlutarchDe superstit. Phot. in vit. Ath. in. 258. writeth that Amestris the wife of Xerxes, in sacrifice to Pluto for her health, buried twelue men quicke in the earth. To Mithra, saith Photius, they offered men, women, and children. And as
 they tell of Molochs seuen ambries, so also is related of MithraCels. ap. Orig. l. 1. according to the number of the seuen Planets.
We may further adde (from GramayGram. As. Persica. his Collections out of diuers Authors, and from others, concerning the Persian Religion) that they sometimes obserued the Graecians Deities, calling Iupiter, Bel; Hercules, Sandes; Venus, Anaitis. To Iupiter was sacred a Chariot with a beame of gold. They Sunne the worshipped (by the name of Mithra, and Eldictus) at Sun-rising: and adored also the painted Image thereof. They accounted the Horse the Suns peculiar beast, and offered vnto him white Horses. Ouer Darius his Tabernacle, the Image of the Sunne, enclosed in the Christall, shone forth so that it might bee seene of all. The order also of Darius his march, when he warred against Alexander, had in their first place their  Fire, which they called Sacred and Eternall, carried on siluer Altars. Next hereunto the Magi singing their country-Hymnes, followed by three hundred sixtie fiue young men, (so many as their yeere had dayes) clothed in bright red, then came Iupiters Chariot, drawne by white Horses: after whom followed a horse of exceeding greatnesse, consecrated to the Sun. Their riders had white garments and golden rods. Likewise both sides of the Kings Chariot were adorned with Images of gold and siluer: two being most eminent among them; the one of Peace, the other of Warre.
That Souldier, which was initiated in Mithraes hollowed orders, was first proued by eightie seuerall kindes of punishment: and if he continued stedfast, he was washed, putting  on his head aTertul. de Coron. milit and Praesc. ad baer. crowne with a sword interposed. Chaste Virgins were hollowed the Sunnes Priests or Nuns. They worshipped Diana, whom they called Nannea (as some will haue it) in that History of2. Mac. 1.13. Antiochus. They solemnized certaine Feasts, the chiefe whereof was that of Mithra. Another holy day they called the DestructionAthenaeus lib. 12. of vices, in which the Magi killed venemous things, and offered; and the seruants lorded it fiue dayes together, ruling both the Family and their Masters. Magophonia they celebrated in memory of the Magi slaine by Darius Histaspis, and his Colleagues. Of their holy-day Sacaea before is spoken: in which (some report, that) the seruants changed offices and garments with the masters. Minutius FoelixMin. Foel. Octau. Arnob. con. Gent. lib. 6. obiecteth against them their incestuous copulation with their mothers. Arnobius derideth their worshipping of Riuers. The Christian Fathers, and Heathen Authors  are plentifull in the narration of the Persian vanities. EusebiusEuseb. de praepar. lib. 6. c. 8. citeth a saying of Bardesanes Syrus; Among the Persians there was a law to marry their sisters, daughters, and mothers: which custome the Persians obserued also in other Countries, and therefore other Nations hating them, called them Magussaei; of which are many in Egypt, Phrygia, and Galatia, whose posteritie succeedeth them in the same wickednes. This name Magussaei is deriued of Magi.


@. IIII. Of the Persian Education and Schooles.  
BVt of all other things this is most commendable and admirable, which the Persians obserued for learning and practise of vertue, if we giue like credite toXenophon. Cyrop. lib. 1. Xenophon herein, asBriss. lib. 2. A. du Verdier, etc. others haue done. They had a kinde of publike Schoole, called the Free or liberall Market, not for the sale of merchandize (which kinde of Markets the ancient PersiansHerod. lib. 1. wanted) but the learning of ingenuous, liberall, and vertuous conditions. This was diuided into foure parts, one for children till, seuenteene yeeres of age, the second for youths to seuen and twentie, the third for men till fiftie, the fourth for old men. In this liberall Market or Colledge was a Palace, and Iudgement-place. Early in the morning the children resort hither: here also were the striplings, and the riper-aged men, daily: the old men often. The striplings boarded and lodged there (except they were married) and presented  themselues to the Magistrates in Armour. Each Court had twelue Prefects, according to the number of the Persian Tribes. To the children are old graue men appointed, likewise to the youths men of riper age, as masters of Manners. The children come not in the Fathers sight till fiue yeeres of age, or as Valerius MaximusVal. Max. l. 2. cap. 6. hath, till seuen, and especially learne truth: they were taught by these Prefects the rules of Iustice, not by bare rules, but by examples (for which cause also, AugustusSueton. Aug. cap. 36. would haue the Senators children present in the Court.) Yea a good part of the day was to this end spent by those Prefects, in hearing and deciding such cases as fell out amongst these their schollers, about thefts, reproaches, or other wrongs. Next to Truth and Iustice, they learned Sobrietie, Abstinence, Continence, and Temperance,  wherein they were well furthered by the examples of their Masters: neither might theyCic. Tusc. quast. lib. 5. eat but in their presence and with their leaue, and that not of the choisest fare, but bread and cresses, whereto they added drinke from the next riuer. They planted in them a hatred of
 vices, especially of lying, and in the next place of debt, which cannot but bee attended with much disquiet: and therefore wisely did Augustus command to buy him the pillow of a Roman Gentleman, that died incredibly indebted, as if there had therein rested some sleeping power, whereon, one so much indebted could take any rest. Ingratitude was as little gratefull as the former, and by the Persian lawes, ingratefull persons were subiect to accusation and punishment, as not Xenophon onely, butAm. Marcel, lib. 23. Marcellinus also hath marked, howsoeuer SenecaSenec. de Ben. lib. 2. cap. 7. findes such a law onely amongst the Macedonians, which perhaps was hence borrowed. They hated such as forsooke their friends and country-men in need. Their awfull respect to their parents was such, that they might not sit in the mothers presence without her leaue:  the father had tyrannicall power ouer his children, for life and death. That which was vnto them vnlawfull in deed, was not permitted in obscene and filthy words to bee spoken. Thus were the Noble-mens children brought vp neere the Palace gates; and in the Prouinces neere the gates of the Deputies or Gouernours.
For bodily exercise, they learned to shoot, to cast darts, to ride and manage vnruly horses, and to fight on horse-backe. And this was their education till seuenteene yeeres of age: at which time they were of the second ranke of Springals and youths, and for ten yeeres after did not repaire home at nights, but lay and abode in this Court or Colledge. When the King went on hunting, halfe of them attended him in armour. Their dyet was the same, but  somewhat larger, as is before related of the children: and in hunting, if it continued two dayes, had but one dayes allowance. They vsed to run long races, of thirtie or fortie furlongs: they exercised the sling, leaping and wrestling, the King propounding rewards to the Victor. The helpe of these were vsed by the Magistrates against robbers, murtherers, and the like wicked persons: as also of the Men, which was the third order, the Seminary of Magistrates and Souldierie of the Persians, till they were fiftie yeeres old or somewhat more, at which age they were freed from musters and forraine employments, but at home were employed in publike and priuate iudgements. None might attaine this honour in Age, but by those degrees before expressed: nor might any haue that education but the children of the rich, which  were able to beare the charge. It was vnlawfull amongst the PersiansAm. Mar. lib. 23. to laugh in loud manner openly, or openly, or by the way to doe the easements of nature by siege, vrine, or vomit: or to make water standing.


@. V. Of the Persian Luxurie, and Marriages, Funerals, etc.
BVt this ancient Persian discipline and sobrietie, with wealth and loosenesse were afterwards corrupted, especially in drinking; to represse which, the Kings made  an order, Est. 1. that none should bee compelled to forget their health, in remembring of healths, or other Bacchanal deuices, whereof would GOD wee had lesse cause to complaine. The vse of HarlotsAmb^os. d^ Helia. cap. 15. were also added to their drinkings, which when the Embassadors sent to Amyntas King of Macedon, to demand Earth and Water (which was the Persian custome when they exacted full subiection and possession) extended to Matrons. Alexander his sonneIustin. lib. 7. sent young men armed in womens habite amongst them, which quenched their hot flames of lust with their bloud. Hence haply it was, that Assuerus would needes make shew of Vashti the Queene in his magnificent Feast, which occasioned her depriuation, and Esters succession. Amidst their cups they consulted of warre and weightie affaires; but some say, they decreed not till afterwards. The Persians vsed banquettings vnder Arras hangings, before the time of Attalus, from whom the Romans  first borrowed the vse of them, of his aula or hall hanged therewith, calling them aulaea. But the wals of the richer Persians were hanged with them, the floures spread with costly carpets, their cupboards furnished with rich plate, their bodies shining with curious and costly ointments, their kitchin stored with garlick, as a preseruatiue against serpents and venemous creatures, their chambers swarmimg with Concubines; yea, mothers, daughters, and sisters wedded and bedded with them: their second seruices celled in Scripture,Ester 5.6. The banquet of wine, when after the belly full farced with meats, with which they dranke water, they had other tables set with wine, on which they gaue a new onset, as a fresh enemy: these and the like excesses would glut our Reader. Loth were I to bring him to their mourningVid. Drus. Obs. lib. 12. rites, in  which they shaued themselues, their Horses, and Mules; they vsed sackcloth, and entred not the Court: they couered the face of such as incurred the Kings anger, as we reade of Haman. Their executions were flaying, crucifying, burning, burying aliue, stoning, cutting asunder, etc. This pertaineth to their religion, their diuination by lots, as before Haman, they, perhaps
 the Magi, cast Phur, that is, a lot, from day to day, and from month to month, to see which would be the most lucky and fatall time for his mischieuous plot against the Iewes. Their mariages they celebrated in the Spring: and on their mariage day the husbands eate nothing but an Apple, or the marrow of a Camel. The Persians are accounted authors of making EunuchesDonat. in Terent. Eunuch., whichPetron. Arb. Satyr. M. Senec. Controu. 4. lib. 10. Petronius Arbiter and M. Seneca impute to the curiositie of their lust, which might thus be longer serued of them. They vsed in salutation to vncouerEustath. in Dionys. Curt. lib. 3. or put off the Tiara. Here I might lade you with the Persian wardrobe, the length and varietie of their garments; and I might tell you of their earings and Iewels, painting of their faces, long haire: of their kissing salutations, if they were equall, and of the knee of the superiour by the inferiour, and adoration of the chiefe: of their womans womanly detestation in the  eagerest degree of hatred and indignation, the fingering of wooll: of their inhumane crueltie to the kindred of those which had committed some grieuous crime, to punish all for the offence of one. The Persians made banquets to their gods, and gaue them the first fruits thereof. But it is time to leaue their gods and them; and let mee obtaine pardon, that this great Monarchie, sometime stretching from India to Ethiopia in one hundred twentie seuen Prouinces, hath stretched so farre, and commanded mee so long attendance in this Discourse. Let mee now looke vpon the Mahumetan face thereof.



CHAP. VIII. Of the alterations of the State and Religion in Persia, vnder the Saracens.

@. I. Of the Saracenicall Conquest and Schisme in Persia: the third Dynastie.
THe Saracens (as is alreadie shewed) a people bred, as it were of putrifaction in  that corrupt estate of the world, dispossessed of his state and life Ormisdas the last Persian King. Their Religion had sustained small alteration in Persia before this time, for ought I finde, sauing what the Christian had in these parts preuailed, (which belongeth to another taske.) But from that time that the Saracens were Conquerours, the soules of the Persians haue no lesse been subiect to those foolish Mahumetan superstitions, then their bodies too cruell slauerie: yea, theCurio Sarac. hist. lib. 1. Blondus saith, that Mahumet was present at their first conquest, and that by his command they relinquished their n^me, and accepted the S^racen. dec 1. l. 9. So also affirmeth Lope Obregon in confut. of the Alcoran. fol. 44. See supl. 3. c. 2. name of Persian was drowned in the title of Saracens. Homar was then Caliph. But when Iezid the sonne of Muaui was Priest and King (such are the Caliphs) of the Saracens; Mutar, the Deputie or Gouernour of Persia, proclaimed himselfe a Prophet, and seized on  the State: from him the Persian Sophi deriueth his originall. When Iezid was dead, the Inhabitants of Cufa in Arabia proclaimed Hocem the sonne of Ali Caliph: but Abdalam the sonne of Iezid intrapped and slew him; and at his Sepulchre was after erected the Citie Carbala. This Hocem had twelue sonnes, Zeinal, Abadin, Zeinal, Muamed, Bagner Muamed, Giafar Cadened, Ciafar Musa, Cazin Musa, Holi Macerat, Alle Muamed Taguin, Muamed Halmaguin, Alle Hacem Asquerin, Hacem Muamed Mahadin: This last,Barr. As. dec. 2. lib. 10. c. 6. the Persians say that hee is not yet dead, but that he shall come sitting on a Horse, to preach their Law to all Nations: beginning in Massadalle, where Ali his grandfather lieth buried. And therefore they haue there alway a Horse prepared ready, which in time of Diuine Seruice, on a certaine festiuall day, they bring with Lights burning to the Temple, in which Ali is buried, praying him to send his nephew quickly. That day is solemnly celebrated, with so great concourse of  people, as a Portugal th^re present, said, he had neuer seen the like. The other eleuen brethren were buried in diuers places. To returne to Mutar; Abdimelec one of the following Calipha's, sent Ciafa against him, by whose ouerthrow that new Prophet wan new and greater estimation then before. But another Tyrant Abdala Zubir, arising amongst the Saracens, sent his brother Musub against Mutar, who slew Mutar, and was soone after slaine himselfe of Abdimelec, who recouered againe the Prouince of Persia. Abdimelec being dead, in the yeere seuen hundred and two and twenty, Gizad his sonneCurio Sarac. hist. lib. 2. succeeded, and another Gizid vsurped the Scepter in Persia, but was ouerthrowne by Masabner the Captaine of Abdimelecs sonne.
In the raigne of Maruan, Asmulin tooke on him the protection of Mutars Sect, affirming  Ali to bee greater then Mahumet: hee was Prince of the Corasens in Persia, and by one Catabanus his counsaile incited the seruants, by force or treacherie to kill their Masters: and these being growne great by their Masters wealth, were diuided into two factions, the
 Caismi, and the Lamonites. Asmulin Captayne of the Lamonites, destroyed the Caismi: and with his Lamonites, and Catabanus inuaded Persia, and were there encountred by Iblinus the Lieutenant, with an Army of an hundred thousand men; but the Lamonites, by the incouragement of Asmuline and Catabanus, (whom they reckoned Holy men) discomfited him and his; and afterward encountred Maruan himselfe with three hundred thousand men, and made him to flee with foure thousand into Egypt, where Salin the sonne of Asmulin ouerthrew him. Thus the Maruanian race being expelled (the reliques wher^of settled themselues in Fesse and Spayne) Asmulin, from whom the family of the Sophi descendeth, with Catabanus, reigned ouer the Saracens. But let the Reader obserue what in the former  Booke and second Chapter: we haue written of the diuisions and schismes often happening in Persia, following the relations of Mirkond a Persian Authour; and therefore more to be obserued then the more vncertayne relations of Christian Authors.
By all which hath beene said, appeareth a continuall difference betwixt the Persians and other Saracens about their Religion; either (as some affirme) for that the Persians preferred Ali before Mahumet, or for that (which is more likely) they accounted Ali, and not any of the other three (Eubocar, Osmen, or Homar) to be the true successor of Mahumet. The Sultans or Deputies of Persia, which gouerned there vnder the Caliph, vsed that their Schismaticall fancy, as they saw occasion to their owne ambitious designes, vnder colour of Religion. Some say that the Turkes obtayning Persia, stripped the Chalifa of Bagadet of his  temporalty, which (the sword being decider of controuersies in their Religion) was no new thing. Not did it become old or continue long. For by the relations of Beniamin Tudelensis, and others, it appeareth that the Caliphas of Bagdet recouered their state, till the Tartar dispossessed both the Turke and them, as we haue already shewed out of Zachuthi, and Mirkond in our History of the Saracens.


@. II. Of the Tartars ruling in Persia, which was the Fourth Dynastie.
 WE are to speake more fully of the Tartars afterwards: heere yet we are enforced by necessity of the Persian story to mention them. Mirkond writes,Mirkond Hist. Persica. that Chingius Kan great founder of the greatest Empire the Sunne hath seene, in the yeare 1219. inuaded Maurenahar (which is to the North of Persia) and chased Mahomet Koarrazmcha into Karason. The Tartar put all he found to the sword: the like he did at Balk; and thence sent 30000. men after Mahomet, which ouer-tooke and slew him in Gueylon, and put the Countrey to fire and sword. In Rey and the Countrey about, the Tartars are said to haue slaine 600000. persons (some say 1600000.) and in the Prouince of Nichabur 1150000. men, besides women and children, committing the like spoyles during  a whole yeare throughtout all the Prouinces of Persia. Almostancher Byla the Chalife forced them to retyre into Maurenahar. But Oktaykahon or Occoda Can his successour both subdued Persia, and rooted out the whole Family of Mahomet Koarrazmcha, Gelaladin his sonne being vanquished neere Multon in India, whither had retyred himselfe. Mango Chan gaue Persia to Vlah Kukhan or Halaon, who ouerthrew the Saracens, tooke Bagdet, staying therein and in the Countries about 1600000. persons. In the yeare 1261: he subdued Alep and Damas. Hee dyed in Persia and gaue his Countries to his three sonnes;Aleppo and Damasco. to Habkaikahon (Haithon calls him Abaga) Hierak, Mazandaron and Karason: to Hyachemet, Aron or Armeni, and Aderbaion: to Taudon, Diarbek and Rabyah. To others other parts, as Bagadet  to Atalmok Iauuiny to repayre it, which he did. Habkaikahon the eldest raigned in Persia seuenteene yeares, and then his fourth brother Nicudar Oglan (Haithon calls him Tangador) succeeded him, who made himselfe a Mahumetan and called himselfe Hamed. After whose short raigne Argonkhon, Geniotukhon, Badukhan, Gazun* (he made Casbin his Imperiall Citie) Alyaptu, succeeded in order. This last made himselfe Mahumetan,a Cason. kept his Court at Tauris, and first brought in the custome of tribute children, which he tooke from their parents (Christians and Iewes) to frame to his seruice. Hee built Sultania. His sonne and successour Abuzayd spend his summer at Sultania, and his winter at Bagadet: after whose death, which happened A. H. 736. the Tartarians were diuided into Persia, euery one making himselfe King of that which he held, which continued till the time of Tamerlane.  Thus haue I out of Mirkond related these Tartar-Persian affaires. But if I adde some what out of Haithon, which liued in the middest of these times, let it not seeme tedious: first of a Paradise destroyed by the Tartar Haalon: and then of the successors till his time, nor mentioning some which ruled but a little while in Persia.





In the North-East parts of Persia (which of this new Heresie they called Mulchet) there was an old man, named Aloadin, a Mahumetan (as all those parts then were) which had inclosed a goodlyAloadin^ Paradise. Valley, situate betweene two Hills, and furnished it with all variety, which Nature and Art could yeeld, as Fruits, Pictures, rills of Milke, Wine, Honny, Water, Palaces; and beautifull Damosells richly attyred, and called it Paradise; to which was no passage, but by an impregnable Castell. And daily preaching the pleasures of this Paradise to the youths which he kept in his Court, sometimes he would minister a sleepie drinke to some of them, and then conueigh them thither; where being entertained with these pleasures foure or fiue dayes, they supposedA right Fooles Paradise. Of the m^ny foolish opinions touching Paradise, see sup. l. 1. c. 3. and if that weary him not, let him reade Moses Barcepta his disputes thereof in three Bookes: in Biblio. e. Pat. to. 6. wh^r^ he shall also finde many of the ancient Fathers conceits thereof. themselues rapt into Paradise. And then being againe cast into a trance by the said drinke, hee caused them to be carryed forth; and after would examine  them of what they had seene, and by this delusion would make them resolute for any enterprise, which he should appoint them; as to murther any Prince his enemie. For they feared not death, in hope of their Mahumeticall Paradise. But thisM. Paul. and Odor. Haolon or Vlan, after three yeeres siege, destroyed him, and this his Fooles Paradise. Some tellCartwright. this of Aladeules, in the time of Zelim the first. Abaga succeded him in the gouernement of these parts, Anno 1264. but not in the Christian Religion: Tangodor the next, became a Saracen, and called himselfe Mahomet, and at Tauris and other places destroyed the Churches of the Christians, as Haolon had done of the Saracens: he banished the Christians: and peruerted as many Tartars as he could to Mahumetisme. But Argonus the sonne of Abaga rebelled, and taking him, cut him asunder in the middle, succeeding in his place, Anno 1285. After him Regayto, whom the  Tartars slew, placing in his stead Baydo a Christian, who forbad the preaching of Mahumetisme among the Tartars, and reedified the Churches of the Christians: Casan succeeded in his Dominion and Deuotion: and after his death Carbaganda, who in his childhood had beene baptized, and named Nicholas, but when his Christian Mother was dead, he became a Saracen.
Thus farre out of Haithonus; in which History appeareth the vicissitude of diuers Religions, sometime Tartarian, sometime Christian, sometime Mahumetan, as in the Princes who g^uerned these Countries vnder the great Cham or Can of the Tartars: so also no doubt in a great part of the Countries themselues; which vsually are of the Kings Religion. This Carbaganda reigning about 1305. is the last Tartar Prince which ruled in the parts of Syria: and  in Persia the state was soone after diuided into many Soueraignties. For as their Religion, so also their Empire fayled; the Egyptian Soldans preuayling in Syria; the Ottoman Tukes, in Asia; and Gempsas, in Persia. This Gempsas was Soldan of the ParthiansPencer. l. 4. and 5.: and about the yeere 1350. restored that Persian Kingdome to the ParthiansOr to the Turcomans: for Mirkond makes that the Nation of Vsuncassan.. Thus our ChristianThe stories of Christians touching these parts are much defectiue: neither agreeing with Mirkond nor Cantarini and Barbaro which were in Persia, and learned these things more truely. Historiographers. Mirkond mentions him not. Likely it is, when all fell to sharing, he got his part. Of Tamerlan, Mirkond relates, that when Chingius sent Occoda into Maurenahar, Carachar Nuyon was made his first Visier, in which dignity hee and his posterity continued there, till Teymur or Tamurlan the fifth from him, with other great gouernments. Teymur being Visier and Captayne Generall to Sciorgat Meckhom, which raigned in Chagaty, and dyed A. 1370. was proclaymed King in his steed. He by his prosperous armes subdued Maurenahar, Turquestan,  Koarrazm, Karason, Sistom, Industan, Hyerakhen, Parc, Kermon, Mazandaron, Aderbaion and Kusistam, Bagadet, Alep, Damasco: defeated Sultan Farache King of Egypt, and after tooke Baiazet the great Turke prisoner. He dyed, Anno 1405. His victories are byAlbacen in the life of Tamerlan. others enlarged to Russia and China: and the great Chams state settled on him. Mirzab. Charok his fourth sonne succeeded him in the Empire: and after him, Anno 1447. his sonne Mirzah Oleghbek: but as after Alexander, so after Tamerlan, their hastie gotten Empire was much distracted among the great Souldiers his followers, which held great shares to themselues, making warre on their Masters sonnes. And one of the descendants of them. Abtelatife slew Oleghbek in the field, Anno 1450. and was slaine of his Souldiers sixe moneths after. Sultan Abusayd, grand-child to Miromcha, the third sonne of Tamerlan succeeded, slaying Abdula the brother of Abdelatife. But he also was slaine by Mirzah Yadigar Mahamed, one of  Acembec or Vsuncassans partakers; who had before slaine Iooncha (Contarini and Barbaro, which were in Persia with Vsuncasan, call him Iausa, others, I know not why, Malaonchres, others Demir) after whose death Abusay^ was called to the gouernment of Kermon, Hierak and Aderbaion, and being sollicited for peace by Asembelus, Acembec or Vsuncassan aforesaid, reiected it, and so lost himselfe, and left those parts of the Persian Empire to the Conqueror. But in Maurenahar Sultan Hamed his sonne succeeded 28. yeeres: and after him his nephew Babor, the last of Tumberlans bloud there raigning, Ichaybekan comming from Vsbek, Anno 1500. and dispossessing him. Yet did Babor possesse Gaznehen, and some part of India, till his death 1532. where his sonne Homayon succeeded him, and to him his sonne  Geluladin Akbar, commonly called Me^^bdim Echbar the Great Mogol, Father of him which now raigneth, of whom in the next booke. Yadigar that slew Abusayd was also of Tamerlans
 race, the sonne of Mahamed, sonne of Baysangor, sonne of Mirzah Charok. He by Acembecs helpe chased Ocem, another of Tamerlans posterity, by Hamar Cheque his third sonne, King in Katason and Strabat, out of those parts into Faryab and Mayman neere Balk, whence hee suddenly returning with a small force, by aduantage of Yadigar or Hiadigar his negligence, slew him, and recouered his Realme. He dyed, Anno 1506. Two of his sonnes succeeded him, Bahady and Musafar, whom Chaybec Vsbek chased out of their Kingdome. Bahady fled to Ismael Sophy who gaue him the lands of Chambe Gazon in Tauris, and tenne ScrafsA Seraf is eight shillings. of gold by the day; thence he was after carryed prisoner by the Turke to Constantinople, where hee dyed.
 Besides these of the posterity of Tamerlan there were other Princes in Persia, and the parts adioyning, as those of the factions of Blacke Sheepe, and White Sheepe. Of the former was Kara Issuf, which conquered Tauris, Sultania, Casbin, and the countries of Seruan and Diarbech: but dying was spoyled to his shirt of his Souldiers: yea, they cut off his eares for his iewells, and left him in the open field. Charrok held long warres with Scander, and Iooncha his sonnes, the latter of which after many conquests was slaine by Acembec, and Acen Aly his sonne and successour: and thus the White Sheepe faction preuayled, Ozun Acembec or Vusun-Casan the head thereof, of the Tarcoman Nation, heire of Diarbech, and Lord of many Prouinces which hee conquered (as before is noted) but defeated by Mahumet the great  Turke, He dyed Anno, 1471. His sonne Calil succeeded, who was slaine by his brother Iacob or Yacub, whose wife bearing dishonest affection to one of the Court, sought by the murther of her husband to aduance this Courtier to her husbands bed and Empire. AndViaggio di mercante apud Ramus. hauing conueyed venome into a golden cup, presents her husband the same to drinke, who somewhat suspecting her, caused her to begin; himselfe and his sonne following her both in dinking and dying. And thus was Persia, by the wickednesse of one woman, made the Stage of ciuill warres, whiles the chiefe Nobles sought each to possesse himselfe of the State, which at last after fiue or sixe yeeres war, befell toMirkond reckons of this family Kings after Iacob, Baysangor, Rostan, Hagmet, Aluuan and Morat. Alumut or Eluan-beg, then being but fourteene yeere old, who was slaine by Ismael in the yeere 1499.
 And thus yee haue had the succession of the Persian Kings in the first and second Dynastie: of the Saracens you heard in the former Booke: next after whom, the Tartars and these here mentioned, till Ismael obtayned the state, whose posterity still hold it.
Beniamin Tudelensis telleth that Senigar then King of Persia, had two and fortie Kingdomes subiect to him, and that his Dominion extended foure moneths iourney, and speaketh as though hee were not subiect to the Caliph in his temporalities: Master Polo reckons eight Kingdomes of Persia, Casibin, Curdistan, Lor, Suolistan, Spaan, Siras, Soncaia, Timocaim;In this discourse wee haue reckoned many other Regions, in regard of subiection, Persian. not reckoning Hirak, the chiefe Citie wherof was Tauris, and diuers other Countries, now, and before his time subiect to the Persian. And by most Historians it appeareth that Persia had before the dayes of Tangrolopix, and till the Tartars conquest, Sultans, which yeelded  small subiection to the Chaliphs.


@. III. Of Ismael Sofi, first founder of the present Persian Empire, or fifth Dynastie.
THe Historie of Ismael, because it giueth much light both into the State and Religion of Persia, is more fully to be reported. After that Mustacen Mumbila, or Almustacenbila Abdula, the Caliph of Bagdet, had bin by the Tartars done to death in the yeere after Haithonus account 1258. about the yeere 1369. there arose in  PersiaI.BB. par. 2. l. 2 Osor. de re. Em. lib. 10. Surius comment. Knolles T. histor. pag. 464. a Nobleman called Sophi, Lord of the Citie Ardouil, reporting himselfe to be of the bloud of Alle or Hali, descended from Musa Cazin, or Cersin, one of the twelue sonnes (as is said) of Hocem, thirteene descents distant. This Sophi, or (as our Tarik Mirkond aforesaid calls him Cheque Safy) had issue Cheque Mucha, the father of Cheque Ali, who begate Cheque Ebrahem, and he Sultan Iuneyd, father of Cheque Aydar, who begate Ismael. These continued their Hali-holies. Our Authors mention none from Sophi to Iuneyd, whom they make his sonne, calling him Guinne, otherwise written, Guini, Guine, and Giunet.Minadoi, l. 2. Minadoi saith, That Sexchiuni, or more distinctly, Siec Giunet, was Authour of the Persian sect, who vnder the name ofE. T. pag. 490. Mirkond reckons Ismael the thirteenth after Morts Aly: being the sonne of Aidar he of Iuneyd, he of Ebrahem, he of Aly, he of Mucha, and he of Safy, who liued in Tamerians time. So, and of Siec (that is, of a wise man, and an Author of Religion) or rather vnder  the pretence of holinesse, began to perswade the people, that the three first successors of Mahomet were vsurpers, onely Ali ought to be named lawfull successor, and ought to be called vpon in their prayers, and by all meanes ro be honoured. From this time forward the Sepulchre of Ali and his sonnes in Cafe grew in great credit, and was visited euery yeere after the
 same sort that the Turks visit the Sepulchre of the other three: and the Kings of Persia vsed there to bee crowned, and girt with their sword, and their great Calife there kept his residence. Because this Case was neere Babylon, hence grew the common error, that these things were done at Babylon or Bagdet.. Iouius also is deceiued, where he maketh Arduelle or Aidere, author of the Persian faction. Sofi is by Minadoi deriued of Sofiti, a people subdued by Alexander: but Scaliger more fitly Tzophi, which in Arabike signifieth a man of pure Religion. In this respect there is no lesse contention betweene these and other Muhammedans, then betweene the Samaritans and the Iewes: so that the Persians are a kinde of Catharists or Puritans in their impure Muhammedrie. Claudet Duret mentioneth another Etymologie, that Sophi signifieth Wooll, and that this profession in token of humilitie, wearing nothing on  their heads more precious then wooll, were so called. But the former deriuation is more probable. Nic. Nicolai in his third Booke hath also that woollen deriuation: and Geffrey Ducket saith, that Sophi signifieth a Begger, and that the King is not there in Persia so called, but Shaugh; which agreeth with their report, which say that Ismael renewed or continued the name Sofi or Sofiti: but his successors leauing that, and the name of Siec, haue retayned onely the Title of Saha, which some write Shaugh, some Xa, a Royall title communicated by the head of this superstition to those Kings which participate with them therein. Ioseph ScaligerScal. Can. Isag. lib. 3. saith, that Sa or Scha is the same with Monsieur among the French, and Don among the Spaniards. The Iewes and Arabians write it (...) and the Grecians (...). It is sometimes set before the name, as in the present King Scha Habas; sometime comes after, as Melixa for Melic-scha.  BarriusIo. Bar. Asia. Dec. 2. l. 10. c. 6. begins this pedigree at the father of Giunet, or Guine (so he calls him) and not as Minadoi, with Guinet himselfe. He addeth, That for the Ensigne, Character, or Cognisance of his Sect, he ordayned, that in the midst of their Turbant (which they weare with many folds) there should arise a sharpe top, in manner of a Pyramis, diuided into twelue parts (in remembrance of Ali his twelue sonnes) from the top to the bottome. They vsed the colour Red on their heads (saith Minadoi) by ordinance of Arduelle, and therefore were called Cheselbas, that is, Red-heads; some write it Cuselbas. Sophi, as Mirkond affirmeth, was holden in such reputation of holinesse by Tamerlane, that he came to visit him as a Saint; and at his request, set free 30000. slaues, which he had taken in the warres against Baiazat, to whom Cheque Sophi gaue apparell and other necessaries, and sent them home to their houses:  whereby hee wan great fame and affection. Barrius and others attribute this to Guine, and say that these slaues became his disciples first, and after Souldiers to his sonne Aidar against the Christian Georgians.
ThisSurius Com. Knoll. T. Hist. pag. 464. Aider Erdebil (or after Iouius, Harduelles) forsaking (as some say) the world, led a streight life in continency and austerity, and was therefore admired as a Prophet, and resorted to, out of all parts of Armenia and Persia, comming to Tauris to see him: Hee inueighed against the common opinion concerning Mahomets successors, as Guine and Sophi had done, shutting vp heauen to all, sauing Hali his followers. For so the Persians vse to say in their prayers; Cursed be Ebubeker, Omar, and Osman: GOD be fauourable to Hali, and well pleased with him. Vsuncassan moued with his fame, gaue him in mariage his daughter Martha begot of the Christian Lady Despina, daughter of Calo Ioannes Emperour of Trapezond;  both of them by this alliance strengthning themselues against the Turke. Aidar had by this Martha, Ismael, whom she trayned vp in the principles of Christian Religion. Iacob successor of Vsuncassan, iealous of the multitude of Aidars disciples, and the greatnesse of his fame, caused him to be secretly murthered; persecuting all his professed followers with fire and sword. Ismael then a child, fled into Hyrcania to one Pyrchales, a friend of his fathers, who afterwards ayded him to the recouering of his patrimonie. Boterus saith, that Iacob, after the murther of Aidar, committed his two sonnes, Ismael and Solyman, to Amanzar (a Captayne of his) to be conueyed to Zalga, a strong mountaynie place: but he brought them vp liberally with his owne children, and in his last sicknesse, gaue them horse and two hundred Ducats,  with aduice to repaire to their mother; where taking vpon him the protection of the sect of Hali, and the reuenge of his fathers death, his enterprises succeeded prosperously.Cap. 11. Gioua^ Maria Angiolelio saith, that Iacob being poysoned 1485. the Signiorie was possessed by a kinseman of Iacobs called Iulauer, after whose three yeeres raigne succeeded Baysingir two yeeres; after Rustan seuen yeares, who sent SolimanbecMirkond saith Solyman was sent by Iacob in succour of Farrok King of Seyruan, vpon whom Aydar warred. against Sechaidar the father of Ismael, who made challenge to the State in right of his wife the daughter of Vsuncassan, who slew him in the field. Rustan would also haue killed the mother and her sonnes, had not entreatie of his Nobles preuented it. He committed them to ward in the Iland of the Armenians in the Lake Astumar; whither he sent for them againe after three yeeres, but they for feare fled to Ardouil, and there liued closely for a time. Rustan was slaine by Agmat through his  mothers procurement, who loued that Agmat, who abode Sultan fiue months, and was slaine by Rustans Souldiers. And Aluan the kinsman of Vsuncassan was Signior, whom Ismael slew.

A certaineA^ud Ramusium, to. 2. Merchant (who abode a long time in Tauris, and trauelled thorow the most part of Persia, skilfull of the Turkish, Persian, and Arabian languages, either seeing himselfe, or learning of them which did see, in the time of Ismael) relates this history somewhat otherwise, whom, as learning of the Persians themselues the Persian affaires, we may reckon worthy to be followed. Hee saith, that this Sechaidar in Ardouil was this head of thy Sophian Sect, and had three sonnes and three daughters by the daughter of Vsuncassan. He was a zealous enemie against the Christians, oftentimes with his followers repayring into Circassia, doing the people much damage, which when in the daies of Sultan Alumut hee attempted as before times, he was by Alumuts order forbidden at Darbent further passage: but seeking  to make way by force, he was by the forces of Alumut taken, and his head, on the top of a Lance, presented to Alumut; and by his command, giuen to the Dogges to bee eaten; the cause why the Sophians are such enemies vnto Dogs, killing all they finde. This newes comming to Ardouil, his three sonnes fled, one into Natolia, another to Aleppo, Ismael the third to an Iland in the Lake of Van, in which is a Citie of Christian Armenians, where he abode foure yeeres in the house of an Armenian Priest, being then about thirteene yeeres old, who vsed him courteously, and instructed him in the rudiments of Christian Religion. A yeere after he went from Arminig to Chillan, where he kept with a Gold-smith his fathers friend. In this time hee had intelligence, by mutuall writing, with his friends at Ardouil: and with  this Gold-smith hauing gathered together eighteene or twentie men of their Sect secretly to take a strong Castle, called Maumutaga, and hidden in ambush two hundred horse-men of his friends in Ardouill, suddenly slaying the Guard, and possessing himselfe of the Castle, he entred a Towne not farre from the Castle, killing the Inhabitants, and carrying the spoile to the Castle. This Castle was verie rich, because it was a principall Hauen of the Caspian Sea; and so strong, that when Alumut had newes hereof, hee was disswaded from sending any power thither to besiege him. Two daies iourney from hence is Sumachi: which with his power, now encreased, he also took, and diuided the spoiles euery where to his Souldiers, which with fame of this liberalitie came from all parts vnto him. He sent also into Hiberia, three or four daies iourny from thence, which was then gouerned by seuen great Lords, three of which, Alexander Sbec, Gorgurambec, and Mirzambec, with many promises of present spoiles and future exemptions from tribute, hee won to his side, receiuing from each of them  three thousand horse, so that he was now growne fifteene or sixteene thousand strong. Alumut with thirtie thousand valiant Souldiers went to meet him between Tauris and Sumachia, and hauing passed a great Riuer, ouer which were two Bridges, he presently caused them to be broken: Ismael arriuing there the next day, with great diligence found a passage thorow the streame, and with his whole forces, in front, in the breake of the day, assailed Alumut his armie, little suspecting such a good morrow, that Alumut with a few companions hardly escaped. The pauilions, horses, and other bootie, Ismael bestowed on his Souldiers: and then hasted to Tauris, where entring without resistance, hee made great slaughter, killing all the  race of Iacob, opening his Sepulchre, and the Graues of other Noble-men, which had been at the battaile of Darbent against his father, and burning their bones; three hundred harlots he caused to be cut asunder in the middle: hee killed all the Dogs in Tauris, and because his mother had married to one of those Nobles, which were in the battaile of Darbent, he caused her head to bee stricken off in his presence. In this while many Townes, Cities, Castles, and Lords submitted themselues to him, and weare his red-coloured Turbant: but the Castle Alangiachana (whereto were subiect eighteene Villages of Christians, which vsed yeerely to send to Rome two men from the Patriarch to the Pope, of whose faith they were, speaking Armenian, hauing some bookes, but quite lost the vse of the Italian language) this Castle (I say) held out for Alumut vntill his death.
While Ismael was Sultan in Tauris, the Sultan in Bagadet Murat Can son of Iacob, with an  army of 30000. marched against him, and in a plaine, meeting with Ismael was there ouerthrown not seuentie persons escaping to Bagadet with Murat Can: the place bearing witnes of the slaughter, buried vnder many new hils of bones. All these things were done An. 1499. And while I was in Tauris, many came from Natolia, Caramania, and Turkie to serue him; of whom they were graciously entertained. An. 1507. our Author being then in Malacia, saw with his eyes, the Sultan Alumut conueyed prisoner by Amirbec, who with foure thousand men going from Mosull (neere to the sometime-Niniue) to Amit, where the Sultan kept, with promise and profession of his succour, being admitted the Citie, tooke him, and cast a chaine about his necke, whose head Ismael smote off with his owne hands. He was presented  to him by Amirbec in the Country of Aladuli, against whom Ismael was now warring: where taking the Citie Cartibirt, he cut off the head of Becarbec sonne of Aladuli, Lord thereof, with his owne hands. From thence returning to Tauris, hee had almost done as much to his two brethren, whom hee had left Gouernours in his absence, for transgressing their
 Commission: but with much intreatie of his Lords, spared their liues, yet confined them to Ardouill, not to depart from thence. The next yeere hee pursued Murat Can, who was come to Syras, a Citie not inferiour to Cairo in Egypt, with thirtie sixe thousand men, but male-content, and therefore many of them flying vnto Ismael. Whereupon Murat Can sent two Embassadours with fiue hundred followers, with offer of Vassallage vnto him. Ismael cut them all in pieces, saying, That if Murat Can would be his Vassall, hee should come in person, not by Embassage. Murat Can had closely sent Spies to obserue the sequell of his businesse, and being hereof by them aduertised, fled: For many of his Nobles had alreadie put on the red Turbant, of whom he feared to bee taken, as Alumut had beene; and therefore with three thousand of his most faithful he fled vnto Aleppo: but the Soldan of Cairo not admitting  him, he went to Aladuli, who entertained him honourably, and gaue him his daughter to wife.
Ismael, after great slaughter in Siras and Bagadet, was forced to returne toIspahan. Spaan with his Armie. For Ieselbas the Tartar had taken all the Countrie of Corasan, and the great Citie of Eri, which is in compasse betwixt fortie and fiftie miles, well peopled, and full of Merchandize; He had taken also Straua, Amixandaran, and Sari, on the Caspian shoare; and with intent to beguile Ismael, desired leaue to passe thorow his Countrey to Mecca on Pilgrimage. Ismael with deniall, and other sharpe words repelled his suit, and abode a yeere in Spaan, to withstand his enterprises. After he returned to Tauris, where were great triumph^  solemnized in his honour. This Sophi is so loued and feared (saith this Merchant) that they hold him as a God, especially his Souldiers: of which some goe into the warres without Armour, holding it sufficient, that Ismael will succour them: others, because they content themselues to die for Ismael, goe into battaile with naked breast, crying, Schiak, Schiak, that is, God, God. And they forget the name of God, alway naming Ismael: they hold, That hee shall not die, but liue euer. And where other Mosulmans say, La ylla yllala, Mahamet res^^lalla, the Persians say, La ylla yllala, Ismael vellilalla, reputing him a God and a Prophet. I haue learned, that Ismael is not contented to be called or worshipped as god. Their custome is to weare red Bonnets, with a certaine thing like a girdle, large below, and straighter vpwards, made with twelue folds, a finger thick, signifying the twelue Sacraments of their sect, or those  twelue brethren, nephewes of Ali. Ismael was of faire countenance, of reasonable stature, thicke and large in the shoulders, shauen all but the mustachees; left-handed, stronger then any of his Nobles, but giuen to Sodomie. At his second comming to Tauris, hee caused to take twelue of the fairest boyes in the City to serue his lust, and after gaue to each of his Nobles one for the like purpose, and before tooke ten of the best mens sonnes for the same intent.
Osorius de Reb. Emman. lib. 10. I. Bot. Ben.Thus farre haue wee had commerce with this namelesse Persian Merchant in Ramusius his shop, who sometime attended on his Court and Campe. Others adde hereutto, that he sent Embassadours to all the Mahumetan Princes of the East, to receiue that Red-hat Ensigne, together with his Sect; as did his sonne Tammas after him, when Nizzamulucco onely accepted thereof. But it is the common opinion, that the greatest part of the Mahumetans in  Soria and of Asia Minor are secretly of that Sect. Ismael after this warred, and wonne, vpon the Zagatai Tartars, and other adiacent Nations, that hee left vnto his successours a verie great estate,Knol. Turk. Hist. reaching from the Caspian Sea to the Persian, and betweene the Lake Iocco and Tygris, the Riuer Abbiam, and the Kingdome of Cambaya, more then twentie Degrees from East to West, and eighteene from North to South. Hee ordained a new Lyturgie, and forme of Praier d^ffering from the ancient. Such was his authoritie, that they would sweare,Ismael called Chaliph. By the Head of Ismael, and blesse his name, saying, Ismael grant thee thy desire. Vpon his Coyne, on the one side, was written, La illahe illalahu Muhamedun resulalallahe: And on the other, Ismaill halife lullahe, that is, Ismael the Vicar of GOD. The Iewes, at the first,Surius. Comm. in An. 1500. had this Ismael in such admiration, that they foolishly reckoned Ismael to be their promised Messias, gratulating themselues in this conceit, thorowout the most part of Europe,  celebrating festiuall Solemnities, with mutuall Presents, in testimonie of their ioy; which yet was soone dashed,Ant. Ienkinson. none hating the Iewes more then Ismael. He lieth buried at Ardouil, in a faire Meskit, with a sumptuous Sepulchre made by himselfe in his life time; where is a faire Stone Hospitall erected by him for strangers, allowing to all trauellers three daies reliefe for horse and man freely. Ardouil is in latitude thirtie eight degrees.
Angiolello, c. 13.The life of Ismael had beene answerable to the bloudie presages in his ominous birth; for he came forth of his mothers wombe with both his hands shut, and full of bloud: for which cause his father would not haue brought him vp, but commanded him to be slaine: but they which carried him away,Ph. Camerar. Medit. Histor. Cent. 2. c. 4. moued with compassion, secretly nourished him three yeeres, and  after presented him to his father, who then acknowledged and receiued him with loue and kindnesse: for this his bloudie and warre-like spirit dwelt in a louely and amiable bodie, adorned with all the Ensignes of beautie. Hee died Anno 1524.



HONGIVS his Map of PERSIA.
map of Persia, Central Asia
PERSICUM REGNUM




@. IIII. Of SHAV^H TAMAS the Persian troubles after his death.
SCHIACH THECMES, or Shaugh Tamas, succeeded,Michael Iss^it. in An. 1576. and reigned aboue fiftie yeeres. Hee liued deuoutly, and yet (for their Law reconcileth both) verie voluptuously, inheriting his fathers Throne, butBusbeq. epist. 3. not his valour, and spending the gratest part of his time amongst his women. So zealous hee was of their superstition, that when M. Ienkinson came to his Court with the Queenes Letters,Ant. Ienkinson. Hak. 10. 1. p. 349 to treat with him of Traffique and Commerce for our English Merchants, before his feet touched the ground, a paire of the Sophies owne Shooes or Basmackes (such as himselfe vsed to weare,  when he arose in the night to pray) were put vpon his feet, lest their holy ground should be polluted with Christian steps. And being admitted into his presence, and asked of his Religion, whether he were a Gower, that is, an Vnbeleeuer, or a Muselman, (so they call them of their owne profession) hauing answered, that he was a Christian, beleeuing Christ to be the greatest Prophet: Oh thou vnbeleeuer (said hee) wee haue no need to haue friendship with the vnbeleeuers, and so willed him to depart: which he did, and after him followed a man with a Basanet of Sand: sifting all the the way that he had gone within the said Palace, euen from the Sophies sight vnto the Court-gate.
In his time Solyman (as our Turkish Relations before is shewed) much endamaged the Persians, and tooke Babylonia, Tauris, and other parts of their dominions:Lib. 3. cap. 8. yet did Tamas  recouer some part thereof againe, and draue Solyman out of Tauris, (or Ecbatana,Minadoi, of the Warres betweene the Turkes and Persians l. 1. as Minadoi interpreteth, and by a composition, caused him to rase the Fort of Chars, erected by the Turkes in his frontiers. Hee dyed the eleuenth of May, 1576. leauing behind him eleuen children: Mahamet the eldest, who had liued a while in Heri (sometime called Aria)
 and after in Siras (anciently named Persepolis:) his second sonne was Ismahel, whom for his fiercenesse his father had confined to the Castle Cahaca: the third, A^dere; the rest, Mamut, Solimano, Mustaffa, Emanguli, Alichan, Amet, Abrahim, and Ismahel the younger. Hee appointed his second sonne Ismahel his successour, esteeming him more worthy then Mahomet Codabanda (this surname was giuen him for his diseased eyesOthers say, blind: Mirkond and Sir A. S.) as being giuen to a studious and quiet life, and contenting himselfe, that Abas Mirize (which now reigneth) was confirmed in the Citie of Heri, and honoured with the title of the Visier of that Countrey.
Periaconcona, the daughter of Tamas, and elder then any of the brethren, being in Commission with other Counsellors of State to see her fathers Will executed, whiles the Posts  ranne with aduertisements to Ismahel, was attempted by Aidere with earnest solicitation for the Crowne: whose ambitious desire she so farre satisfied, as that shee caused him to bee inuested in Regall apparell, and fettled in the great Gallerie, attending the acclamation of the people; being publikely installed, as though hee were elected King. But meane while shee set sure guards of men, deuoted to Ismahel, at the gates of the Palace; thus purposing to entertaine him (with dreames of dangerous honours) till Ismahel arriued at Casbin. But whiles hee (suspecting the deceit) sought to flee, hee left his head behinde in the hand of Sahamal his vncle, which he cast, all-bloudie, in the middest of his conspiring partakers. Ismael soone after came, and receiued with publike applause the desired Soueraigntie:Turkish Parricide imitated in Persia.  and as he had before adicted himselfe to the studie of the Turkish Law; (enough, if it had beene knowne, to haue barred his succession) so now, after the Turkish manner, he founded his Throne (a foundation to slipperie to stand) in bloud, causing the heads of his eight younger brethren to be cut off, together with all such as were neere them in bloud or affinitie, and all the fauourites of the late slaine Aidere. Thus is Casbin dyed in the bloud of her hopefull Gallants, and entertaines her beholders eyes with streames of bloud running from the slaine, which cause another streame of teares to issue from their liuing friends* who filling the ayre with mournefull complaints (which returning answere by ecchoes, seemed to sympathize their griefe) and in compassion of those dying bodies, then gasping their fatall breaths, imitating (with true affection, and not affected imitation) the same in deepe and  broken sighes: viewing also their owne dangers in the present ruine of their neerest and deerest, some-time allies and acquaintance: tossed with this variety of turbulent passions, conceiue, in this confusion of thoughts (that which is truely the daughter and mother also of confusion) Trecherous Disloyaltie to the Author of these their sorrowes. Ismael posting on to his owne destruction, had now forbidden the douotions of Aly the Persian Prophet, and enioyned the Turkish Rites of Abubachar, and other the followers of Mahomet, by imprisoning, rayling, pulling out the eyes, and killing Ali his obseruants, establishing his Decree, not sparing, in this persecution, to torment the tender Ladies (some of them of his owne bloud) nor reuerencing age or profession, depriuing euen the Califfe of Casbin (the eye of their blindnesse) of both his eyes, because he would not see equitie in this noueltie; and purposing  (as the Fame went) to goe to Bagdat, there to receiue the Crowne from him whomsoeuer hee should find the successour of the great Califfe. In the middest of his cruelties hee was (with like crueltie) murthered by Periaconcona. The Executor of her fathers Will is thus made an Executioner of her fathers sonne, hauing brought in the conspirators, apparelled in womens weeds, to strangle him among his Paramours. This was done the twentie foure of Nouember, 1577. after he had reigned one yeere, seuen moneths, and sixe dayes.


@. V. Of MAHOMET CODABANDA, and his sonnes ABAS.  
MAHAMET CODABANDA thought it now time for him to looke to his right, which by meanes of Mirize Salmas, the chiefe of the Sultans, hee obtained. This Sultan presented him with the head of that Virago Periaconcona, vpon the top of a Launce, with the disheuelled haire, gastly lookes, and bloudy impressions, yeelding an vncouth (though not vndeserued) spectacle to the beholders: which (if like the Snakie scalpe of Medusa it did not transforme them into stones;De Medusa and M^gaera, vide Poetas. yet, as if it had been the Banner of Megaera) seemed to display new quarrels, kindling inward hatreds, tumultuous seditions, and ciuill broyles, which exposed them to Amuraths forces, who thought it fit time  for him to fish with his Turkish nets in this troubled Persian streame. Of these warres is alreadie spoken.Lib. 3. cap. 8. I. Siluest. in Du Bartas transl. Much losse did the Persians by this meanes sustaine, and much more had followed, had not Emir Hamze, Mahomets eldest sonne, with his valorous attempts, stopped the Turkish
 proceedings, and like the Easterne Sun, with his greater brightnesse dispersed those weaker beames of The Moone Standards of proud OTTOMAN.
But soone was this Sunne eclipsed, not by the Moones interposition (for that is naturall, if wee vnderstand it of the heauenly; and ordinary, if of the earthly and Turkish) but by extraordinarie and vnnaturall procurement (as was thought) of his ambitious brother Abas, or (of others susp^cted) of his father; effected by a treacherous Eunuch that guarded him, which suddenly strucke him thorow the bodie and slew him. Abas his brother, by solemne oath cleared himselfe of this odious imputation. And yet hee is no lesse suspected of a more monstrous and vnnaturall treacherie against his owne father, who is thoughtMinadoi l. 9. in his nine bookes, translated by Mast^ Hartwell, the Reader may see these wars at sull.Relatione di Persia, and in Thesoro Politico. Henricu. Po^sius, Laurentius Riscburgi^us. Anonymus quidam de eod^m bello scrips. to bee poysoned  by his meanes, that by these bloudie steps hee might ascend to that Throne, which now he enioyeth. But (all this notwithstanding) he hath since so subtilly handled the matter, that hee is both beloued of his owne, and feared of his enemie: his subiects sweare and blesse in his name.Cartwright. Anno 1603. He hath recouered from the Turke both Tauris, and other Regions of Seruania and Georgia, which the Turke had before taken from the Persians. Hee was reported also to haue taken Bagdat, but (it seemeth) not truly. IansoniusIanson. Merc. Gallobelg. in his Newes 1610. reporteth of diuers victories obtained by him against the Turke (which caus^d publike Fasts and supplications to be appointed at Constantinople:) and of the Persian Embassage, with rich Presents and holy Reliques to the Emperour at Prage. Gotardus Arthus likewise  in hisGot. A. Merc. G. 1613. Gallobelgicus, relateth of Abas his Embassage to Constantinople about a Peace: but when his Embassadour returned with Articles, whereby the Persian was bound, vnder shew of gifts, to pay an annuall tribute to the Sultan, he therefore put him to death; putting out the eyes also, and cutting off the hands of the Turkish Embassador which was sent with him. Of Bagdat and old Babylon wee haue spoken elsewhere: let this be here added out of Balbi,Gaspar. Balbi. that trauelling from Felugia to Bagdat, which hee reckoneth a dayes iourney and a halfe, one whole dayes iourney thereof, was by one side of the ruines of Babylon, which hee left on the left hand.
As for Tauris, in the yeere 1514. Selim tooke it (as some say) on composition, which hee  brake, and carried thence three thousand of the best Artificers to Constantinople. Anno 1535. Solymar gaue it for a prey to his souldiers; Anno 1515. Osman spoiled it with vncouth and inhumane cruelties; whatsoeuer the insulting Conqueror, in the vtmost extent of lawlesse lust, could inflict, or the afflicted condition of the conquered could in the most deiected state of miserie sustaine, was there executed. Abas in recouerie hereof vsed the Canon, an Instrument which before they had, to their owne losse, scorned. The Prince is (saith ourCartwright. Author) excellent both of composition of bodie, and disposition of minde, of indifferent stature, sterne countenance, piercing eyes, swart colour, his mustachees on the vpper lip long, his beard cut close to the chin. Hee delights in Hunting and Hawking, Running, Leaping, and trying of Masteries; He is an excellent Horse-man and Archer. In the morning he vseth to visit his stables of great Horses, and hauing there spent most of the forenoone,  he returnes to his Palace: About three of the clocke in the after-noone, he goeth to the At-Maiden, which is the high street of Hispaan, the Citie of his residence, round about which are scaffolds for the people, to sit and behold the King and his Nobles at their Exercises of Shooting, Running, Playing at Tennis, etc. all on horse-backe. In this place very often, in his owne person, he heareth causes, and pronounceth sentence, executing Iustice seuerely.
Now th^t we may mention some of the chiefe Cities of Persia (vnder which name I here comprehend, as vsually in this Historie, theirM^dia Gheilan, Mastandran, or Hyrcania, Pa^thia, Aria, Candahat, Heri, Corassan; Farsi, or Persia, with the Caramanian desart, the Kingdome of Lar, and the Turcoman nation are subiect to this King: and he hath also subdued and ruined the houses of some great men, which in his fathers dayes would doe what they list. Dominion, not as it is measured by the Pens of Geographers, but by the Swords of their Princes.) In Sumachia, Master Cartwright saith, They saw the ruines of a cruell spectacle, which was a Turret erected with Free-stone and Flints, in the midst whereof were placed the heads of all the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Countrie. A mile from this Towne was a Nunnerie, wherein was buried the bodie of Amaleke  Canna, the Kings daughter, who slew her selfe with a knife, for that her father would haue forced her to marrie a Tartarian Prince: the Virgins of the Countrey resort hither once a yeere to lament her death. Sechi is foure dayes iourney thence, not farre from which is Eres, which, because they yeelded to the Turke, were by Emir-Hamze vtterly destroyed, man, woman, and child. Arasse is the chiefe Citie of Merchandize in all Seruania, especially for raw Silks. Tauris hath out-liued many deaths, and is very rich by reason of continuall Trade, nourishing almost two hundred thousand people within her compasse; for wals, it hathSir Anthony Sherley saith i^ hath mudwals. not. This was sometime the Seat-Royall, and after that, Casbin, which is situate in a fertile Plaine, foure dayes iourney in length, wherein are two thousand Villages. The buildings  are of Bricke dried in the Sunne, as in Persia is most vsuall: The At-Maidan, or chiefe street, is foure square, almost a mile in circuit. Neere to it is Ardouil, of chiefe note for beginning of the Sophian Superstition. Geilan is foure dayes iourney from Casbin, and stands neere to the Caspian Sea. Neere to Bachu is a Fountaine of black oyle; which serueth all
 the Countrey to burne in their houses. Cassan is well seated, and rich in Marchandize, but subiect to heat more then other parts of Persia. No person is there permitted to be idle. Hispaan is thought by some to be Hecatompolis: the walls are a dayes iourney about on horsebacke; before the greatest, now the Royall Citie of the Persians. It hath a strong Fort, two Seraglio's, the walls whereof glister with red Marble and Parget of diuers colours, paued all with Mosaique worke, all things else combining Maiestie and Louelinesse, Magnificence and Beautie. The inhabitants, as did the ancient Parthians (whose chiefe Citie it sometime hath beene) buy, sell, talke, and performe all their publike and priuate affaires on horse-backe: the Gentlemen neuer goe on foot. Sciras is thought to bee Persepolis, it is rich of Trade, and there is the best Armour made in all the East, of Iron and steele, cunningly tempered  with the iuyce of certaine herbes. The Gouernement of this State in Warre and Peace, I leaue toSans^uin^ del gouerno di reg. l. 6. Botero, etc. others.


@. VI. An Appendix touching the present Persian King, out of Sir ANTHONY SHERLEY.
HAuing thus followed the currant of Authors in these Relations of Persia: there hath since the first Edition been published the Trauels of Sir Anthony Sherley into these  parts (with Sir Robert Sherley his brother) penned by himselfe: with some extracts whereof to furnish this Chapter (alreadie tedious) as with a second seruice after a full stomacke, will (I hope) renue appetite, with the varietie (so farre fetched and so deare bought) howsoeuer before cloyed with fulnes: To let passe therefore those worthy Brethren (Worthies indeed in this kinde, beyond the reach and worth of my blurring praise, and eclipsing commendations) and to come to their Trauell and obseruation. Hauing passed not without manifold dangers to Aleppo: and thence to Birr, and so downe Euphrates: by the way they aduentured to see the Campe of Aborisci King of the Arabs, inhabiting the desarts of Mesopotamia, a pooreThis King was a Saniack of the Turke, whereas they on the Westside of the Riuer in an huge extent, and infini^e numbers ^oue, and rob all: the Turke keeping aagainst them fifteene hundred Ianizaries at Damasco, and twelue thousand at Cairo. Old Babylon is North from Bagdat about fiue and awentie miles. Io. Newbury. King with ten or twelue thousand beggerly subiects, liuing in tents of blacke haire-cloth, well gouerned. They came to Bagdat, which is wholly on the other  side of Tygris, except one Suburb in the Peninsula, to which men passe by a bridge of boats, euery night dissolued for feare of the Arabs, or stormes: whence, through the bountie of an Italian Merchant, Sir Victorio Speciero, they escaped (for they were not vnsuspected) with a Carauan of Persian Pilgrims wich came from Mecca. Thirtie dayes they were on the way to the Confines: and fifteene from thence to Casbin, where they staied a moneth attending the Kings arriuall; being in the meane time well vsed, vpon conceit that the King would like well of their comming: the people otherwise are ill in themselues, and onely good by example of their King, and strict obedience to him. For of the ancient Persians there are few, these being the posteritie of those which haue been here seated by the transplantations of Tamerlane and Ismael (not to mention any, more ancient) out ofCourdies, Tartars, Turkmans, etc. other Countries.  
The King himselfe, by our Authors Relation, in his vertues and gouernment, is, as if some Philosopher should discourse of what should be, rather then an Historian declare what is: as did XenophonSome haue foolishly beleeued as Historie, those things which Xenophon writ as a Philosophicall Poem, etc. sometimes in his Cyrus: Of those imputations of Paricide and ambition, not a word. His order of attaining the Crowne, is thus reported.
The Persian custome, being that onely the elder brother ruleth, the rest are made blinde by burning basons, hauing otherwise all contentments fit for Princes children: when Xa-Tamas was dead without issue, his brother (so hee calleth him, contrary to our former relations, and to that of Mirkond the Persian, which I more maruell at) Xa-Codabent, was called, Blind to the Kingdome. He had issue Sultan Hamzire Mirza the eldest, who succeeded him, and this present King called Abas. The eldest in his fathers life time administred all things,  which blindnesse made the other vnfit for: but Abas at twelue yeeres of age, vnder the gouernment of Tutors held the Prouince of Yasde, where the loue of the people made him suspected to his Father, who secretly resolued his death. Abas by his friends hearing it, fled to Corasan a Tartar people on the East of Persia, both by their religion and dependance, Turkish, and of themselues otherwise vnquiet, and addicted to spoyle. This King honoured Abas as his sonne. His father soone after dying, Sultan Hamzire succeeded, who was forced to renew his truce with the Turk, by reason of the rebellion of the Turcomans, whom by force he subdued, beheaded their Princes, and for his securitie slew twentie thousand of the ablest amongst them for the wars. And then wholly bending his thoughts against the Turk, was by treason slaine by his Barber. His Princes, Authors of this fact, shared his State amongst  them, euery one making himselfe Lord of that Prouince which he gouerned: vniting their resolutions against Abas, whom also the Turke (which had his hand in the businesse)
 had vndertaken should bee kept still in Corazan. Abas neuerthelesse so wrought, that the King of Corazan dismissed him, with three thousand horsemen, to winne possession of that State, which since hath deuoured the Tartars, and is growne terrible to the Turke, being no lesse in Extent then the Turke hath in Asia, and better both peopled, gouerned, and deuoted to their Soueraigne. But it was not easily atchieued. In Sistane one of the neerest Prouinces, hee was encountred with twenty thousand, his troupes cut in pieces, himselfe forced to flee to the mountaines, where he liued three moneths vnknowen amongst the heardmen, flitting vp and downe with tenne or twelue followers. Wearie of this life, hee determined to shew himselfe in Yasd, his quondam Prouince, which so well succeeded, that numbers come flocking to him, and Ferrat Can also a great Prince (discontent with the present State, no  part of which had falne to him, hauing at that time no Prouince in his gouernement, when the King was slaine) resorted to him with his brother, and tenne thousand followers. They were welcome, but hee much more, as a great Souldier and a wise Prince. With these forces hee ouerthrew his neerest enemies, which caused those of Shyras, Asphaan, Cassan, assisted by the Kings of Gheylan and Mazandran, to gather mighty forces. In the meane time, the Turkes armed at Tauris, and the Prince of Hamadan, hauing called in a strength of the Courdines, was marching towards Casbin. Thus beset with Armies, hee leaueth Ferrat Can with Zulpher his brother and fiue thousand men in Casbin: and himselfe with the rest of his power, marched towards the Can of Hamadan. Now did Ferrat Can (according to former agreement  betweene the King and him) professe himselfe altered from the Kings part, and writeth to the Rebells, offering to ioyne his strength with theirs, and to mutinie the Kings Armie also, which was lodged in the Mountaynes, in shew to keepe the straits, indeede to expect the euent. Thus the Cans assembled at Casbin, and after long deliberation, concluded, that it was needelesse and not safe to call in the Turkes forces, and dispatched a messenger and present to the Bassa of Tauris, to reserue his fauour till a time more needfull. Hereof Ferrat sent word closely to the King, and of a banquet which should bee at his house a few nights after, where the Principalls of the Army should meet. Hither Abas bid himselfe a guest, posting thither with fiue thousand of his best horse, which he disposed in the mountaine, couered with Ferrats troupe, expecting the appointed signe: which being giuen late in the night when the whole company was heauie with wine and sleepe, the King was receiued into  the house with three hundred men, where without any vprore he slew seuentie. And at the breake of the day the Kings people made as great shouts and noyse, as if all the Army had bin there, whereat the Alarme being giuen, all betooke them to their armes, repairing to Ferrats lodging to their Princes; whose heads laced vpon a string, were there presented to them out of a Tarras, vpon which the King presently shewed himselfe with Ferrat Can; Zulpher hauing his fiue thousand men ready in a troupe in the great place. All these things together so amazed them, that they thought the Kings pardon a high preferment, which he freely granted both them, and the succours sent thither by the Kings of Cheylan and Mazandran. The reports hereof made Hamadans Armie to vanish, and the King tooke order presently by new  Cans for the gouernment of those parts. Hee led his souldiers to Hisphaan, giuing out that the treasures of the Kingdome were there layd vp by the Rebels; a good policie to winne it, which with as much pretended indignation he rased, for fayling of his seeming hopes. To satisfie his Souldiers better, he led them against the Kings of Gheylan and Mazandran, where the entrances by Nature difficult, thorow the vnpassable woods and hilles, were made easie by the reuolt of those to whom the charge of keeping the Straits was giuen, whose liues Abas had before spared at Casbin. The successe was, the two Kings were slaine, and the souldiers enriched with the spoyle of a Countrey exceeding fertile, thus subdued to his Scepter. The people he remoued into other parts of his Dominion, sending the former inhabitants  into Cheylan and Mazandran.
Not long after the brother of that King of Corassan, which had beene Tutor to Abas, rebelled against his brother, and slew him and all his children, except one with whom his Tutors fled into the Mountaines. This occasion Abas apprehended for the subduing of that Countrey in the Infants right, which (notwithstanding the treasons of Ferrat, now weary of his former loyalty, and conspiring with the Turke and Tartar to betray his Master to them) hee effected. These things with larger circumstances Abas himselfe related to Sir Anthonie and Sir Robert. As for his gouernment, the same is there also described, but I haue beene too long in the former. Hee hath Posts once a weeke from all parts. The Visire sitteth in counsell with the Kings counsell euery morning, and the King himselfe euery Wednesday.  The poorest may offer him any supplication, which he readeth, registreth, ordereth. One example of Iustice is admirable, which he sentenced on the Gouernour of Casbin, conuict of many extortions, briberies, and other crimes: That all his goods and lands should be sold for satisfaction to those whom hee had spoyled; and if any thing wanted, since the
 King by giuing him that authoritie, was partly the cause of those excesses, hee condemned himselfe to pay the residue out of his treasurie. If any thing aduanced, it should bee giuen to his children, with a grieuous Edict, that no succour should be ministred to himselfe. Neither should hee at once end his punishment by death,He carryeth with him 500. Dogs, and as many Hawkes for all game: Sparrowes for Flies, Marlins for birds, Eagles, etc. but during his life weare a Yoke like a Hogs-yoke, and haue his eares and nose cut off: nor might any relieue him; but hee should get his liuing with his owne hands, that hee might feele in himselfe the miserie of pouertie. This made the Turks Embassador there present sweare, that such fortune and such vertue must needs be his Masters ruine. His bountie to our Author, his magnificence otherwise, let the Reader there learne, as likewise his priuate disports and exercises. At his entrance into Hisphaan, the wayes were couered two English miles with Veluet, Satin, and Cloth of Gold,  where his horse should passe. He feasted Sir Anthony, before his employment in that honorable Embassage to the Princes Christian (after the manerEsther. 1. Athenae. l. 4. tels of 15000. guests, and 400. talents spent in one of those Feasts, but that of Assuerus was greater. of the ancient feasting vsed by the Persians) thirty dayes together, in a Garden of two miles compasse, vnder Tents pitched by small rils of water; where euery man that would come, was placed according to his degree, vnder one or other Tent, prouided abundantly with meate, fruit, and wine, drinking as they would without compulsion. The ioy of which feast was augmented by the Tartars ofBucara or Bogharre. Buckhawrd, yeelding themselues to his subiection, and by the great Mogors great offer with his eldest sonnes daughter, to the young sonne of King Abas in marriage. But I referre the more desirous to Sir Anthonies owne booke; hauing thence gathered this, because it differeth so  much in some things from others; then whom, he had farre better meanes of intelligence.



CHAP. IX. Of the Sophian Sect, or Persian Religion, as it is at this present.

@. I.  The differences betwixt the Turke and Persian, with the zeale of both parts.
IT hath beene already shewed, how the Saracens had one Calyfa, or Caliph, whom they esteemed the Head of their Religion and Empire, in right vnto both succeeding their grand Seducer, Mahomet: and how the foure Captaines or Doctors, each ayming, vnder colour of Religion, to further his ambitious Proiects, made way to difference of Sects in the beginning, and in succeeding Ages the Sword decided, who was rghtfull successor, the posterity  of each challenging to himselfe that right, according as they were able in the Fielde to maintaine it. These Persians affected Hali, as truest interpreter of their Law, and Lord of the State, to whom Mahomet gaue his daughter in his life time, and his Alcoran at his death, being his kinsman also by birth; and although, by the violence of the contradicting Caliphes, they did not alway make hereof open profession, yet euer and anone, as occasion was offered, this fire brake out, yet neuer into so great a flame, as after the yeere 1369. by Sophi, Guine, Aidar, Ismael, and their successors, vnto this day: their Sect being that onely, of the seuenty two Saracenicall (so many someTheodorus Cantacuzen. ap. Cras. Io di Bar. As. dec. 2. l. 10. c. 6. account) which shall in the Persian estimation haue admission into Paradise, all the rest (and why not this also?) leading to hell.
From that diuision betwixt the Persians and Arabians, about the successor of Mahomet (it is Barrius his Relation, in which the Persians call themselues Sia, which signifieth the vnion  of one body, but the Arabians call them Raffadin, that is, vnreasonable, and themselues Cunin) proceeded other Sects amongst the Mahumetans; and amongst the Persians, two called Camarata and Mutazel^, which follow little the saying of the Prophets, but would haue all proued to them by naturall reason, not allowing Moses or Mahomet any further. There is one Sect amongst them called Malaheda, which subiecteth all things to Chance, and to the Stars, not to Diuine Prouidence. There are other called Emozaidi, which reiect many things in the Alcoran, and follow the doctrine of Zaidi, the Nephew of Hocem, second sonne of Ali,Deuill, quasi doe-euill: or Deuill, of (...). an Accuser or Cauiller. these inhabite on the confines of Prester Iohn, and in Melinde.
But to come to the common Persians, and to obserue out of Barrius the diuersity of opinion  betwixt them and the Arabians; their Doctors reduce these differences into seuenteene conclusions. The Persians say, That GOD is the Author and worker of euery good, and that euill commeth from the Deuill: The Arabians say, That would bring in two Gods,
 one of good, the other of euill: the Persians say, that God is eternall, and that the law and creation of men had a beginning: the Arabians answere, That all the words of the law are prayses of the works of God, and therefore eternall, like himselfe: the Persians say, That the soules of the blessed in the other world cannot see the essence of God, because he is a Spirit of Diuinity; onely they shall see his greatnesse, mercy, pitty, and all other good things which he works in the creatures: the Arabians answere, That they shall see him with their eyes, euen as hee is; the Persians say, That when Mahomet receiued the Law, his soule was carried by the Angel Gabriel into the presence of God: the Arabians affirme it of his body also: the Persians say, That the children of Ali, or Alle, and Fatema: and their twelue Nephewes,  haue preheminence aboue all Prophets: the Arabians grant it aboue all other men, but not ^boue the Prophets: the Persians say, that it is sufficient to pray thrice a day vnto God; in the morning when the Sunne riseth, which is called Sob; the second (Dor) at noone: the third (Magareb) before Sunne-set, because these three containe all the parts of the day: the Arabians require twice besides, according to their law, called Hacer, and Assa. The rest of their seuenteene Articles of difference, mine Author hath not expressed. These are sufficient, to shew that they not onely differ about the successors of Mahomet, as Minodoi affirmeth, but about Dogmatical points also in their ridiculous Theologie, and interpretation of their law.
 These differences haue continued of old and long continuance; what hath in latter times accrewed hereunto by the Sophian additions of Guine and his followers, is in part touched in the former Chapter. Let vs now take view thereof, as the same at this present hath infected Persia and the neighbouring Regions.
There is resident inMi^adoi lib. 2 The chiefe is now at Hispaan. Cartw. Casbin their profane Priest, called Mustaed-Dini, that is to say, the chiefe of the law, who is as the Mufts among the Turkes; and in the other subiect Cities are certaine peculiar heads obedient to this chiefe Priest, who notwithstanding are not chosen or displaced at his pleasure, but by the King himselfe, who should not onely be a King, but a Priest, as Ali and Mahomet were; from whom hee challengeth succession. And we haue  shewed before that Ismael was called Halife, or Chalife, that is, the Vicar of God. Howbeit, for auoyding of greater trouble, he granteth that fauour, and putteth ouer that burthen from himselfe vnto others; to whose iudgements he also referreth himselfe, whensoeuer there is any Consultation or Treatie touching their law and religion. Vnder the Mustaed-Dini are the Califs (sayth Minadoi) and these are they that execute their dayly Seruice in their Mosches or Temples. The chiefe of these Califs is hee that putteth the Horn vpon the Kings head, when he is first enthronized: a ceremonie now performed in Casbin, because the Turkes forbad it to bee performed in Cafe, neere vnto Babylon, according to the ancient wont. Other Cities also haue a Mustaed-Dini and Calif, although inferiour to them of Casbin. These inferiour Califs seeme to be Vicars (so the word signifieth) of the Mustaed-Dini.
The difference betweene the Turke and Persian (as commonly it happeneth in case of Religion)  is so hotly pursued on both sides betwixt them,Phil. Camerar. I. F. Ob. subciscent. 3. c. 12. that they neither vse mutuall marriage, nor Merchandize, as some affirme: there can be no certaine Peace, or continuing Truce. And if one altar his Religion and turnes to the other side, hee is not receiued without a newThere bee meanes to draw vp that skinne by Art, which may endure a new cutting. Circumcision. Baiazet the great Turke burnt two hundred Houses in Constantinople, infected with this Sect, together with the inhabitants, and set forth a publike Edict against it. Ismael is sayd, in like hatred of the Turkes to haue caused a Swine to be nourished, which, in despight of the Ottoman he named Baiazet. Solyman returning from Amasia, was entertained in the house of one of this Sect, who therefore, after the departure of his Prince, purified his house with washings, perfumes and other ceremonies; as if it had beene polluted with a Turkish guest; for which cause himselfe was slaine, and his house rased. But let vs take a further  view of this Sect in other Countries.


@. II. Of the spreading of the Persian Opinion.
NEither could it containe it selfe in the limits of the Persian Kingdome, but was spread further, and receiued euen in the heart of Turkie, and skirts of India.Knol. T. H. Surius Comm. in An. 15^0. For amongst other the Disciples of Aidar, Chasan Shelife, and Schach Culi, afterwards surnamed Cuselbas, fleeing the fury of the Persian King, who had slaine their Master,  and persecuted his followers, came into Armenia Minor, and there tooke vp their dwelling at the great Mountaine Antitaurus, at the soot whereof the broken Rocks haue many darke Caues, the worke of Art partly, partly of Nature; which place of the inhabitants is called Teke-ili, whereof Schach Culi was after called Techellis. Here these two giuing themselues
 wholly to a contemplatiue life, in a strict austerity contenting themselues with such things as the earth voluntarily affoorded, began to grow in knowledge, first of the Heardsmen and Shepheards; after, of the Husbandmen and Countrey people, admiring their new holinesse. Yea, Baiazet himselfe, then Emperor of the Turkes, moued with zeale of their deuotion, sent them yeerely sixe or seuen thousand Aspers. Afterwards becomming Fortune-tellers, and prognosticating things to come, they were by the supersttious people drawne into Villages and Cities, where they preached Hali, according to Aidars doctrine, enioyning their Disciples the red Band on their Turbants; of which the Turkes tearme them Cuselbas, that is, Red-heads, with which, in short time, the Cities and Townes were filled.
When they were thus multiplied, there met ten thousand of them at a Fayre at Tascia, or  Attalia, where they executed the chiefe Magistrate; and being perswaded by these new Masters, they sware neuer to forsake their Captaines, or refuse any labour for their most holy Religion, vowing their soules and bodies in defence thereof. These Captaines not hauing otherwise to maintaine their followers, gaue them leaue to forrage the Countrey adioyning, and to liue vpon the spoyle of them that would not receiue their new doctrine, which they in many troupes, and with many preyes accordingly performed. They entred into Lycaonia, and the people fled out of the Countrey into Iconium. There two Prophets set vp Proclamations of blessings to all such as would receiue their Sect, and of destructions to the gainesayers. Ismael also, to encrease their strength, had sent them some troupes of horsemen. In the Politike Historie which Crusius hath giuen vs, in the first booke of his Turcogracia, it is  sayd, that two hundred thousand followed Sach Cules: In this war Baiazets two Nephewes, with the forces of the Countrey, encountring them in battell, receiued the ouerthrow: Corcutas, the sonne of Baiazet, with his Armie durst not assayle them. Thus marched they into Bithynia, where neere vnto the Riuer Sangarius, Caragoses Bassa, Viceroy of Asia, affronted them, hauing before commanded Achmetes, the eldest sonne of Baiazet, to leuie forces in his gouernment of Cappadocia and Pontus, to shut them in at their back. But Techellis, after the losse of seuen thousand men, and all his Ensignes, chased him out of the field into Cutaie the seat of the Viceroy, where he besieged and tooke him with his wiues and children: and after being pursued by Alis Bassa, with forces out of Europe, hee impaled this Caragoses in the way on a sharpe stake fastened in the ground. Here was hee forced to fight, and his fellow  Chusan Shelife slaine; but Techellis recouering the battell almost lost, left Alis Bassa slaine in the place; the Turkes fleeing before him. Ionuses Bassa was sent against him, when hauing lost a great part of his strength, hee had retired his weakened forces into Antitaurus, out of the Woods and Mountaines, often assayling the Turkes: whence at last he fled into Persia. Ionuses caused strait inquisition to be made for these new Sectaries, doing such to death with exquisite torments, as had borne armes in the late rebellion, and burned the rest in the forehead with an hot yron: and after transported them, together with the friends and kinsemen of such as had beene executed, into Europe, there to bee dispersed through Macedonia, Epirus, and Peloponnesus, for feare of a second returne of Techellis. The remainder of Techellis his power, as they fled into Persia, robbed a Carauan of Merchants; for which outrage, comming  to Tauris, their Captaines were by Ismaels command executed, and Techellis himselfe burnt aliue; but yet is this Sect closely fauoured in Asia.


@. III. Of their Rites, Persons, Places, and Opinions, Religious.
WE haue now seene the Proceedings of this Sophian Sect, both in Persia and Turkie,Gef. Duck. Hak. tom. 1. both here kept downe, and there established by force. To weare red on the  lower parts of their body, were to these Red-heads scarsely piacular. Touching Hali, they haue diuers dreames: as that when they doubted of Mahomets succ^ssor, a little Lizard came into a Councell assembled to decide the controuersie, and declared that it was Mahomets pleasure, that Mortus Ali (or Morts Ali) should be the man. He had a sword wherewith hee killed as many as he stroke. At his death he told them that a white Camell would come for his body, which accordingly came, and carried his dead body and the sword, and was therewith taken vp into heauen; for whose returne they haue long looked in Persia.Some say it is for one of his Nephewes. For this cause the King kept a horse ready sadled, and kept for him also a daughter of his to be his wife; but she died in the yeere, 1573. And they say further,  that if he come not shortly, they shall be of our beleefe.
They haue few bookes, and lesse learning. There is often great contention and mutinie in great Townes, which of Mortus Ali his sonnes was greatest: sometime two or three thousand
 people being together by the eares about the same; as I haue seene (sayth Master Ducket) in Shamaky, and Ardouill, and Tauris, where I haue seene a man comming from fighting, and in a brauery bringing in his hand foure or fiue mens heads, carrying them by the hayre of the crowne. For although they shaue their heads commonly twice a weeke, yet leaue they a tuft of hayre vpon their heads about two foot long, whereof, when I enquired the cause, They answered that thereby they may bee the easier carried vp into heauen when they are dead. In praying they turne to the South, because Mecca lyeth that way from them. When they be on trauell in the way, many of them will as soone as the Sunne riseth, light from their horses, turning themselues to the South, and will lay their gownes before them, with their  swords and beads, and so standing vpright doe their holy things, many times in their prayers kneeling downe, and kissing their beades, or somewhat else that lieth before them.
When they earnestly affirme a matter, they sweare by God, Mahomet, and Mortus Ali,Knol. Tupk. hist. pag. 964. and sometime by all at once, saying, Olla Mahumet Ali, and sometime Shaugham bosshe, that is, by the Shaughes head. Abas the young Prince of Persia charged with imputation of treason, after other Purgatorie speeches, sware by the Creator that spread out the ayre; that founded the earth vpon the deepes; that adorned the heauen with Starres; that powred abroad the water; that made the fire; and briefly of nothing brought forth all things:Arthur Edwards. Hak. tom. 1. by the head of Ali, and by the Religion of their Prophet Mahomet, that hee was cleare. If any Christian  will become a Bosarman, or one of their superstition, they giue him many gifts: the Gouernor of the Towne appointeth him a horse, and one to ride before him on another horse, bearing a sword in his hand, and the Bosarman bearing an arrow in his hand, rideth in the City cursing his father and mother. The sword signifieth death, if hee reuolt againe. Before the Shaugh seemed to fauour our Nation, the people abused them very much, and so hated them that they would not touch them, reuiling them by the names of Cafars and Gawars, that is, Infidels or Mis-beleeuers. Afterwards they would kisse their hands, and vse them gently and reuerently. Drunkards and riotous persons they hate;Rich. Cheinit. for which cause Richard Iohnson caused the English, by his vicious liuing, to be worse accounted of then the Russes.
 Their opinions and rites most-what agree with the Turkish and Saracenicall. Their Priests are apparelled like other men: they vse euery morning and afternoone to goe vp to the toppes of their Churches, and tell there a great tale of Mahomet and Mortus Ali.Ducket. They haue also among them certaine holy-men called Setes; accounted therefore holy, because they, or some of their ancestors, haue beene on pilgrimage at Mecca; these must be beleeued for this Saint-ship, although they lie neuer so shamefully. These Setes vse to shaue their he^ds all ouer, sauing on the sides a little aboue the Temples, which they leaue vnshauen, and vse to braide the same as women doe their hayre, and weare it as long as it will grow.Ios. Barb. apud Ramus. Iosafa Barbaro at Sammachi lodged in an Hospitall, wherein was a graue vnder a vault of stone, and neere vnto that a man, with his beard and hayre long; naked, sauing that a little before and behind, he was couered with a skinne, sitting on a peece of a matte on the ground; I, (sayth  hee) saluted him, and demanded what hee did: he told mee hee watched his father: I asked who was his father; He, quoth he, that doth good to his neighbour; with this man in this Sepulchre I haue liued thirty yeeres: and will now accompany him after death; and being dead, be buried with him: I haue seene of the world sufficient, and now haue determined to abide thus till death.
Another I found at Tauris on all-Soules day, in the which they also vsed a commemoration of Soules departed, neere to the Sepulchre in a Church-yard; hauing about him many birds, especially R^uens and Crowes: I thought it had beene a dead corpse, but was told it was a liuing Saint, at whose call the birds resorted to him, and he gaue them meat.
Another I saw, when Assambei was in Armenia, marching into Persia against Signior Iausa,  Lord of Persia and Zagatai, vnto the City of Herem; who drew his staffe in the dishes wherein they are, and sayd certaine words, and brake them all: the Sultan demanded what he had sayd: they which heard him answered, that he said hee should be victorious, and breake his enemies forces, as hee had done those dishes: whereupon he commanded him to be kept till his returne; and finding the euent according, he vsed him honourably. When the Sultan rode thorow the fields, he was set on a Mule and his hands bound before him, because he was sometime accustomed to doe some dangerous folly: at his feet there attended on him many of their religious persons, called Daruise. These mad trickes he vsed according to the course of the Moone, sometimes in two or three dayes not eating any thing, busied in such fooleries, that they were faine to bind him: Hee had great allowance for  his expences.
One of those holy men there was, which went naked like to the beasts, preaching their faith: and hauing obtained great reputation; hee caused himselfe to bee immured in a wall forty dayes, there to abide without any sustenance: but when this time was expired, and
 some wondered, one more nose-wise then the rest, smelled the sent of flesh: the Sultan hearing it, committed him and his disciple to the Cadilasher, who by torments caused them to confesse the coozenage; for, thorow a hole which was made in the wall by a caue, he had broth conueyed to him, and therefore they were both put to death: In the yeere 1478. Chozamirech an Armenian, being in his shop in Tauris, an Azi or Saint of theirs came to him, and willed him to deny his Christian faith: he answered him courteously, and prayed him not to trouble him: but when he persisted, hee offered him money; the Saint would not haue the money, but importuned his first sute: Chozomirech sayd hee would not deny his Christian faith: whereupon the other plucked a sword out of a mans scabard which stood by, and with a wound which hee gaue the Armenian in the head, killed him, and ranne away. But  the Armenians sonne complayning to the Sultan, procured his apprehension at Merin, two dayes iourney from Tauris: and, being brought before him, he with a knife killed him vvith his owne hands, and caused him to be cast on a dung-hill for the dogges to eate; saying, Is this the way to encrease the faith of Mahomet? But when some of the more zealous people went to one Daruiscassun, which was in guarding of the sepulchre of Assambei the former Sultan, and (as it were) Prior of the Hospitall, and requesting of him, obtayned the body to burie it: the Sultan hearing it, sent for him, and sayde to him, Darest thou countermand my commands? Away and kill him; which was suddenly dispatched. Hee further to be reuenged of the people, committed the Towne to the sack, which for the space of three or foure  houres was done. And then he forbad further spoyle, and fined the Towne in a great summe of gold. Lastly, hee caused the Armenians sonne to come before him, and with many kind words comforted him. This long history I haue inserted, to shew the extremity of blind zeale, and religious fury in the seculars and votaries of these Persians, if iustice should not withstand their rage.
Before is mentioned the commemorations of their dead, which is thus performed ouer their Sepulchres. Thither resort great multitudes of men and women, olde and yong, which sit on heapes with their Priests, and with their candles lighted: the Priests eyther reade or pray in their language; and after cause to bee brought somewhat to eate in the place; the place containeth betweene foure and fiue miles; the pathes which leade thither are full of  poore people, which beg almes, some of whom offer to say some prayer for their benefactors. The sepulchres haue stones vpon them engrauen with the names of the buried parties: and some haue a Chappell of stone thereon.
Ios. Barb.At Merdin he saw a naked man, which came and sate by him, and pulling forth a booke, read thereon, and after drew neere and asked him, whence he was; hee answered, a stranger^ I also am a stranger, saith he, of this world, and so are we all; and therefore I haue left it, with purpose to goe thus vnto mine end; with many words besides touching meekenesse, and the deniall of the world. He said, I haue seene a great part thereof, and finde nothing therein that contents me, and therefore haue determined to abandon it altogether. To this Merdina man cannot passe, but by a way made of stone, continuing a mile: at the head therof is a gate  and way to the Towne; and within the Towne is another hill with a like way of fiue hundred pases in height. There is an Hospitall for entertainment of all strangers, made by Ziangirboi, the brother of Vsuncassan: and if they be of better sort, they are entertained with carpets spread for them, worth an hundred ducats a peece: and victuals for all commers.
We might heere take further view of their stately Temples, their great and populous Cities, and other things worthy obseruation, if that our Turkish History had not related the like also among them, especially touching the persons and places religious. For the rest I referre the Reader to other Authors.
Sir Ant. Sher.The present King Abas (more, as it seemeth, in policie, to secure himselfe of factions, and against the Turke, then conscience) is a great persecutor of that sect of Mahomet which followeth the interpretation of Vssen and Omar. This hee labours to extirpate and make odious:  hauing in vse, once a yeere with great solemnitie to burne publikely (as maine heretikes) the images of Vssen and Omar. Then doth he cause his great men publikely, in scorne of their institution, to goe with a flagon of wine, carried by a footman, and at euery village, or where they see any assembly of people, to drinke: which himselfe also vseth, not for loue of the wine, but to scandalize the contrarie religion. Yet are there of the greatest, exceeding precise Turkes, if they durst shew it.
I. Ward to M. Haywood.In a Letter of Iohn Ward, written in Tauris, May 14. 1605. this King is blamed for making slaues of poore Armenians, and forcing many to Mahumetisme, pulling downe Churches, and vsing more rigour then the Turke.  



@. IIII. Of Natures wonders, and the Iesuits lyes of Persia.
THeDucket. wonders of Nature in these parts are: neere Bachu, a fountaine of oyle continually running, and fetched into the farthest parts of Persia: and another neere Shamakie, of Tarre, whereof we had good vse and proofe in our ship. Hereabouts you shall haue in the fields, neere to any Village in the night, two or three hundred ^oxes howling. Kine they haue like ours, and another sort great boned and leane, as hard ^uoured as those which Pharaoh dreamed of. In Persia groweth great abundance of Bom^asin cotton: this groweth on a certaine tree or brier, not past the height of a mans waste, ^ith a slender stalk like to a brier or carnation Iuly-flower, with very many branches, bearing ^o euery branch a fruit or cod round, which when it commeth to the bignesse of a Wall-nut, ^peneth and sheweth forth the cotton, which groweth still like a fleece of wooll, to the big^esse of a mans fist, and then being loose is gathered: the seeds are flat, and blacke, as big as ^ease, which they sow in their fields, and plowed ground in great abundance.
I had thought I had ended this Chapter and our Persian Expedition; but our good friends ^he Iesuites would needs entertaine your wearie eyes, with reading an exploit of theirs, rela^ed byIohn Copley his Doctrinall and Morall Obseruations concerning Religion. p. 85. one, sometimes their fellow Catholike, now (I hope) our fellow Christian. For the ^redit of this honest and loyall (of their honest returne not w^th a non est, and loyall with a ^^e all) societie, was a French pamphlet by them dispersed (a little before the Powder-trea^on) amongst their Catholike friends in England, reporting the miraculous conuersion of the King of Persia, by one Campian a Iesuit^, an English-man, that had expelled a Deuill out of a possessed partie; and commanded the Deuill at his departure to giue a signe thereof, by stri^ing downe the top of a steeple. Which being effected, the Kings conuersion followed, together with many of the Nobilitie, to the Roman faith; libertie also being granted to preach it openly, and to build Churches and Mon^steries thorowout the Kingdome. This was beleeued in England, especially by a friend of our Authors, vnto whom that Pamphlet was sent, who requested him to say Masse in thanks-giuing to GOD for so great a benefit. But in the end, that Iesuite who sent the Pamphlet gaue out, that it was but a thing deuised by French Hugonets, to disgrace their societie. Gracious societie! that can sometime cure their lies with a distinction of piaefraudes,Deuout deceits: spectatum admssi risum teneatis amici? Had euer any but a I^suite dispensation to marry Deuotion and Deceit, Godlinesse and Cousenage together? sometime couer them with a robe of the new fashion, Aequiuocation: sometimes can expose their bastards at other mens doores, to shield themselues from shame, with laying the blame on others; and haue a mint in their pragmaticall heads of such supersubtle inuentions: what are they now disgraced? and that by Hugonets? Euen as truly as the Parliament-house should haue beene blowne vp by PuritansProceeding against the Traitors. (this also was the Ignatians deuice) or like to that newes of the late QueeneRelat. of Religion. whose Ambassadours were at Rome for the Popes Absolution: or that of Bezaes recantation, and Geneuaes submission to the Pope. Blessed Ignatius (let mee also inuocate, or let him deigne to reade in that all-seeing glasseSpeculum Trinitatis. this poore supplication) infuse some better spirit, or some clea^lier and more wittie conueyance at least, into thy new progenie, lest the Protestants grosser wits sent, see, feele the palpablenesse, and impute the Iesuitical courses to that Author which said, he1. Kin. 22.22 would go out and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all ACHABS Prophets, which,Iohn 8.44. Apoc. 18.15. when he speaketh a lie, speaketh of his owne, because he is a lier, and the father thereof. Hitherto wee tooke Ignatius for their father, but now we find a New, of whom they borrow Bankruptly shifts, beseeming onely the Merchants of Babylon, disgracing humanitie, defacing diuinitie, worthily raungedSir Ed. Sands Relat. of Religion in the W^st. A. l. Merc. Ga. 1610. amongst the poore policies of the Hospitall of the desperate. Since also, Iansonius in his Mercurius Gallobelgicus hath told vs newes of the Kings graunt to build a Temple and Monasterie for Christians, himselfe, as hee saith, much enclining to that religion: whereupon many haue been baptized, and not a few through the power of holy-water,Who can cure these miracles of lying^ An. 1608. haue beene cured. The King hath further sent to the Georgians to vnite them to the Romish Church: and the Armenians also, by an embassage to Rome haue protested all obedience to that Sea, as they before had done in the Couent of Saint Augustine, which is in the chiefe Citie of Persia. He setteth downe the copie of King Abas his Letter to the Pope, wherein he requested him to send a Prelate to gouerne at Tres Ecclesiae, where the chiefe of the Armenian Christians vsed to reside. The like he writeth in another letter to the King of Spaine: which, if it be so, argueth rather his policie, to obtaine good will and helpe of the Christians against the Turk, then any loue to Christian Religion.




CHAP. X. Of the Scythians, Sarmatians, and Seres, and of their Religion.

@. I. Of the Scythian Name, People, Region, Language, and manner of life.  
VNder the name Scythia, is contained a verie great part of the world: It was diuided into Scythia, Europaea, and Asiatica. PlinyPlin. l. 4. c. 12. saith, That this name reacheth vnto the Sarmatians and Germans, and to those farthest Nations, which were vnknowne to other men. And Strabo in his first booke saith, That all knowne Regions towards the North were-called Scythians or Nomades: and in his eleuenth booke he affirmeth, that the Greekes called all those Northerne Nations, Scythians, and Celtoscythians. Those beyond the Adriatike and Pontike Seas, and the Riuer Ister or Danubius, were called Hyperborei, Sauromatae, and Arimaspi:  those beyond the Caspian Sea, Sacae and Massagetae. SomeScythae (...). Caelius li. 18. 24. will haue this name to be giuen them (...), which signifieth to be angrie: Others of their Shooting,Plin. l. 7. c. 56. saith that Scythes, sonne of Iupiter, inuented the Bow and Arrowes. called still of some of those Nations, and in some other languages. Schieten, of which our word Shoot is deriued: Mela in his third Booke and fifth Chapter, calleth them all Sagae: and in the fragment which beareth the name ofCato Annij de orig. and ap. A. Riccobon. Cato de Originibus, is mentioned Scythia Saga: this word Saga, BerosusPheudo Berosus, lib. 2. and 3. and 5. interpreteth a Priest: saying, that Noah left the Scythian Armenians his rituall bookes, which onely Priests, and that onely among Priests, might reade, who were therefore called Saga, as Noah himselfe had been. These peopled the Countries from Armenia to the Bactrians, all which place was called Scythia Saga: ouer which Sabatius reigning in the time of Iupiter Belus; Araxa with his sonne Scythia possessed all from Armenia Westward, to  Samatia in Europe. The Grecians fable, Hercules to be the father of these Nations, begetting ScythesH^rod. lib. 4. Diod. Sic. lib. 2. on a monster, whose vpper halfe resembled a Woman, the nether part a Viper. It were an endlesse and boundlesse worke, to seeke and set out the true and proper beginnings and bounds of this so large a Tract of the world, called Scythia: the particular Nations of them would be but harsh to recite out of Pliny, Mela, Strabo, and others: the multitude wherof he that will may find inOrtel. Thes. Ortelius his Thesaurus collected together. The Sarmatae, or Sauromatae, are sometime made one peculiar people of the Scythians: and sometimes the names are confounded, Sarmatia also being diuided into Europaea and Asiatica, whereof the one is interpreted byOliu. in Melam. Ortel. Thes. geo. Oliuerus, Polonia, by Ortelius, Russia, and the other Tartaria.
GoropiusGorop. Beccesel. in his Becceselana admiring his owne language, coniectureth that while Nimrod and his company fell to babel, or after our p^onuntiation, babble at Babel, others, namely,  the Cymbrians, or posteritie of Gomer staied still in Margiana, a Countrie fruitfull of Vines; whither hee imagineth Noah descended out of the Arke, and there abode after the Floud. These he supposeth, being not at Babel, retained their old and first vniuersall language. But Margiana growing too little for their multiplied numbers, they were forced to send out Colonies. And thus the Saxons, Tectosages, Sauromatae, Getes or Gothes, the Danes, Galles, and other Scythian Nations, the true posteritie of Gomer, and keepers of the first language, as he by Dutch Etymologies gathereth, peopled both Scythia and Sarmatia in Asia, and Europe, together with all Germanie, France, England, Norway, Denmarke, and some parts of Asia Minor. Hee that will bee further informed of his Reasons, let him reade his Saxonica, Gotodanica, and other Treatises of his Becceselanian Antiquities.  
PtolomeyPtol. l. 3. c. 5. distinguisheth Scythia from Samatia: hee confineth Sarmatia Europaea, with the Sarmatian Ocean, and the land vnknowne on the North: with Vistula on the West: the Easterne border is Tanais: from whence vnto the Hircanian Sea Eastward, is Sarmatia Asiatica, on the North abutting on the vnknown parts of the earth, on the South with the Euxine Sea, and a line drawne right from thence to the Caspian Sea. Scythia is byPtol. l. 6. c. 14. him placed to the East of Sarmatia, diuided by the hill Imaus, extending vnto the Region called Serica, hauing on the North vnknowne places: on the South, the Sacae, Sogdiana, Margiana and India. But our purpose is to take them here in their more generall sense, vnderstanding all the North pars of Asia, now Tartaria Asiatica (for of Europe, sauing wherein the Europaean Scythians agree with the Asian we are not now to speake:) And of these, first to consider their ancient  Scythian Rites, and in the next place their later Tartarian appellation and Religion.
Iustinlib. 2. out of Tragus relateth the arguments vsed of the Egyptians and Scythians, each
 seeking to challenge to themselues, to bee the ancientest of Nations: in which quarrell the Scythians preuailed. Their manners and customes hee thus reporteth. They haue no limitation of lands, nor tillage, nor house, but alwaies wander thorow places not inhabited, feeding their Heards and Flocks. They carrie their wiues and children with them on Carts, which also being couered with hides, they vse for houses. No offence is more hainous amongst them then theft: gold and siluer they as much contemne, as others desire. Milke and hony is their food; their clothes, skinnes of beasts, for the vse of wooll they know not. They haue three times sought the Empire of Asia, neuer conquered of others. They chaced Darius the Persian King out of their coasts: they slew Cyrus with all his armie: they ouerthrew Zopyron a  Captaine of Alexander the Great, with all his forces. They onely heard of, neuer felt the Roman armes, and themselues founded the Parthian Empire.
That which credulous and fabulous antiquitie hath reported, of the monstrous peoples inhabiting the Northerly and vnknowne parts of Scythia, is not here to be recited, the Countries being at this time discouered, and knowne to haue no such men, as either by nature are bald and flat nosed, with huge chins; or haue but one eye, where there are also Gryphons, keepers of their treasures; or men with Goats feet: or other monsters of men, whichPlin. lib. 7. Solinus cap. 20. Pliny, Herodatus, and others, haue rather mentioned then beleeued; Mandauil and Munster following them in like Relations. Next to these both in place and credit, wee may reckon the Hyperboreans, of whom the DeliansHerod. lib. 4. Pius s^cundus in historia Asiae, confuteth this tale. Vide Melam lib. 2. cap. 1. Cum not. Her. Barb. etc. report that they sent to Delos Virgins, with sacrifice to  Lucina, bound vp in wheat-straw: through so many Nations inhabiting betweene. Of the Issedones is reported, that when one dieth, his kindred bring thither beasts, which they kill, and cut, and dresse, and eat together with the flesh of the dead man, whose skull also they keepe and gilde, vsing it as an Idoll, to which they performe yeerely ceremonies: these exequies doth the sonne there performe to his dead father.


@. II. Of the Religion, Diuination, and other Scythian Rites.
 GEnerally of the Scythian Religion thus. Of the gods, they worship first Vesta, whom they call in their language Tabiti: next of all Iupiter, in their speech Papaeus, and the Earth, supposing her to bee the wife of Iupiter, and call her Apia. In the next place they worship Apollo and Venus, by the names of Octosyrus, and Artimpasa, and Mars, and Hercules. Some of them sacrifice also to Neptune, or Thamimasades. Images, Altars, and Temples, they thinke ought not to bee made, except to Mars. Their manner of sacrificing is generally this: The sacrifice is presented with the fore-feet bound, the Sacrificer at his back hauing laid aside his holy vestment, woundeth the same, and while it falleth, calls vpon that god to whom he sacrificeth; and then putteth a halter about  the necke, and strangleth it, without kindling any fire, or vowing, or other ceremonie, and slayeth it: the flesh plucked from the bones, hee casteth into a great Caldron, the bones hee vseth for fewell to seeth the same (for wood the Countrie doth not yeeld:) And if they haue not any such vessell, they put all the flesh with water into the paunch, and so the beast doth seeth it selfe. After it is boyled, he which sacrificed offereth the libaments, or offerings of the flesh and inwards: their sacrifices are, besides other beasts, especially of horses.
Their Temples to Mars they build on this manner.Scythian Temples. They heape together bundles of twigges, three furlongs in length and breadth, and aboue on them is made a square plaine, three sides thereof are vpright, the fourth is made slope, and the bending-wise, thereby to  get vp: thither they bring euerie yeere an hundred and fiftie Waines of twigges to supply the waste of them. Vnderneath this worke is erected an old iron sword, and this is their Image of Mars, to which they offer yeerely sacrifices, both of other cattell and of horses: and more to this blade then to other gods. Of their captiues they offer one of an hundred, but after another manner. For after they haue offered wine on their heads, they kill them by a certaine vessell, and after lifting them vpon that their heape or Temple, they embrew the Sword-god with the bloud. This they doe aboue: beneath in the Temple they cut off all the right shoulders of the slaine men, and hurle them vp in the aire together with the hands; wheresoeuer the hand shall fall, there it lieth, and the dead bodie apart. When they haue performed all their solemnities, they depart. Swine are so odious to them, that they will haue none  of them nourished in their Countrie.
There are among them Diuiners, whose Rites are these.Scythian Diuination. They bring great bundles of willow twigs, which they lay on the ground, and vntie, and laying them asunder one by one, diuine. Some of them practise diuination with the leaues of the Teil-tree, which they fold
 and vnfold in their hands. The King, when at any time hee falleth sicke, sendeth for three choice men of those Diuiners; who for the most part name some man vnto him, which hath forsworne himselfe, hauing sworne by the Kings Throne, an oath vsed of the Scythians: presently the man is brought forth, who, if he denieth what their art hath accused him of, the King sendeth for twice the number of Diuiners: and if they by new practise of their art find him guiltie, his head is cut off, and the first Diuiners share his goods: but if they shall absolue him, more Diuiners are sent for; and if the most of them doe absolue him, then those three first are thus done to death. They lade a waine with twigs, and binding the Diuiners hand and foot, and stopping their mouthes, cast them into the waines, and set all on fire, burning Oxen; waine, and men together, vnlesse some of the Oxen by the burning of their harnes  escape. This punishment inflict they on their false prophets. They make their leagues with other Nations in this sort. They powre wine into a great bowle, mixing therewith the bloud of them which ioine in league, cutting some part of the body with a knife or sword; and then dip in that bowle or mazer a sword, arrowes, an axe, a dart, and after curse themselues with many words, last of all drinking the wine. NicephorusNic. Greg. hist. Rom. lib. 2. Gregoras relateth the Scythian Customes and Expeditions, and their contempt of gold and ignorance of the vse of it. These on the one side, and the Christians on the other, forced the Turkes, which were also a kind of Scythians, to settle themselues as they could, in the parts of Mesopotamia, Chaldaea, and Assyria, where they left there owne, and learned the Rites and Customes of the Mahumetans.  The Kings are buried amongst the Gerrhi, with many ceremonies, carrying the dead bodie through all the Countries ouer which hee reigned, which cut and shaue themselues; and with him is buried his best beloued Paramour, his Cup-bearer, Cooke, Master of his horse, Waiter, Messenger, Horses, and the first fruits of all oher things, and also golden Cups: and then they cast on earth, making a verie great hill.
When the yeere is gone about, they take fiftie of his principall attendants, which are not slaues, but freeborne Scythians, and strangle them with so many horses of the best, and fasten the dead men on the dead horses with much solemnitie. But to relate all the particulars hereof, and their burials also of priuate men (whose dead bodies are carryed about fortie daies, from one friend to another, entertained euerie where with feasts, etc.)  would be too tedious. He that would haue a sight of these things, let him resort to Thomaso Porcacchi his Funerali Antichi, where these things are not onely discoursed in words, but described in artificiall pictures.
The Scythians so farre hate forraine Rites and Religions, that Anacharsis, a Scythian Philosopher, hauing trauelled through a great part of the world, and vowed to the mother of the gods, if he returned home in safetie, that he would sacrifice to her, with such Rites as hee had seene obserued in Cyzicus: in the performance of his vow, was slaine by King Saulius.
ScylesPh. Camerar. Med. hist. Cent. 1. 58. yet the Turkes (their of-spring) hold diuers Religions. also being King of the Scythians, when he brought in forraine Rites, and obserued the mad Bacchanal solemnities, which hee had seene among the Greekes, lost both his Kingdome and life.Athenaeus lib. 12. cap. 8. They cut off the noses of men, and imprinted pictures in the flesh of  women, whom they ouercame: and generally their Customes ofHerodot. li. 4. war were bloudie: what man soeuer the Scythian first taketh, he drinketh his bloud: hee offereth to the King all the heads of the men he hath slain in battaile: otherwise he may not share in the spoile: the skins of their crownes flayed off, they hang at their horse-bridles:Plin. lib. 7. c. 2. their skins they vse to flay for napkins and other vses, and some, for cloathing. Once a yeere the chiefe men haue a solemnitie amongst them, in which they powre wine into a Mazor, of which none may drinke, which hath not slaine an enemy.
These Customs were generall to the Scythians in Europe and Asia (for which causePolyb. hist. l. 9. Scytharum facinora patrare, grew into a Prouerbe of immane crueltie, and their Land was iustly calledBarbara nec Scythiae telius, etc. Tibul. lib. 3. Barbarous:) others were more speciall and peculiar to particular Nations Scythian.  


@. III. Of particular Nations in Scythia, their Acts and Rites.
OF the barbarousA. Mar. l. 22. crueltie of the Scythians, the sea confining was called Euxiu^ by the contrarie, as the furies were called Eumenides, saith Ammianus, because they sacrificed strangers to Diana, whom they worshipped vnder the name of Orsiloche, and hanged vp their heads on the walles of their Temples.  The Ile Leuce, neere to Taurica, was dedicated to Achilles, where none of his deuout worshippers durst abide in the night-time; for none might spend the night on shoare without danger of his life. Arrianuus in his Peripius (or sailing about) of the Euxine Sea, speaketh of this
 Iland, and the deuotions therein performed to Achilles and Patroclus: that certaine birds ke^pe the Temple, watering and sweeping the same with their wings, and the Goates which feed in the Ile there present themselues for sacrifice, when the price is first paid at the Altar to the contentment of that Deitie, or Diuell, whose illusion (if not others collusion) it must needs bee: But because this Iland adioyneth to Europe, I must forbeare these things till another time. He also describeth the Nations, both in Asia and Europe, which abutt round about that Sea. IornandesIor. de reb. Geticis. Scanzia Officina gentium Vag^na nationum. vid. W. Laz. de Migrat. Gent. lib. 8. bringeth these Scythians bordring from Scanzia (so hee calleth that Peninsula, which others name, Basilia, Scandia, Scandinauia, etc. Wherein are the Kingdomes of Sweden, Gothland and Norway) and attributeth to the Goths those warres, which  the Egyptians and Persians are said to haue made against the Scythians. Neere to Maeotis King Filimer planted himselfe and his followers; in Dacia, Thracia and Maesia Zamolxes, who was also a great Philosopher. These and the rest were not onely a terrour to the skirts of Asia, but to the heart of Africa and Europa, in processe of time sacking Rome, and shaking that Roman Monarchy almost to the ground. SimocattaSimocat. hist. Maur. lib. 7. c. 7. Cedreni compend. in his Mauritian History giueth the preeminence of Martiall valour, amongst the many many Scythian Nations to the ABARES. Chaganus the Scythian King, sent Embassadors to Mauritius, with an Epistle, wherein he stileth himselfe Gouernour of seuen Nations, and Lord of the seuen Climats of the world. He comquered the Abdelae or Nephthalites, the Abares (some of which fled to Tangast to the Turkes) and theAn ex his Mogor natio Tartarica. Ogor-Nation which dwell by the Riuer Til (or Volga) whose ancient  Princes were called War, and Chunnai. He conquered also the Prince of Colch, in which war hee slew three hundred thousand people, their carkasses lying scattered foure daies iourney. Hee subdued also the Turkes at the hill Icar, which is foure hundred miles distant from the golden Mountaine: so they call a mountaine in the East, because of the fertilitie and store of cattell therein: which alwayes the greatest Chagan amongst the Turkes possesseth. For Chagan is not a proper name, but a Princely title, which in those parts, and the Countries adioyning is still continued: the Tartars calling their Princes Chan (whichVid. Iac. Pont. Annot. in Simoc. some perhaps falsly, write Cham) and the Persians and Turkes still vsing that title. These Turkes vaunted themselues neuer subiect to Earth-quakes or Pestilence. They cal their Priest Taisan, that is, the Sonne of GOD. Their Religion I haue before mentioned. They haue a custome that the males neuer weare gold. This Citie was diuided by a streame,Sup. lib. 3. c. 8. which sometimes separated  two disagreeing Nations, no lesse distinguished by their disioyned mindes and differing habites, the one wearing blacke, the other red. This Citie, they say, was built by Alexander, when hee had ouercome the Sogdians and Bactrians. The Kings wiues shining with Iewels, are carryed in golden Chariots, each drawne with one Bull,Niceph. ex Simocat. the bridles embossed with gold. The Prince (as is said elsewhere) spent the night with seuen hundred women. Fame attributeth another Citie, not farre hence, to Alexander, called Chubdan. The Prince thereof being dead, his wiues in blacke, with shauen heads, continually mourne, and may neuer forsake the Sepulchre. These haue many Elephants, and traffique with the Indians which dwell Northwards, and make Silke. Thus much I thought worth the adding out of Simocatta,  for better knowledge both of the Turkish and of the Tartarian Historie, as well as of the Scythian.
The MASSAGETAE,Strab. lib. 11. famous for the ouerthrow of Cyrus, esteeme the Sunne alone for God, and offer vnto him a horse. They haue one wife to each man, and yet euery one vseth also his Neighbors wife openly, hanging meane while his quiuer on the Waine or Cart: The best death, and most happy amongst them, is, when they are become old, to bee cut in pieces, and to be eaten together with sheeps flesh: if hee dye naturally, they burie him in the earth, as dying a base and beastlyIoan. Boem. death. Their weapons are of brasse, their furniture of gold, of both which they haue much store, little of yron and siluer.Caelius lib. 11. cap. 21. The BACTRIANS, when they  were old or worne with sicknesse, cast their Parents to Dogs, which they kept for this purpose, and called Buryall Dogs. The Bactrian women are pompous,Euseb. de praepar. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. riding in great state, and lye with their seruants, and with strangers. They haue among them Brachmanes; Zoroastres the Bactrian is accounted first author of the Magi, and of liberall Arts: he liued twenty yeeres in a wildernesse with cheese: but others account this another Zoroastres.
The SACAE sometimes made neerer, sometimes further inuasions: they possessed Bactria, and a great part of Armenia, which after of them was called Sacasena, and proceeded vnto Cappadocia, where, in the midst of their feastings, being in the night surprised by the Persians, and slaine, they left their name Saca or Sacea, to a yeerely solemnitie among the Persians, in memory of this victory. Of the Sacae, some holdGorop. Bececs. our Saxons to be descended. Dionysius  in his Greeke verses giueth them the highest praise for shooting of all others.
The AMAZONS, of whom is before related, are saidIustin. lib. 2. Iornandes de reb. Get. to be descended of the Scythians, who vnder the conduct of Plinos and Scolpythus, settled themselues by the Riuer Thermodon, and possessed the field of Themiscyra: But when they continued to spoile the adioyning
 Countries, they were by secret conspiracie of those people destroyed. Their wiuesGorop. thinks (and I with him) th^t these Amazons were but the wiues which exercised armes, and followed warfa^e with their husbands. became Warriours both in defence and offence, and did great acts vnder their two Queenes, Marthesia and Lampedo: after, Ohera and Antiope the daughter of Marthesia, in the time of Hercules, reigned: then Penthesilea, who in the Troian warres was slaine. Yet the reliques of that Nation continued vntill Minthia or Thalestris, in Alexanders time; and by degrees ware out altogether. One of their Queenes instituted the sacrifice to Mars and Diana, called Tauropolium, saith DiodorusDiodor. Sic. l. 2. cap. 11., who addeth that they liued not without men, but that they put the men to domesticke drudgeries, and exercised the women in the field. Yet doth hee no lesse then Strabo make doubt of these Amazonian, or Vnimammian NationThe Amazons are still one Nation, further then the relaters or their Authors haue trauelled. In two places of Asia, two of Africa, two of America; the Amazons haue beene till that men came th^re and found none.: and no lesse of the HYPERBOREAN, which hee thus relateth out of Hecataeus, that they dwell in an  Iland in the Ocean neere vnto the Pole, in which Latona was borne, and Apollo was most of all worshipped: and that the Ilanders generally are Apolloes Priests, euerie day chanting Hymnes in his praise: they haue also a huge Groue, and a round Temple dedicated to Apollo, to whom their Citie is sacred. These and other things fable they of the Hyperborei, to which SalinusSol. 21. addeth many other, of the clemencie of the ayre, of the innocencie of the men, of their freedome from sicknes, and voluntarie seeking for death in the fulnes of daies (after they haue made merrie, casting themselues from a certaine Rocke into the Sea) all these pleasures concurring notwithstanding; things contrarie both to Truth and Nature, except with GoropiusGorop. Bec. l. 9. pag: 1032. wee turned some parts, at least of this Historie into an Allegorie. He yet historically interpreteth, that they which placed the Hyperborei beyond the Arimaspi, these beyond  the Issedones, and those also beyond the Scythians, and these againe beyond the Cimmerians, intended the Europaean Scythians, or inhabitants about Maeotis, the Liuonians and Muscouites, the Issedones to be in Scandia, and all alongst those frozen or Icy Seas, as he proueth by Etymologie of the word: North-East, and Eastwards from these in the continent of Asia he placeth the Arimaspi, and in the continent of America Mexicana hee seateth the Hyperborei: They which list to haue recourse to his learned discourses of this argument. PorcacchiPorc. ^uncr. Antichi. telleth of some Scythians, which hanged their dead on trees (as the Col^hi of old, and some Tartarians are still reported to do) esteeming it a disgrace to be buried in the earth. The Taurici buried with their Kings some of their best friends. The DERBICESAet. Var. bist. lib. 4. cap. 1. calls them Berbiccae: where he saith also that the Sardoan custome was to kill their old men with clubs, Et lib. 3. cap. 34. That the Ceij being old, at a solemne feast or sacrifice, ended their age with a draught of Hemlocke. feasted with the flesh of their kinsmen, which were seuentie yeeres old: the women at that age they  strangled, and after buried. The CASPIANS straitly imprisoned such as attained to that age, and their famished them. Some say they laid them amongst the woods, and obserued what became of them; esteeming them (as is said before of the Persians) highly honoured, and next to a canonizing, whom the Birds tare with their talons. In the next degree of happinesse, whom Dogs or wilde beasts praied on: but beneath all disasters and disaduentures, which could find neither the one nor the other, to become vnto them such enemie-friends. The TIBARENI crucifie those old men, which they haue best loued. The HERVLES being sicke or old, were placed by their kindred on a pile of wood, and there by another, which was not of that kinne, slaine with a dagger, who being descended, the pile was fired. His wife was forced to hang her selfe, or else to abide perpetuall infamie. But I  am loth to burie you in these buriall Rites.
The Scythians punishedAlex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 11. no fault more seuerely then theft. They would make themselues drunken with the smoake of hearbs burnt in the fire. They sware by the Kings Throne, by their Sword, and by the WindZonar. Ann. tom. 2.. When they had sacked Athens, and piled a heape of bookes to the fire, which others had compiled with studious paines, one of the companie disswaded burning of then, lest that the Greekes neglecting the Muses, would become Martiall.Viu. de trad. dis. l. 2. They doubled their numbers at foure, as we doe at ten, through vnskilfulnesse in numbring.


@. IIII.  Of the SERES.
WE might proceed further in these cold Scythian narrations, if the deepe Snowes, long Desarts, beastly Men, and man-kind beasts, Men-eaters, and other monstrous aduentures in the way, did not make it both perplexed and dangerous. Leauing therefore these horrid and vncouth Nations: the first ciuill Countrie Eastward is theSoli. cap. 53. Plin. l. 1. yet Dionys. cals them (...). Seres, the quietest and mildest of men, fleeing the commerce and traffique with other Nations, bartering yet with such Nations as resort to them, not valuing wares by words, but by their eyes. Among them is reported to be neither Thiefe nor Whore, nor Murtherer, nor Hailes, nor Pestilence, nor such like plagues. A woman after conception, or  in her purgation, is not desired. None eateth vncleane flesh; none knoweth sacrifices, but euerie one is iudge to himselfe of that which is right. TheyIo. Boem. lib. 2. cap. 9. Strabo, lib. 15. tell, that they liue two hundred
 yeeres, that the Common-wealth is gouerned by a Councell of fiue thousand, euery one of whom findeth an Elephant to the Common-wealth. They haue this name of Sera the chiefe Citie, by PtolomeyPtol. l. 6. c. 16. placed in 177. 15. and 38. 36. This Region he limiteth on the West with Scythia extra Imaum; on the East, with Terra incognita; and likewise on the North (here some place the Promontorie Tabin, there the Easterne Ocean) on the South with part of India extra Gangem. Our silkes haue the name of this Region, where it is made of a most fine wooll, growing on the leaues of trees: Dionys. saith, of flowers of the earth. Tam multiplici opere, saith PLINY, tam longinquo orbe petitur vt in publico matrona transluceat. This Serica,Cast^ld. Ortel. Thes. Castaldus calleth Cataio: and so doe most of our new writers. OrosiusOros. l. 1. c. 2. numbreth from the Serike Ocean to the Caspian Sea, two and fortie Nations of Hyrcanians and Scythians,  and from thence Westward to the Riuer Tanais thirtie foure. The Region betwixt Albania and the Caspian, he attributeth to the Amazons. TheDom. Nig^r. Asia com. 8. Seres are supposed to inhabite the Countrey now called Cathay, which name Niger deriueth from a Scythian Nation, called Chata. They had a law against Idolatrie, and worship of Images. They had no Temples.



CHAP. XI. Of the Tartarians, and of Diuers Nations which they Subdued;  with their Pristine Rights.
THe names of Scythia and Sarmatia, are now together with those Nations swallowed vp and drowned in that Tarta^ian deluge, which about foure hundred yeeres since, with a sudden torrent ouerwhelmed the gteatest part of Asia; that we speake not of Europe, the heart whereof, quaked and trembled with feare of this Tempest. From Rome did PopeVincent Belluac. spec. Hist. lib. 30. Innocent the fourth send Embassadors, by entreaties to preuent their Armes, when as they had alreadie ouerrunne (besides those Countries which still beare their name) Russia, Polonia, Silesia, Morauia, Hungaria, euen as farre as Austria. So farre was the huge vnwealdie Empire of Alexander,  or of the Romans, short of the Tartarian greatnesse, that the expedition of some oneBathu. of the Subiects of this Empire, hath pierced as farre into the West, as euer Alexander into the East, and that happily among more resolute courages, then the Persians or Indians, effeminated with wealth and Peace, could affoord: and Tamerlane alone some ages after (if wee credit that HistorieAlhacen. Arab. of the life of Tam^rlane. of his life, translated out of the Arabike) subdued and obtayned more (besides his owne inheritance) then all that which the Romanes had atchieued in that eight hundred yeeres and vpwards, wherein their Empire was growing to the full: but of him afterwards.

 @. I. Of the beginning of the Tartarian Nation.
THe name Tartar is proper to a Riuer in Mongull, from whence it was deriued to the people inhabiting neere the same, which after gaue both name and lawes to so great a part of the world. For thus writeth IoannesIo. de Planc Carpini apud Hak. tom. 1. Mar. Sanut l 3. sar. 13 c. 3. de Plano Carpini, which was sent Embassador to the Tartarian Court, from Pope Innocent, Anno 1246. There is a Countrey in the East part of the world called Mongol: which had sometimes  foure sorts of Inhabitants: Yeka-Mongol, that is, the great Mongols; Sumorgul, that is, water-Mongols; these called themseluesTotaros vocant, id est, ^xules, Me^c^t. Tartars, of a Riuer which runneth thorow their Countrey, named Tartar: the third Merkat, the fourth Metrit. These all were alike in person and language, but diuided amongst themselues into seuerall Prouinces, and vnto seuerall Princes. In the land of Yeka-Mongol, wasChin^is secu^d. Vincentium in Spec. Hist Ca^gius, Haitono. Se^ Lud. Reg. Lampadius in mellific. etc. Niceph. Greg. Hist. Rom. lib. 2. calls him Zitzischan. Cingis, who began to bee a mightie hunter before the Lord: for he learned to steale men. He ranged into other Countries, taking as many captiues as he could, and ioyned them vnto himselfe. Also he allured the men of his owne Countrey vnto him, who followed him as their Ring-leader to doe mischiefe. Then began he to warre vpon the Sumongols or Tartars, and slew their Captayne, and after many conflicts subdued them to himselfe, and brought them all into bondage. Afterward he vsed their helpe against the  Merkats, whom also hee vanquished in battell. Proceeding from thence, hee fought against the Metrites, and vanquished them also. Naimani hearing that Cingis was thus exalted, greatly disdayned thereat: for they had a great and mighty Emperour, vnto whom all the
 foresaid Nations payed tribute. Whose sonnes (when hee was dead) succeeded him in his Empire. Howbeit, being yong and foolish, they knew not how to gouerne the people, but were diuided, and fell at variance among themselues. These inuaded Cingis his Countrey, putting the Inhabitants to the sword, but were after ouerthrowne by the Mongols, and either slaine or made captiues.
SomeG Botero Ben. fetch the Tartarian pedigree from the ten Tribes of Israel, which Salmanasar carryed captiues: and in their MapsOrtel. Theat. place hords of Danites, Nepthalites, etc. in the furthest Northerly and Easterly bounds of Asia; which yet are a great part of the world, not only from Media (whither those people were conueyed) but from any part of the Assyrian Empire. (The King of Tabor, or Tybur, in these parts, is said to haue come into France, to Francis  the French King about the yeare 1540. and was after at Mantua by Charles the Emperor burned, for secret sollicitation of him and other Christian Princes to Iudaisme.) And OpmeerusOpmeer Chro. in An. M. 3413. reporteth of that their iourney passing thorow Euphrates, miraculously staying his streame (to wonder at the vanitie of Writers) when they went into a Region called Aisarich, which was a yeere and a halfes trauell, there to keepe their Law; where neuer before had beene any habitation. But these things haue small probabilitie.
M. PaulusCap. 42. apud. Ram. (The Latine Copie of M. Paul. is very vnperfect) G. Mercat. tab. Vn. Mirkon. recites Chingis his pedigree, etc. (who with his Father and Vncle liued many yeeres in the Court of the great Chan, aboue three hundred yeeres since) saith, that they dwelled at first (if such wandring may be so called) in the North, where they had no Lord ouer them, but payed tribute to a great Signor (there called Vncam, and here in these Countries Presbyter Iohn) to whom  they payed the tenth of their beasts. But this Vncam, or Presbyter Iohn fearing their numbers euery where multiplying, deuised to disperse them through the World: which the Tartars perceiuing, with ioynt consent forsooke their former habitation, and departed thence farre off into the North, denying further tribute vnto Vncam.
After they had there continued a certayne time, they chose to their King about the yeere 1162. one which was called Cingis Can, who ruled them with such modestie and iustice, that they loued and feared him as a god, his fame reducing all the other Tartars in other parts vnder his obedience. He thus strengthened, wearie of those desarts, commanded them to arme themselues with bowes, and other weapons, and began to inuade and conquer Cities and Prouinces to his subiection, the principall inhabitants whereof hee carryed with him, kindly entertayning them, leauing such discreete Gouernours in the same, that the people  were secured in their persons and goods. When he had thus subdued about nine Prouinces, he sent his Embassador toVncam subdued. Vncam, to demand his daughter in marriage: which Vncam with much indignation and many threatnings denying, Cingis assembling his forces, marched against him, and by the way enquired of his Astrologers and Diuiners touching his successe. They taking a greene reed, cleft it a sunder, placing the parts thereof a good distance one from another, and writ vpon the one the name of Vncam, and Cingis on the other; telling the King, that whiles they were reading their coniuring charmes, these reeds would fight together, and the victory should remaine with him whose reede got the better: which acordingly came to passe in the sight of the Armie: Cingis his reed ouercomming the other, as after Cingis himselfe did Vncam, whom he slew in the field, and possessed his daughter and state,  wherin he continued sixe yeeres conquering Cities and Kingdomes, and at last was wounded at a Castle called Thaigin, in the knee, whereof he dyed, and was buryed in Mount Altay.
The next Emperour (after his account) was Cin Can; the third, Baythin Can; the fourth, Allau the brother of Mangu; Esu Can, the fifth; Mongu Can, the sixth; the seauenth Cublai Can, who not only inherited what the former had conquered; but in the sixtieth yeere of his raigne subdued in a manner the rest of (those parts of) the World. The word Can signifieth Emperour. Wheresoeuer these Emperours dye, they are buryed in Altay aforesayd; they which carry him killing all they meete within the way, bidding them goe to the other world to serue their Emperor. For this end they also slay the best horses, to serue their dead Lord in another world. When Mangu Can was buried, there were more then ten thousand  men slaine by the Souldiers which conueyed him. In this Historie of M. Paul, obserue that this Catalogue of Emperours is vnsound: for W. de Rubruquis in Bathyes time, was at the Court of Mangu Can, to whom Bathy was subiect. Occoday is left out, and Esu put in. The cause of this errour seemeth to bee, the giuing of this name Can to the chiefe Dukes, as Bathy, etc. and the want of exact written Chronicles in those times amongst them.



@. II. The great Exploits of CINGIS or CANGIVS the first Tartarian Emperor.
FOr further light into this Historie, I thinke it not amisse to set downe what Haith^n or Anthony the Armenian hath written of the Tartarian beginnings. This our Author was Royally descended in Armenia, where hee liued about three  hundred yeeres since, and at the request of Pope Clement the fift, writ the History of the Tartars, from Cingis or Cangius till Mango Can, taken out of the Tartarian Histories: the rest he partly saw with his eyes, and partly learned of his Vnckle, an eye-witnesse of the same, who had attended on Haithon the Armenian King, in the great Cans Court. The Countrey where the Tartars first dwelt (saithThe Tartars Legend of Congius, Hait. Armen. Haithon) is beyond the Mount Belgian, where they liued like beasts, hauing neither letters, nor Faith, nor Habitation, nor Souldi^rie, nor reputation among their Neighbour-Nations. There were of them diuers Nations, called by one common name Mogli, which were diuided into seuen principall Tribes, whose names were Tartar, Tangut, Cunat, Talair, Sonieh, Monghi, Tebeth. These all being subiects to their Neighbours, a poore old man being a Smith (who, as they beleeue, was ingendred of  the Sun beames) saw in his sleepe an armed man on a white horse, which said vnto him, O Cangius, The will of the Immortall GOD is, that thou bee the Gouernour of the Tartarians, and Ruler of the seuen Nations, to free them from their bondage and tribute. This his vision, when he reported to others, they would not beleeue him, vntill that the night following, the chiefe men amongst themselues saw the same man, with command from the immortall GOD, to yeeld obedience vnto Cangius. This they performed with all reuerence, and spred in the midst of them a black felt, with a seat thereon, on which the seuen Princes or chiefe men placed Cangius, calling him Can, that is, Emperor, and kneeled before him. This happily  was then the most sumptuousA felt the Tartarian throne in their Coronation. Throne their State could afford, but continued in the Royall inuestiture of their succeeding Soueraignes, their exceeding Riches and Conquests notwithstanding: at two of which solemnities (saith our Author) I my selfe haue beene present. Cangius thus inthronized on his felt, commanded them many things: first, to beleeue the immortall GOD: and from thence forwards, the Tartars began to call vpon the name of the immortall GOD, seeking for his ayde in all their enterprises: secondly, hee commanded to make a generall view of all such as were able to beare armes, appointing Captaines ouer tens, ouer thousands, and ouer ten thousands, which made a full Regiment. Hee commanded also those seuen principall heads of their Tribe, to bereaue themselues of their dignities; and for further triall of their obedience, each of them to bring thither his eldest sonne, and to cut off his head, each with his owne hand: which they refused not to doe, in reuerence to  that diuine ordinance, whereby hee was made their Soueraigne. Cangius hauing thus made tryall of their fidelitie, subdued many Nations: and one day hauing his horse slaine in battell vnder him, was forsaken of his Tartars, dispayring his recouerie after they saw him fall, and might easily haue beene slaine, had not his enemies through ignorance neglected him, to pursue the rest: which Cangius perceiuing, conueyed himselfe into a thicket of shrubs; and when his enemies returned to despoile the dead, an Owle came and sate on the shrub, vnder which Cangius was hidden, which caused them not to suspect any to lurke there, and so they departed. He the next night fled to his people; who seeing him, and hearing the order of his escape, gaue thanks to the immortall GOD, who by meanes of that Bird had preserued him. They also had (after this) thatThe Owle obserued. Fowle in such reuerence, that it is accounted a happy thing to weare one of her feathers on their heads. Cangius afterwards assaulting his enemies,  brought vnder, both them, and all the Countries on that side of Belgian. The exact time of these things Haithon could not learne, notwithstanding his much enquiry: which he imputeth to their want of letters at that time.
These Countries thus conquered, the armed man appeared to him the second time, and commanded him in the name of the immortall GOD to passe the Mountayne Belgian, and goe towards the West, where he should conquer Kingdomes, Signories and Lands. And that thou mayest be assured that this is the will of GOD, arise and goe with thy people towards the Mountayne, to that part which ioyneth on the Sea: There thou shalt dismount, and turne thee toward the East, and kneeling downe nine times, shalt worsh^p the immortall  GOD and he which is Almightie shall shew thee the way by which thou mayest commodiously passe. Cangius presently commands his people with their wiues and families to accompanie him in this enterprise; and when they were come to the Sea, forgat not with his followers to performe those nine worships, and staying there that night in his prayers, the next
 day hee saw that the Sea had gone nine foot backe from the Mountayne, and left a spacious way, by which they with all their substance passed Westward. Hence it is that the Tartars ascribe some happinesse to the number of nine, and hee that will offer a present to any Tartarian Signor, must offer nineThe number of nine. things, which custome they vse in their tributes vnto this day, as Master Ienkinson found by experience to his cost. Cangius after many aduentures, and many lawes which of him were called Iasack Cangis Can, hauing first perswaded his twelue sons (wherein I thinke his nephewes were also reckoned) to concord, bidding each of them to bring him an arrow, which together, none of them* asunder, the least of them might easily breake; hee dyed.
This Historie of Cingis or Cangius, I haue thus fully related, for knowledge both of the  beginnings of their State and Religion: and if these Visions seeme fabulous, yet might Cingis in his subtilty deale with them, as Mahomet with his Arabians, or Numa with the Romans; the one making Gabriel, the other Aegeria, Authors of their policies: and what hee in part pretended, might by Fame and Time be augmented. Although I see not, but that this History of Cingis may as well be credited, as that of Alexander in Iosephus, to whom appeared one in the habite of the Iewish High Priest, commanding him to vndertake that enterprise, with promise of assistance; for which cause, he whom the World worshipped as a King, and as a God, did worship,Antiq. lib. 11. himselfe prostrate before Iaddus the High Priest. And the sameIos. Antiq. lib. 2. in fine. Author also saith, that the Pamphylian Sea diuided it selfe to giue way vnto his Macedonian Souldiers, hauing no other way to destroy the Empire of the Persians.  
To returne to our Fryer with whom we began; he reportethJo. de Plano. Carpini. that Cingis, after his victorie against the Naimani, warred vpon the Kythayans, where hee was ouerthrowne, and all the Nobles, except seuen, slaine. Hauing breathed himselfe a while at home, hee inuaded the Huyri, a Christian people of the Nestorian Sect, whom they ouer-came, and receiued of them Letters, of which before they were ignorant. After them, he subdued the Saroyur, Karanites, and Hudirat. This done, he waged Warre against the Kythayans or Cathayans, whose Emperour he shut vp into his chiefe Citie, where Cingis besieged him, till that Victuall fayling in his Campe, he commanded that they should eate euery tenth man of the Armie. They of the Citie fought valiantly with Engines, Darts, Arrowes: and when Stones wanted, they threw Siluer, especially molten siluer. But by vnder-mining the Tartars made way from  the Armie into the middest of the Citie, where they issued vp, and opened the gates by force, and slew the Citizens. This is the first time that the Emperour of the Kathayans being vanquished, Cingis Cham obtayned the Empire. The men of KaytayKytayans, and their Religion. are Pagans, hauing a speciall kinde of writing by themselues, and, as it is reported, the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. They haue also recorded in Histories the liues of their fore-fathers, and they haue Eremites, and certayne houses made after the maner of our Churches, which in those dayes they greatly resorted vnto. They say, that they haue diuers Saints also, and they worship one God. They adore and reuerence Christ Iesus our Lord, and beleeue the Article of eternall life, but are not baptized. They doe also honorably esteeme and reuerence our Scriptures. They loue Christians, and bestow much almes, and are a very courteous and gentle people. They haue no beards, and they agree partly with the Mongals in the disposition  of their countenance. There are not better Artificers in the world. Their Countrey is exceeding rich in Corne, Wine, Gold, Silke, and other commodities. Of their writing, Fryer Bacon, from the Relations of W. Rubruquis, which liued in his time, and Rubruquis himselfe (as in the Manuscript thereof appeareth) testifie that it was done wi^h pencils and in characters: as the Chinois and Iaponites still vse. The Iugres write from the top to the bottome of the page, and from the left hand to the right: the men of Tebeth as wee doe: those of Tangat from the right hand to the left, but multiply their lines vpwards. The Cathayans (saith Rubruquis) are little men, and speake thorow the nose. They are good artificers, the sonne succeeding in the fathers trade. Their Physitians deale with hearbes, but not with vrines. There  were amongst them Nestorians, who had a Bishop residing in Segni. Their bookes were in Syriake: themselues ignorant of that tongue. They were drunkards, vsurers, and some of them had many wiues. They washed their lower parts when they entred their Churches: they feast and eat flesh on Fridayes, as the Saracens. Their Bishop visits them scarce once in fiftie yeeres. And then all their Males, euen infants also, are ordred Priests. The Idolaters amongst them are more moderate, some of which weare yellow broad cowles: some are Eremites, and leade an austere life in woods and hills. Cathaya had not then any vines, but they made drinke of Rise, wherewith they also tooke a kinde of Apes, which would drinke themselues drunken with that pleasant liquor: out of whose neckes they tooke the bloud wherewith they died purple.  
After the conquest of Cathay, Cyngis sent his sonne Thossut Can (for so they termed him also) against the people of Comania, whom hee vanquished. Another sonne he sent against
 the Indians, who subdued India Minor. These Indians are the blacke SaracensBlacke Saracens., which are also called Aethiopians. Thence hee marched to fight against Christians, dwelling in India Maior, whose King was commonly called Presbyter Iohn, who by a stratageme repelled them out of his dominion. In trauelling homewards, the said Armie of the Mongals came vnto the Land of Buirthabeth; the inhabitants whereof are Pagans, and conquered the people in battaile. This people haue a strange custome: When any mans father dieth, hee assembleth all his kindred, and they eat him. They haue no beards, but with an iron instrument plucke out the haires, if any grow. Cyngis himselfe went vnto the Land of Kergis, which they then conquered not, And in his returne home his people suffered extreme famine: and by chance  finding the fresh entrailes of a beast, they cast away the dung, sod it; and brought it before Cyngis, and did eate thereof. Heereupon Cyngis enacted, That neither the bloud, nor the entrailes, nor any other part of a beast, which might bee eaten, should be cast away, saue onely the dung. Hee was afterward slaine by a thunderclap, leauing behind him foure sonnes; the first Occoday, the second Thossut Can, the third Thiaday, the name of the fourth is not knowne.


@. III.  Of OCCODAY the next Emperour, and CVINE CAN.
CYNGIS being dead, Occoday was chosen Emperour. He sent Duke Bathy his nephew, the sonne of Thossut Can, against the Countrey of Altisoldan,Occoday 2. Tart. Imp. and the people called Bisermini, who were Saracens, but spake the Language of Comania, whom hee subdued. Thence they marched against Orna, a Port Towne on the Riuer Don, where were many Gazarians, Alanians, Russians, and Saracens, which he drowned with the Riuer running thorow the Citie, turning it out of the chanell. Thence they passed  into Russia, and made foule hauocke there, destroying Kiou, the chiefe Citie. They proceeded against the Hungarians and Polonians, and in their returne inuaded the Morduans, being Pagans, and conquered them in battaile. Then they marched against the people called Byleri, or Bulgaria magna, and vtterly wasted the Countrey. From hence they proceeded towards the North against the people called Bastarci, or Hungaria magna, and hauing conquered them, subdued also the Parossitae and Samogetae, thence proceeding vnto the Ocean Sea.
At the same time Occoday sent Cerpodan against Kergis, who subdued them in battaile.The Kergis. These are Pagans, hauing no beardes at all. They haue a custome, when any of their fathers die, in token of lamentation, to draw (as it were) a Leather thong ouerthwart their faces, from one eare to the other. Hence hee marched with his forces Southward against the Armenians,  which they conquered, with part of Georgia, receiuing tribute of the other part; and from thence into the Dominions of the mightie Soldan, called Deurum, whom they vanquished in fight. And to be short, they went on further, sacking and conquering euen vnto the Soldan of Aleppo, whose Countries they subdued. They marched against the Caliph of Baldach, and exacted at his hands the daily tribute of foure hundred Byzantines, besides Baldakines, and other gifts. Thus farre of their Conquests out of Frier Iohn aforesaid, who was in person with Bathy, or Baydo, and at the Court of Cuine the Emperour.
HaithonHaithon Armen. calleth Baydo the second sonne of Occoday, or Hoccota Can, affirming, That hee sent his three sonnes; Iochi into the West, as farre as Tygris; Baydo towards the North: and Chagoday towards the South. Hee sent also one Baydo (whither the same, or another) with  thirtie thousand horse, against the Soldan of the Turks, whose Realme hee subdued in the yeere 1244. He addeth, That Baydo hauing conquered CumaniaCumania., (which hee confineth on the East with the Corasmians, on the West with the Euxine, on the North with Cassia, haply Casan, on the South with the Riuer Etil) he subdued Russia, Gazaria, Bulgaria, and so passing into Austria, following the streame of his victories, in the passage of a great streame was there drowned. His heires succeeded him in the places which he had conquered; which Seignorie Tochay possessed in Haithons time. This Historie of Baydo his death is not likely: For Yvo of Narbona, in an Epistle to the Archbishop of Burdeaux, recorded byMat. Paris. Matth. Paris in the yeere 1243. saith, That in the same present summer they had departed out of Hungarie, and laid siege to Neustat, wherein this Yvo then was: and in the yeere 1246. Frier Iohn was  with the said Baydo, who also rehearseth that Hungarian Expedition, and his returne vnto those parts about Volga, or Etil. Likewise William de Rubruquis, a Frier Minorite, was sent to Baatu (so he calleth him) from Lewes the French King, in Anno 1253.

And to this agreeth Mathias a MichouMat. a Michou de Sarmat. lib. 1. in his Sarmatian Historie, who witnesseth, That in the yeere 1241. the Tartars, vnder Bathu, came into Russia, and destroied Kiou, a Citie before stately and beautifull, hauing in it three hundred Churches and more, very faire, of which some remaine to this day among the shrubs and briers, receptacles for wilde beasts. It was the Seat of the Metropolitan, who had vnder him many Bishops thorow Moldauia, Valachia, Russia, and Muscouia. Hee sent Peta into Polonia, who destroied the Countrey, and on Ashwednesday turned Cracouia into ashes, abandoned before both of the Prince and People; and after ouerthrew Duke Henrie, and other Noblemen, with the forces of the Countrie assembled against them, together with Pompo, the great Master of the Dutch Order in Prussia: in which battaile, a certaine Tartarian Standard-bearer, carrying in a great Standard  the Greeke letter X, and on the top of the staffe a blacke and terrible Image: with a long beard, beganTartarian Sorcerie. with inchantment strongly to shake the head of the Image: whereupon a smoake and cloud of intolerable stinke was presently dispersed ouer the Polonians, and they became heartlesse and vnable to fight. Duke Henrie, and Duke Boleslaus, and Pompo, with the flower of their Nobility, were heere slaine, and the Countrie miserably spoiled. From hence they went into Morauia, where they put all to fire and sword more then a moneth together: and thence to Hungary to Bathy, who entred Hungarie with 500000. souldiers; where first ouerthrowing those forces which King Bela had sent to prohibite them passage, they after chased the King himselfe, with the power of his Kingdome opposing himselfe against them, out of the field, who fled into Austria, and after into Sclauonia, leauing his  Countrey a prey to the Tartars: who making spoile on that side of Danubius, the next Winter passed ouer the Riuer, then frozen, and filled all with bloud and slaughter. Bathy sent Cadan to pursue the King into Sclauonia, still fleeing before him, who wasted Bosna, Seruia, and Bulgaria. And after two yeeres sackage in Hungarie, they passed by the fennes of Maeotis into Tartaria, and haply had returned to make fresh spoiles in Europe, if the Embassage of Pope Innocent had not diuerted their purpose: or rather, that Occaday their great Chan being about that time poisoned, they were to expect a new Commission from his successour, which was Cuine; who when he was installed, euen in the presence of FryerIo. de Plano. C. Iohn, the Popes Legat, erected a Banner against all Kingdomes of the Christians, except they would bee subiect to him: for their intent was to subdue all the world, as Cyngis Cham had ordained; and the superscription of his Seale was God in Heauen,W. Rubruq. M.S and Cuine Chan vpon Earth, the strength  of God, the Seale of the Emperour of all men. Hee kept his Court vsually in the land of Naymans, the plaines whereof were extended like to the Sea, without the rising of any hill. The cold most eager and sharpe till March, little winde, nor snow, except in the end of Aprill. At Caracarum Rubruquis met with an English man borne in Hungaria, which was expert in many languages; his name was Basilius. Heere hee found two Mosches and one Church.


@. III. Of MANGV CAN and his successor CVELAI.  
Cuine 3. Imp. Mangu 4.BVt Cuine in short time after died, and left the Empire to Mangu Can; to whom AytonusHaithonus de Tart. the Armenian King went voluntarily in person, about the yeere 1257. and receiuing gracious entertainement, made vnto him seuen petitions: first, That he and his people should become Christians: secondly, That there should be perpetuall peace betweene the Tartars and Christians: thirdly, That in all Countries conquered by the Tartars, the Churches and Clergie-men of the Christians should bee free from seruitude and tribute: fourthly, That hee would redeeme the Holy Sepulchre and the Holy Land from the Saracens: fifthly, That hee would destroy the Caliph of Baldack: sixthly, That himselfe might haue aid, as neede should require, in his defence, of such Tartars as were  neere vnto Armenia: seuenthly, That such parts of Armenia as the Saracens now possessed, and the Tartars should recouer from them, might returne to the Crowne of Armenia. Mangu-Can answered, after deliberation with his Nobles, to the first, That himselfe would bee a Christian, and perswade other his subiects, but force none thereunto: and to the rest in order, that his requests in all should be fulfilled, and to that end hee would send his brother Haolon into those parts, as is before alreadie shewed. Thus was Mangu baptized by a Bishop, then Chauncellor of Armenia, and all his houshold, and many Nobles of both sexes. But before Ierusalem could bee recouered,Cu^lai. 5. Imp. Mangu died, and Cobila, or Cublai Can succeeded, in whose time M. PaulusM. Paul. l. 2. was an eye-witnesse of the Tartarian proceedings, who affirmeth, That,  this Cublai exceeded in power, not his predecessours onely, but all the Kingdomes of Christians
 and Saracens, although they were ioyned in one. Before hee obtained the Soueraigntie, hee shewed himselfe a valiant Souldier: but after hee was Emperour, hee neuer fought field but once against Naiam his vncle, who was able, out of the Prouinces wherein he gouerned, to bring together foure hundred thousand Horse, to whom Caidu should haue added a hundred thousand Horse more. These both conspired against their Master and Lord Cublai:Anno 1286. but before their forces were ioyned, Cublai stopping the passages, that none might passe to carrie newes, suddenly assembled, within ten dayes iourney of Cambalu, three hundred and threescore thousand Horse, and an hundred thousand Footmen. With this power riding day and night, he came suddenly on his enemies, and hauing first consulted with his Diuiners,  after their manner, gaue the on-set, and tooke Naiam prisoner, whom hee strangled betwixt two Carpets, lest the Earth should drinke, or the Sunne should see the bloud of that imperiall family. Naiam had beene secretly baptized, and now also had the Crosse for his Banner, which occasioned the Iewes and Saracens to scoffe at the Christians: but Cublai vnderstanding hereof, called them all before him, and said, that the Crosse would not helpe such wicked men as Naiam, who was a Traitour to his Lord; say yee not therefore, that the GOD of the Christians is vniust, to forsake his followers; for hee is the chiefe Bountie and Iustice. Cublai by his Captaines conquered the Kindomes of Mien, Bengala, Mangi, etc.


HONDIVS his Map of TARTARIA.
map of Tartary, North Asia
TARTARIA






CHAP. XII. A Continuation of the Tartarian Historie, and the question discussed, whether Cathay and China be the same: and the iourney of BENEDICT GOES by land from Labor.

@. I.  Of the Tartarian Succession to our dayes.
AFterM. P. l. 2. c. 5. Tamor 6. Cublai can succeeded Tamor Can, sonne to Cingis, the eldest sonne of Cublai: in whose time Haithon (which then liued) saith, That there were besides, three great Tartarian Princes, but subiect to the great Can: Chap^, which ruled in Turquestan, who was able to bring into the field foure hundred thousand Horsemen armed: Hotchtay, in the Kingdome of Cumania, who was able to arme six hundred thousand horsemen to the wars, but not so resolute as the former. Carbanda, the third, ruled in Tauris, able to assemble an Army of three  hundred thousand Horse, well prouided. And all these liued in the Westerne bounds of the Tartarian Empire, euerie way inferiour in wealth and numbers to the Southerly and Easterly parts thereof.
Tarik Mircond a Persian, in his Catalogue of the Cans or Tartarian Emperours, calleth Cublai, by a transposition of the syllables, Vlaku. For thus doth hee recite their names, with the yeeres of their coronations. Chinguis in the yeere of the Hegira 602. Otkay Khaon 626. Gayuk Khaon 643. Manchu Khaon 644. Vlaku Khaon 657. Haybkay Khaon 663. Hamed Khan or Nicudar Oglan 680. Argon Khon 683. Ganiaru Khon 690. Budukhan 693. Gazunkhan 694. Alyaptukhan 703. Sulton Abuzayd Bahader Khan 716. These from Cublai or Vlaku, are the Cans or Vice-royes of Persia and those parts adioyning, and not the great Cans themselues.  But of these and of Tamerlane and his issue, wee haue before related at large, in the fourth Persian Dynastie. I haue seene the transcript of a letter sent by King Edward the Second, written 1307. in the first yeere of his reigne, October 16. to Diolgietus King of the Tartars, against Mahomet, and in behalfe of William Liddensis Episcopus and others to preach to his people. But these Tartars it seemeth were of the neerer Mahumetans, and not the great Can of Cathay.
Since Tamor Can, we haue not so continued a Historie of their Empire and Emperours as before, and yet wee haue had succeeding testimonies a long time of their State and Magnificence, but neither so diligent obseruers, nor so exact Writers as the former: besides that, their Histories seeme in some things more fabulous. Of this later sort are OdoricusOd^ricus ap. Hak. a Fri^^,  which liued three yeeres in the Emperors Court, and trauelled as farre as Quinsay, who died in the yeere 1331. Sir Iohn MandeuileSir Iohn Mandeuile. our Country-man spent many yeere in those Countries, a few yeeres after Odoricus, and writ the Historie of his Trauels, in the reigne of Edward the third of England; Echiant Can being then Emperour of the Tartars: in which, if many things seeme not worthy credit, yet are they such as Odoricus, or some others, not of the worst Authors had before committed to writing, and haply by others after his time, in those dayes when Printing wanted, foisted into his booke. Once, hee setteth downe the distances, and passages of Countries so exactly, as I thinke he could not then haue learned, but by his owne Trauels. After his timeNic. di Conti. ap. Ramus. Ios. Barbaro. Nicholo di Conti, a Venetian, trauelled thorow India and Cathay, after twentie fiue yeeres returning home: and going to Eugenius the fourth,  then Pope, to bee absolued, because hee had denied the Christian Faith to saue his life, his enioyned penance was, truly to relate to Poggius tht Popes Secretarie his long peregrination: This was in the yeere 1444. About the same timeIos. Barbaro. Iosafa Barbaro, a Venetian, in the yeere 1436. had learned of a Tartarian Embassadour (which had beene at Cambalu, and returning by Tana, was entertained of the said Iosafa) some particulars touching the great Cham and Cathay, some part whereof he heard after confirmed by the mouth of Vsun-cassan, the mightie Persian King, in the yeere 1474. So that from the yeere 1246. thus farre we haue continued succession of the Cathayan Historie, besides that which an ArabianAshacen Arabs. hath written in this Historie of Tamerlane, now extant in English.  



@. II. The question discussed whether Cathay be the same with China.
I Am the more curious in naming these Authors, lest any should thinke that which is written of this people to bee fabulous (all these, in a manner, concurring in the most substantiall things) and because many confoundLudouicus Reg. Litera Iaponicae. Contugo Contughi in Thes. Polit. part. 4. etc. the Countries and affaires of China and Cathay. The cause of both which opinions may bee, because that in these last hundred yeeres and more, in which more of the World, then euer before hath been discouered, yet nothing of moment is found out of this Countrie or People. Whereunto may  bee answered, That since, diuers of the great Tartarian Lords, before subiects to the great Cham, hauing made themselues absolute Lords of their seueral States, the way hath not bin so open to passe, being otherwise of it selfe exceedingly both long, difficult, and dangerous: and the adioyning Princes recouering themselues from Tartarian seruitude, will neither suffer their owne to goe out, nor others freely to enter their Dominions; as the Muscouite, the King of China, and others. Master Ant.Hak. tom. 1. pag. 303. Ienkinson, which went as farre thither-ward as Bogharre, could not passe further for warres in those parts. Neither haue any gone thither by Sea. And yet euen in this time wee haue not altogether wanted witnesses. LudonicusL. Vert^man. Vertomannus, an hundred yeeres since, in Bengala, met with diuers Christians, who affirmed,  That there were in their Countrie diuers Signiors, Christians, subiect to the great Cham. These were white men, of a Citie called Sarnau. In M. HakluitsTom. 1. pag. 336. and seq. painefull labours we may reade of diuers passages out of Russia and Persia by Carauans into Cathay. Ramusius also, in his AnnotationsRamusius. before M. Paulus, telleth of one Chaggi Memet, a Persian Merchant, who had beene at Campion and Succuir in Catay (Damircan then reigning) and had acquainted him with diuers partiulars thereof.
Also in the Epistle ofEmanuel Carval. Epist. vide eadem ap. Pierre du Iarric, liure 4. de l^ histoire des I^des Orient. cap. 16. Emanuel Carualius, a Iesuite, dated at Malaca in Ianuarie, 1599. is contained the transcript of Ierome Xauerius his letter from Lahor, the Citie Royall of the great Mogor, dated August. 1598. Wherein the Iesuit relateth, That whiles he was in conference with the Prince, there entred into the Palace an olde-man of Mahomets Religion, threescore yeeres of age, who affirmed to the Prince, That hee had come from Xatai by the  way of Mecca. Presently some which knew him, affirmed, That hee had distributed in almes an hundred thousand pieces of gold at Mecca. The Prince asking if it were so, hee affirmed, That he did it because he was old, and could not long liue, nor carrie those things away with him. Being demanded of the State of Xatai, he answered, That he had there liued thirteene yeeres in the Citie Royall, Xambalu, the King whereof was verie mightie, and had in his Empire a thousand and fiftie Cities, some of them verie populous. He said, he had often seene the King, with whom no man speaketh but by a supplication, nor is answered but by an Eunuch. Being asked how he had accesse thither, he answered, That he sustained the person as well of the Embassadour of the King of Caygar, as of a Merchant: and being detained in  the first City by the Magistrate, he shewed his Commission, and post was presently sent to the King who returned in a moneth, riding nintie or an hundred miles a day, with change of Horses, bringing him letters of admission. No man was troublesome to him in the way. They punish theeues seuerely (which also is obserued of the Cathayans in Iosapha Barbar^, and in Marcus Paulus aforesaid.) The people he affirmed were white, comely, long-bearded, and very personable. In Religion he said they were Isauites (or Christians, professors of Iesus) and some among them Musauit^s, or Iewes, and many Mahumetans, who hoped to draw the King, being a Christian, to their Sect. The Iesuit addeth, That he further conferred with him another day about their Religion, who told him, that they had many Churches, and  some very great many Images, both painted and carued, especially of the Crucifixe, which they religiously worship. Euerie Church hath his Priest much reuerenced. The Priests liued single, and kept Schooles, wherein they instructed the youth, which should after take Orders: they had also one among the Priests supereminent, and were all maintained at the Kings costs, as were the Churches also both built and repaired. They ware blacke clothes, and on Holy-dayes, red; with Caps much like the Iesuites, but greater. He added, That hee had often seene the King go to Church: That there were many of both Sexes, which in Cloysters liued a Monasticall life, some obseruing also a single life in their owne houses.This agreeth with Vertom^^s report. He reported, That the Countrie was rich, and had in it many Mines of Siluer: the King had foure hundred Elephants, which they said were brought from Malaca. And from Pegu: also hee said,  that Merchants resorted thither, which voyage was halfe a yeere (it seemeth thorow the Sea betweene China and Iapan.) Xauerius addeth, That while he was at Caximir, he heard of many Christians in Rebat, a Kingdome ioyning to Xatai, who had Churches, Priests, and Biships, to whom he had written three wayes in the Portugall and the Persian Tongues.

The greatest obiection against this History, that distinguisheth Cathay from China, is the report of Iacob PantogiaIacob Pantegia., a Iesuite, in a letter dated from Paquin, the Seate Royall of China, in March 1602. in which hee blameth a double errour of our Maps, both for making China larger then it is, and for adioyning to the same this questioned Kingdome of Cathay, whereas (saith he) China, or Sinay, is Cathay, and this Paquin, where now wee liue, is Cambalu. This hee proueth by the incredible riches which he here saw, agreeing to that which is commonly reported of Cathay, and by the testimonie of certaine Moores and Mahumetans, whom he found in Paquin, which vsually, euerie fifthGoes saith sixe. yeere, resort hither vnder shew of an Embassage, and paying of Tribute; indeed for gaine, by way of traffique: (their tribute meane while obtaining sufficient retribution out of the Kings Coffers, who sustaineth them  and theirs, all the time of their abode in China, at his owne costs, besides other gifts.) Of these Merchants, which resorted hither out of Persia and the Countrie of the Mogores, the Iesuites by enquiry learned, that this Countrie of China was called Cathay, and had no other name in Persia, and among the Mogores, nor did they know any other Countrie so called: And asking further, how they called the Citie Paquin, they answered, Cambalu: whereupon the Iesuit concludeth without all scruple, as is said. And againe, in the Chinian Epistles, dated 1607. is reported, ThatBaned. Goes. Benedictus Goes (sent sixe yeeres after of the Iesuites by the way Mogor to finde out Cathay) remained in the borders of China, in the Prouince of Xanti, from whence he writ, Anno 1606. That he could finde no other Catay, then the Kingdome  of China. This report furthereth Pantogiaes opinion.
But if it be not sufficient to oppose the former report of Xauier, to these of Pantogia and Goes, and the different qualities of the Chinians and Cathayans (as in their proper places shall follow) both in things priuate and publike, Diuine and Humane; I answere, That the name of Cambalu is by Marcus PaulusMarc. Paulus lib. 2. cap. 7. and others interpreted, The Citie of the Prince, or Cam. And PereraGaleotto Pevera relationes Chin. Pequim sig. interpreteth Pachin, or Paquin, where the King of China alwaies resideth, to signifie the Towne of the KingdomeTrigant sunt Borealem Curiam, ad similitudinam australis quae dicitur Narquin., as he was there aduertised, the same signification (in manner) remaining to the diuers appellations in differing languages, as a common name to be applied to any CitieLit. Iac. Anon. Anno 1603. Royall.
Now for custome of both; whereas in China theeues and malefactors are seldome executed  (and none hath power to execute any, without speciall Commission from the King) but either they die by stripes, hunger, or imprisonment, except some few once in a yeere: Marcus Paulus and Iosafa Barbaro, from the relation of eye-witnesses affirme, That in Cambalu was such sudden and rigorous execution of Iustice, that one taking a iarre of Milke from a womans head, and beginning to drinke, vpon the womans out-cry was apprehended, and presently with a sword cut in sunder, that the bloud and milke issued together; a Tartarian Embassador affirming both this, and that he had seene the like execution vpon another, for taking a piece of Bayes from a woman, so chopped in twaine. But the relation of the Chinian and Cathayan differing Rites will further yeeld scruples in this case. As for the name of Cathay, ascribed to China by the Moores, I answere, That William de RubruquisWil. de Rupr. Hak. tom. 1., who  was in the Court of Mangu Can, supposeth Cathay to be Serica Regio described by Ptolomey farre more Northerly, then the Iesuite reporteth China to bee, by his owne Astrolabicall obseruation. And to these SeresPtol l. 6. c. 16. Ptolemey ioyneth the Sinae, or Chinois, on the South, and our later Geographers generally concurre in this opinion. Hee also which readethIo. de Plano Carp. cap. 5. Ioannes de Plano Carpini shall finde, that the Tartars conquered the Kara-Kitai, or blacke Cathayans, and then the Emperour of Kithai, be vndermining his Citie, as is said, in the daies of Cyngis; and yet a great part of Kitai remained still vnconquered, and withstood his forces; and namely that part which is neerest the Sea. And this wealthy countrie of great Cathaya hath many Prouinces, the more part whereof doe yet withstand the Moals or Tartars (it is the last Printed period in William de Rubriquis.) I hence gather that the name Kitai was applied to a great part of the North-East of Asia, happily no lesse generall to many Regions  on that side, then India to the Southerly parts. And why may not the name of Kathay, as well by the Mogores and Persians, bee giuen to the North parts of China (one parcell of the North-East of Asia) as the name of India, not onely to so great a part of Asia, but to America also, which was called India, because the first Discouerers thought they had encountered the Indian Continent? And these parts of China, may much fitter retaine the name of Cathay, to which Empire it had so long been subiect, and by the Cathayan conquest was first knowne to our world. Since my first Edition I met with the other part of Rubruquis, which Master Hakluit (then whom I know none in this kind more industrious) copied out of an entire booke in the Librarie of Bennet Colledge in Cambridge. Where betweene Cataya and India he placeth a Sea: which fitly agreeth to the Chinian Map, made  by the Chinois themselues, who paint a great Bay or Gulfe of the Sea betwixt the Northern parts of China, which we reckon to Cathaia, and the Southerne which may be accounted to
 India. Further, hee addeth, That all the Nations of Great Cathaya (which Epithete is not a little to bee obserued) are situate amongst the Caucasean hils, on the North side, euen to the Easterne Sea.
But they knew no countrie else so named! TrueThe names of China haue often altered, and so we may thinke of Cathay that somtimes more generall, it is now restrained by the Saracens (the only trauellers into these parts of China where they trade.; for the Lawes of the Cathayans forbidding egresse of the Natiues and ingresse of Aliens, and a more forcible law of Mountains and Desarts, wilde beasts, and wilder men; the manifold smaller and more beggerly Segniories betweene, euerie one challenging their ninth (if not themselues confiscating, or theirs robbing all) now in so long a space, may burie euen the name and knowledge of the Great Can, whereas neither Armes of Princes, nor traffique of Subiects can open any new,  or retaine the olde notice of Nations. What dreames did the West conceiue of the East in Asia, and South in Africke, till the Armies first, and Merchants after, of the Carthaginians, Macedonians, and Romanes discouered them? And yet how did those flouds of barbarous people afterwards drowne with barbarous ignorance the knowledge of all Arts, and this of Geographie amongst the rest? And till the Tartarians, like a terrible thunder-clap, with the lightning and noyse of their Armies, brought a more sudden then welcome knowledge of themselues to the world, who euer in Persia or Assyria had heard of their names, or of diuers people else (and these Cathayans among the rest) first knowne by their conquests? Further the Iesuite himselfe, to Paquin ascribeth iust fortie degrees: and Marcus Paulus his Father and Vncle went from Boghar (the altitude whereof Master IenkinsonHak. at  his being there, obserued to be thirtie nine degrees, and ten minutes: or asAb^lsada Isap. Ramus. Abilfada Ismael placeth it, thirtie nine and an halfe, North, and North-East to goe into Cathay. The like course did the same men hold going into Cathay, from Armenia afterwardes with Marcus himselfe,Lib. 1. cap. 1. sempre alla volta di Graeco and Tramontana; whereas a course directly East, or inclining to the South, must haue beene taken, if China had beene Catai. Neither is is likely that their iourney would haue beene so much letted by Frosts and Snowes. The same may be gathered out of the discourses following in Marcus Paulus*Lib. 1. and l. 2. where he abutteth the countries in succeeding linkes to Cathay, from the East to the Northwards, and from the North-East declining Westward in reckoning from thence. And whereas Pantogia raiseth the most Northerly part of China but to fortie two degrees at the most, wherein, as to an eye-witnesse wee yeeld him credit: How can it stand with reason, how can it be likely that in those  temperate climes, the world can yeeld but a few Nations, and those base Moores and Ethnikes, when as a good part of Spaine, halfe Italy, Greece, all France, Germanie, and Hungarie (to omit other welthy parts of the world) are subiect to the same parallels? And indeed herein Pantogia hath well helped vs, whereas our moderne Maps haue caused no small scruple to a diligent obseruer, in placing Cathay, a countrie reported to bee so fertile and ciuill in so Northerly a clime, very indiscreetlyHond. tab. raising Cambalu to the height of sixtie degrees, and paralelling Cathay with Norwey: which cannot stand with other things thereof reported, howsoeuer the Tartars themselues were happily of a more Northerly climate then this mentioned. Others go not so farre, yet they place Cambalu too farre within land, which Paulus  saith is within two dayes iourney of the Sea. It seemeth that now this great Tartarian Prince (if there be any such) hath no strength at Sea, and therefore is lesse knowne. And herein participate other great and mightie Princes, Prester Iohn (so called) of Aethiopia in Africa, and the Sophi, and great Mogor, in Asia, ranked iustly amongst the greatest Emperours of the world: who hauing some part of their Dominion adioyning to the Sea, make little or no vse thereof. Abilfada Ismael a Syrian Prince, who wrote an exact Geographie in Arabike aboutAb. Ismael cited by Ramus. vol. 2. three hundred yeeres since, placeth Cambalu in 144. 8. Long. and 35.25. Latit. it may happily bee 45. degrees in Latitude, one Figure being falsified, or else inuerted for 53. And as this Latitude disagreeth from that of Paquin, so the Longitude a great  deale more: this confirming this opinion further, that Chaggi Memet, Mar. Polo, Mandeuil, Odoricus, Nicolo di Conti, and others, eye-witnesses, speake of China, or Mangi, and of Cathay, as diuers Countries.
And Farfur King of MangiM.P. l. ^.55. possessed his Countries, now knowne by the name of China, in peace, till An. 1269. being counted a richer Countrie then Cathay it selfe, which was conquered before, if wee vnderstand it properly: and Cambalu seemeth to bee the Citie wherein Cingis the first Cham besieged and tooke the Cathayan Emperour. Paulus also mentioneth among the greatest Cities of Mangi, Panghin, and Nanghin, reporting further that Mangi alone had in it a thousand and two hundred great, rich, and illustrious Cities (as much as is reported of whole China, and more) and that after Cublai Can had conquered that  State, he diuided it into nine tributarie Kingdomes, gouerned by so many Vice-royes vnder him: And these Cities hee fortified with Garrisons, not of the Naturall inhabitants, but of Cathay. And these things are reported by him, who long liued in these parts, and non interfuit solum sed etiam praefuit, and quorum pars magna fuit, possessing the place of Gouernour
 vnder the Can three yeeres (according to the Tartarian custome) in IanguiMarc. Paulus lib. 2. cap. 60. one of the chiefe Cities of Mangi, hauing vnder it twentie seuen other Cities: and the whole Prouince of Mangi hee placeth South-East from Cathay. And wherefore doth the King of China alwayes abide in Paquin, in the Northerly part of his Kingdome; but, as all which write here of affirme, because of the Tartars which from those parts conquered the Kingdome? which if they were so base a people, as Pantogia affirmeth, could not be so dreadfull to the Chinois, that their King for their sakes should there make his residence in the skirts and borders of the Kingdome. AlhacenAlhacen his H storie of Tamerlane, translated by Iean. du Bec. a learned Arabian wrote the Historie of Tamerlanes life, wherein hee telleth of the great Cham of Cambula, and the King of China: as diuers Princes of diuers Countries, one of which accrewed to Tamerlaine by marriage of the Chams  onely daughter, and the other by conquest. What needed such a wall (which I my selfe haue seene drawne in a Map of China, of a verie large forme, and made in China it selfe with Chinian characters, hanging in Master Hakluits Chamber at Westminster) made by the Chinois, if the Tartars were not mightie neighbours, especially themselues being so mightie and populous? But it is vnknowne! And who knew that there was such a Kingdome as China an hundred yeeres agoe? Or who hath sayled that way to seeke this, since? And how long was it before it was knowne in our world, that there was such a Prince in the world, as the great Negus aboue mentioned, in Aethiopia; especially hee hauing no Ships for Warre or Merchandize, nor many (scarce any) good Hauens by Sea, to make himselfe knowne: and  within land Nature hath as it were imprisoned him, barring vp the passages with Mountains and Desarts: which seemeth now to be the case of the Cathayan; furthered by the iealousie of many great Princes, not to admit any Forreiner in; or licence any of theirs to passe our, for feare of innouation. Sed plenum aleae est, saithScal. de reb. Sinarum. Can. Isag. lib. 3. SCALIGER, de ijs aliquid statuere quae nobis per caliginem duntaxat nota sunt. It is hard to determine in these mistie mysteries. Euen as in Nature it falleth out that the Sunne shineth there many houres before it ariseth to vs, so in Historie it may happen that there may shine a Tartarian Sun in Cathay, when as a darke night in this long iniquitie of distance hideth him from our eyes.
Thus haue I argued the question, and well know not which way to determine. If this could any thing further the Iesuiticall vow to the Papacie, I could then suspect this opinion  of Noueltie (they indeed being the Nouatores,Scal Elench. Tr. N. Si. Step. de Lyps. Latinitate. a word which Serarius so delights to fixe vpon vs; or Veteratores, as Scaliger answeres him; quibus nihil antiquius quam antiquare antiquitatem, as H. Stephanus obiects to some Lypsian Mimikes:) but in matters of Geographie wee may follow him more safely then in Ouranographie,Iob. 1.17. as neerer of kinne to that Great Compasser of the Earth. I know not how to answere many obiections against this Chinian Cathay, but by deniall of truth in Trauellers assertions, some taking too Hyperbolicall and DiabolicallDiab. Pater mendac. authoritie: or in the coniectures of Saracens, which, seeing Paganisme in China, so conspire with Popish Imagerie, in selfe-imagined worship: with whites, lights, funerall rites, and other blacke, darke, dead, deuotions, wherein the Chinois and Iesuits seemed alike; thought them of one religion (the IesuitesTrigaut. l. 5. c. 11. owne coniecture:) or that, Time the consumer  of all things hath deuoured Cities, Peoples and Religions: or what else soeuer.
If any respect my opinion in this controuersie, I confesse the iournall of Goes lately published, and hereafter inserted, hath made mee make a new search, and take a neerer view: and though Time the Father of Truth must determine the question more fully, yet this is for the present my iudgement (if I may so stile it:) That neither they which confound Cathay with China, nor they which wholly separate them are to be followed. Medio tutissimus ibis. They seeme in this altercation to let truth fall betweene them, which in my conceit is this, that the present Kingdome of China comprehends the best part of Cathay, besides the ancient Chinian limits,N. Trigaut. l. 1. by Polo called Mangi. For Mangi (which is the true China) was by the great Can diuided into nine Prouinces or Kingdomes, as Paulus (which assisted in that Conquest) relateth. But when Humvu expelled the Tartars out of China, hee indeuoured  the same in all the best parts of Cathaya (now the Northerly parts of the Chinian Kingdome) where the Tartars were strongest, and had kept their residence. These Northerly parts were gouerned by Yunlo his Nephew and Generall of his Forces, who after Humvu his death dispossessed his Sonne, and fixed his vsurped Imperiall seat at Paquin, or Pequim in the North, as being better secured there of his friends, and against the Tartars also his practising neighbours. This Citie hee called Pequim, that is the Northerne Court, in relation to Nanquim or Nanquin, which signifieth the Southerly Court, where Humvu had before resided; both which continue Royall Cities or supreme Courts to this day. The same which in respect aforesaid, they call in China language quim, the Tartarian founders called in their  Idiome, Cambalu, Citie of the Prince, which name the Tartars and Saracens (as you haue heard) continue. But that all Cathay is not included in these sixe Prouinces, subiect to China, our reasons before out of Rubruquis are sufficient. And that there is yet a Grand Can
 in those parts, Lord of great Cities, which are also rich and fortified, hauing Printing, Ordinance, and other ciuill Arts, as in China, may appeare by the Persian Chaggi Memet his iourney into these Countries, related by himselfe to Ramusio. Goes from Camul in nine daies came to the Northerne parts, those famous walls of China: but Memet trauelled from Camul fifteene daies to Succuir; fiue daies further to Gauta, and then sixe to Campion, not mentioning any wall or impediment from the Chinois. These Cities hee placeth in Tanguth, which Paulus also doth, more Northerly the China or Cathay: both of them mentioning the plentie of Rheubarb, which draweth Merchants thither from farre. Marcus Paulus calleth Tanguth a great Prouince, containing many Prouinces and Cities; himselfe hauing liued at  Campion a whole yeere. The Emperour raigning (about seuentie yeeres since) Memet cals Daimircan, this last syllable vsually being annexed to all Princes names in those parts: and cals him the Grand Can, affirming that Succuir and Campion, were but the beginning of his Estate, and his frontire Townes towards the Mahumetans: his people being Idolaters: Now, Tanguth was neuer that I know, by any reckoned either to Cathay (in proper signification) or China. And therefore still wee may beleeue, that there is a Great Can (though little in comparison of those times, when all Asia was in manner subiect to them) still holding some Northerly and worse parts of Cathay, with Tanguth and otherSuch as those which Presbyter Johannes Asiaticus held in Paulus his time. better Countries, and perhaps another Cambula too (this being a name appellatiue) though the King of China bee  Lord of the best parts of Cathay (of the world) which will bee more apparant by the Relation of this ensuing iourney, through a great part of the Tartarian Prouinces on the West of China, here for the studious Geographie inserted out of Ricci and Trigautius their Relations of China published Ann. 1615. touched before out of the Iesuites Epistles.


@. III. The long and dangerous Iourney from LAHOR, a Citie of the Great MOGOL  to CHINA, by BENEDICTVS GOES.
VPon the Relations of that Mahometan, before mentioned out of Xauerius his Letter, Pimenta the Father Visitor of the Iesuites sent notice thereof into Europe to the Pope and Spaniard. They hearing of so mightie a Nation Christian, the Viceroy of India was commanded to follow Pimenta's directions, who employed Benedictus Goes a Portugall Iesuite in that Expedition, furnished as anArmenians are permitted freer passage then others. Armenian Merchant, changing his name to Abdula Isai, this later appellation signifying a Christian. Thus obtaining the Great Mogol Achabar his Letters Patents to his Viceroyes and neighbour Princes, accompanied with one Isaac an Armenian, he departed from Lahor the sixth of Ianuary 1603. Euerie yeere there is a Carrauan of Merchants which passe out of these parts into the Kingdome  of Cascar, about fiue hundred together, for their better defence against Robbers. With these adioyning himselfe, in a moneths trauell hee came to Athee in the same Prouince of Lahor. After passage of a riuer and some stay, hee came after two moneths to Passaur: thence trauelling to a small Towne, they met with a certaine Heremite, who told them that thirtie daies thence was the Citie Capherstam,It seemes to be therefore so called, for Capher signifies an Infidell. in which no Saracen was permitted entrance, but Ethnikes may enter except in to their Temples. Hee tasted also of their wine, of which the countrie is fertile. They goe to their Temples in blacke. Here where they met this Heremite, they stayed twentie daies, and were faine to hire foure hundred Souldiers of the Gouernour for their defence. In twentie fiue daies they trauelled from hence to Ghideli, the Merchants tr^uelling armed on the toppe of hilles, the carriages at the bottome, to preuent theeues which vse from those toppes to stone the Trauellers. They were yet assaulted and many  wounded by these Robbers. After twenty dayes more, they came to Cabul where they stayed eight moneths.Pilgrimage to Mecca, by and from the skirts of China. At this place there hapned into their company the sister of Mahamet Can King of Cascar, by whose countrey they were to passe towards Cathay. Shee was called Agehane, Age being an honourable title annexed to her name for her Pilgrimage to Mecca (from which place shee had now returned) who being in some want borrowed sixe hundred Ducats in Merchandize of Goes, which shee repayed after in most fitting Marchandize for Cathay; namely, a kind of Marble (they call it Iasper,Diuers for stones, as for pearles: this is also mentioned by Marcus Paulus. the Chinois Tusce) which is of two sorts, one taken out of the bottome of the Riuer Cotan by such as Diue for it, as they doe for Pearles, it is like to great Flintes; the other meaner, drawne forth of the Mountaine  called Consangui Cascio. The solitarinesse of the place distant from Catan twentie dayes, and the hardnesse of the stone, which they mollifie with fires ouer the place, make it costly; the Merchants which buy this Priuiledge of the King, carrying with them a yeeres prouision for their Labourers. From Cabul they went to Ciarcar, where the Mog^rs Patents (which
 had made him hitherto tribute-free) were neglected by the vnruly borderers: from thence to Parua the last towne in the Mogors subiection. After fiue dayes stay they passed in twentie dayes ouer exceeding high mountaines to the Region of Aingharan, and fifteene dayes after to Calcia, where the people resemble the Hollanders. Ten dayes being past, they came to Gialalabath, where the Bramenes exact custome, granted them by King Bruarate. Fifteene dayes after they came to Talhan, where by ciuill broyles they were stayed a moneth, the Calcians being in rebellion. Thence they trauelled to Cheman, vnder Abdulahan King of Samarhan, Burgauia, and Bacharate, and other confining Kingdomes, where the Calcians robbed them of great part of their goods: In eight dayes troublesome trauell they came to Badascian, where they were againe fleeced: neyther were they free at Ciarciunar their next  resting, from whence in ten dayes they came to Serpanill, a desart place, and twentie dayes after to Sarcil a countrey full of villages. Two dayes iourney from this place they came to Ciecialith a hill couered with snow, where in sixe dayes trauell, many of the company perished with cold. Thence they attained to Tanghetar in the Kingdome of Cascar, and in fifteene dayes more to Iaconich; which iourney was so irkesome that Goes lost fixe horses. He went from hence to HiarchanPaulus cals it Ciarcian. the royall City of Cascar in Nouember, 1603. a Mart famous for concourse of Merchants and variety of Marchandize. He presented the King with a Watch, a looking glasse, and other Europaean gifts, obtayning his letters patents for furtherance of his iourney.
This iourney for the principall places vnto Camul agrees with that report of Chaggi Memet in Ramusius.From hence hee went with the Carauan Bassa or Captaine (which buyes this place at a  deare rate of the King) about the middest of Nouember 1604. to Iolci, Hancialix alceghet, Hagabateth* Egriar, Mesetelec, Thalec, Horma, Thoantac, Mingrieda, Capetalcol, Zilan, Sa^e Guebedall, Canbasci, Aconsersec, Ciacor. Acsu, in twentie fiue dayes, a very tedious way by stones and sands. In this Iourney they passed the desart of Caracathay. Thence they trauelled to Oitograch Gazo, Casciani, Dellai, Saregabedal, Vgan, and Cucia. And after a moneths stay here, in twentie fiue dayes more to Cialis, gouerned by the King of Cascars base sonne: with whom at first he had some difference about Religion, which with a gift was pacified. And in a disputation with the Mahumetan Doctors before him, the Viceroy tooke part with Goes, affirming that the Christians were the trueMusulmans, that is, right beleeuers. Misermans, and that their Ancesters professed that law: a thing worthy by the way to bee obserued. Here hee met with some Merchants returning from Cathay, which could tell him of Ricci and the other Iesuites  at Paquin, as before you heard out of Pantogia. And here first did he learne, that China was Cathay. At his departing from Cialis, the Viceroy gaue him his letters of passe, and inscribed him a Christian according to his desire, whereat a Mahumetan Priest much wondered, affirming, that theirs with the Region shifted also their Religion.
In twenty dayes they came to Pucian, thence to Turphan a fortified Citie: thence to Aramuth, and so to Camul, the last City of this Kingdome of Cialis. In nine dayes they passed from Camul to the Northerne walles of China, where they stayed twenty fiue dayes, expecting the Viceroyes answere for their admission, at a place called Chiaicuon. And then being entred the walles, they came in one dayes iourney to the Citie Socieu. All the space betweene Cialis and the borders of China, is subiect to the out-rodes of the Tartars; the  cause that Merchants trauell in great feare, in the day time, looking not whether the coast be cleare, and trauelling the night with great silence and secresie. They found many Saracens slaine in the way. The countrey people they seldome kill, but rob of their cattell: as for corne and rice, they hold it food for beasts, and not for men, feeding on flesh, and liuing aboue an hundred yeeres. The Saracens in these parts are effeminate, and might easily bee subdued by the Chinois if they would. On the West parts of China is that Wall before mentioned to exclude the Tartars: and two fortified Cities with strong Garrisons, hauing their proper Viceroy and other Magistrates, Canceu the head City of the Prouince Scensi; and Soceu, which is diuided into two parts, one of which is inhabited by Saracens, which trade here for Merchandize, the other by Chinois, whom the Saracens heere call Cathayans. Euery  night the Saracens are enclosed in their owne Citie, in other things as the Chinois, subiect to the same Lawes and Magistrates. Neyther may any forreyner returne into his countrey which hath stayed there nine yeeres. Euerie sixth yeere, seuenty two Legates come after an olde custome to pay a kind of tribute to the King: this but a shew; the intent being to inrich themselues (as is sayd) with Marchandize, being maintained in respect of that pretence at the Kings Charge. Into Soceu Goes came at the end of the yeere, 1605. and here met with other Saracens returning from Paquin, which told him of the Iesuites there residing, adding that the King did not tell, but powred out of a measure a dayly allowance of money to them; which I mention, to shew that a man must bee sparing of credite to Saracen Trauellers  and Merchants. But Goes could not a long time certifie these his fellowes of his arriuall, being ignorant of their China names, and it was foure monethes iourney to Paquin from Soceu;
 and the force of Winter is there very great: yet did they send in that vnseasonable season one of their Conuerts a Chinois called Ioannes Ferdinandus, who, after a tedious iourney found Goes then lying on his death-bed, when hee brought him the letters from the Society. Eleuen dayes after, he dyed, not without suspition of poyson, giuen him by the Saracens, who had also before deuised by the way many shifts to make themselues Masters of his goods; they haue likewise a custome, that if any dye by the way, his goods are shared amongst the rest. Here did the Saracens offer to seize all into their hands; but Ferdinandus professed himselfe his Nephew, (borne of a China Mother) and with much a doe, eating Swines flesh together with the Armenian, in token they were not Saracens, obtayned that little which was  left of Goes his substance, scarcely enough to pay charges: yet this and all the other tedious circumstances of this long Narration, I haue thus largely related, for the instruction of Geographers and Merchants of these parts, desirous to know or trade those Countryes, the knowledge whereof I thinke no Europaean else hath learned by experience in some hundreths of yeeres last past. His Companion the Armenian was sent from Paquin to Macao, and thence to India, and being taken by Hollanders in the way at Sincapura, was redeemed by the Portugals, and returned to Ciaul, where he yet liues, as Trigautius our Authour affirmeth. But it is high time for vs to take view of our Tartarian Religion.



CHAP. XIII. Of the Religion of the Tartars, and Cathayans.
IOANNESIo. de Pl. Car. c. 3. op. Hak. to. 1 DE PLANO CARPINI thus writeth of their Religion. They beleeue that there is one GOD, the maker of all things visible and inuisible, the Authour of good things and punishments, yet do they not worship him with prayers, prayses, or any certaine rites. They haue also Idols of Felt, in the fashion of a man, and the same they set  on both sides of their Tent-doores, and vnder them they put a thing of Felt fashioned like a Dugge. These they account the keepers of their Cattell, Authors of their Milke and young store. Others they make of Silke, and doe them much honour. Some place them in a faire Chariot couered, before the doore of their station: and whosoeuer stealeth any thing out of that Chariot is slaine without all pitty. Their Captaines haue one alway in the middest of their Tent. To these Idols they offer the first fruits of their Milke: and the first morsels of their meate, and first draught of their drinke, at meales. And when they kill a beast, they offer the heart to their Idoll, leauing it before him till the morning, and then they take and eate it. They make an Idoll also to their chiefe Emperour, and offer thereunto with great solemnitie, as well other creatures as horses, which none after dare ride on till death. They breake not a bone of the beasts which they kill for meate, but burne  them with fire. They bend themselues to this Idoll towards the South, as to a God. They worship the Sunne, Lights, and Fire; Water also, and the Earth, offering thereunto the first of their meates and drinkes, and in the morning before they eate or drinke. They haue no set rites prescribed by Law, nor doe they compell any to deny their Religion simply: although in some of their customes they are very rigorous. Thus they martyred Michael Duke of Russia, because he refused to doe reuerence to the Image of Cingis Can, which had beene their first Emperour: and compelled the younger brother of Andrew Duke of Saruogle in Russia, to marrie his said brothers wife according to their custome, after that they had slaine her former Husband.
They haue certaine traditions,Their sinnes. according to which they reckon these things following to bee sinnes. To thrust a knife into the fire, or any way touch the fire with a knife, or with  their knife to take flesh out of the Cauldron, or to hew with an hatchet neere to the fire. For they thinke that they should so cut away the head of the fire. They account it sinne also to leane on the whip wherewith they beate their horses (for they ride not with spurres.) Also to touch arrowes with a whip, to take or kill young Birds, to strike an horse with the raine of their bridle, and to breake one bone against another. Likewise to powre out meat, milke, or any kinde of drinke, vpon the ground: or to make water within their Tabernacle; which whosoeuer doth willingly, is slaine: but otherwise he must pay a great summe of money to the Inchanter to bee purified: who causeth the Tabernacle, with all things therein, to passe betweene two fires. Besides, if any hath a morsell giuen him which hee is not able  to swallow, and for that cause casteth it out of his mouth, there is an hole made vnder his Tabernacle, by which hee is drawne forth, and slaine without all compassion. Likewise whosoeuer treades vpon the threshold of any of the Dukes Tabernacles, hee is put to death. Thus are these Gnats strained, when as hostile inuasions, murther, and such other Camels, are
 easily amongst them swallowed. They thinke that after death they shall liue in another world, and there multiply their cattell, eate, drinke, and doe other actions of life. At a new Moone, or a full Moone, they begin all new enterprises. They call her the great Emperour, and bow their knees, and pray thereto. The Sunne they say is the Moones mother, because shee hath thence her light.
Their Sorceries.They are giuen to Diuinations, Auguries, Sooth-sayings, Witchcrafts, Inchantments: and when they receiue answere from the Deuill, they attribute the same vnto God, whom they call Itoga, and the Comanians call him Chan, that is, Emperor, whom they maruellously feare and reuerence, offering to him many Oblations, and the first fruits of their meate and drinke. According to his answere they dispose all things. They beleeue that all things are purged  by fire: therefore when any Embassadours, Princes, or other personages whatsoeuer, come vnto them, they and their gifts must passe betweene two fires to bee purified, lest peraduenture they haue practised some Witchcraft, or haue brought some poyson or other mischiefe with them. And if fire fall from heauen vpon men or beasts, which there often hapneth; or if they thinke themselues any way defiled or vncleane, they thus are purified by their Inchanters. If any be sicke, a speare is set vp in his Tent with blacke felt welted about it, and from thenceforth,Their sicknes and Funerals. no stranger entereth therein. For none of them which are present at his death, may enter the hord of any Duke or Emperour, till a New-Moone. When hee is dead, if hee bee a chiefe man, hee is buried in the field where pleaseth him. And hee is buried with his Tent, sitting in the midst thereof, with a Table set before him, and a platter full of meate,  and a Cup of Mares-milke. There is also buried with himVin. l. 30. c. 86. a Mare and Colt, a Horse with bridle and saddle: and they eate another Horse, whose bones the women burne for the soule of the dead, stuffing his hide with straw, setting it aloft on two or foure poles, that hee may haue in the other world a Tabernacle and other things fitting for his vse. They burie his gold and siluer with him: the Chariot or Cart in which hee is carried forth is broken, his Tent is destroyed, neither is it lawfull to name his name, till the third generation. They obserue also other Funerall Rites, too long to rehearse. They lament their dead thirtie dayes, more or lesse. Their Parents, and those of their family are thus cleansed: They make two fires, and pitch neere thereunto two Speares, with a line from the top of the one to the other, fastening on the same line some pieces of Buckram, vnder which, and betwixt the fires,  passe the Men, Beasts, and Tents. There stand also two women; one on this side, the other on that, casting water, and repeating certaine charmes: if any thing fall, or be broken, the Inchanters haue it. And if any be slaine of Thunder, the men in the Tent must thus be cleansed and all things in the Tent,Their conditions. being otherwise reputed vncleane, and not to be touched. No men are more obedient to their Lords then the Tartars. They seldome contend in words, neuer in deeds. They are reasonably courteous one to another: their women are chaste; adulterie is seldome heard of, and theft is rare, both punished by death. Drunkennesse common, but without brawles among themselues, or discredit among others. They are proud, greedie, deceitfull. They eate Dogs, Wolues, Foxes, Horses, and in necessitie, mans flesh, Mice, and other filth, and that in as filthy a manner, without Clothes, and Napkins (their Bootes and the Grasse can serue to wipe their greasie hands:) they haue no beard, Hearbs, Wine,  Meate or Beere, nor doe they wash their dishes. It is a great sinne amongst them to suffer any of their food to be lost: and therefore they will not bestow a bone on a Dogge, till they haue eaten the marrow.
Yvo Narbonensis in an Epistle recited by Mat. ParisMat. Paris. Anno 1243. reporteth the confession of an Englishman, which was taken with other Tartars by the Christians. Hee saith, that they called by the Name of Gods, the auncient founders and fathers of their Tribes, and at set times did solemnize feasts vnto them, many of them being particular, and but foure onely generall. They thinke that all things are created for themselues alone. They be hardy and strong in the brest, leane and pale-faced, rough and huf-shouldred, hauing flat and short noses,  long and sharpe chinnes, their vpper jawes low and declining, their teeth long and thin, their eye-browes extending from their foreheads downe to their noses, their eyes inconstant and blacke, their thighs thicke, and legges short, yet equall to vs in stature. They are excellent Archers. Vanquished, they aske no fauour; and vanquishing, they shew no compassion. They all persist as one man in their purpose of subduing the whole world.
Their proud swelling titles appeare in the Copies of those Letters of Duke Baiothnoy and Cuin Can, expressed byVincent Bel. Spec. hist. l. vit. c. 51. and. 52. Vincentius. One of them beginneth thus: By the precept of the liuing GOD, CINGIS CHAM sonne of the sweet and worshipfull GOD saith, that GOD is high aboue all, the immortall GOD, and vpon Earth CINGIS CHAM onely Lord, etc. These Letters of the Emperour, the Tartars called the Letters of GOD: and so beginneth Duke Baiothnoy to  the Pope, who had sent Frier Ascelline, with Alexander, Albericus, and Simon, thither in Embassage. The word of BAIOTHNOY, sent by the diuine disposition of CHAM, Know this O Pope, etc.

Frier Iohn,Io. de P. C. saith he, stiles himselfe, The power of God, and Emperour of all men: and hath in his Seale ingrauen words of like effect, as is alreadie shewed. MandeuillC. 37. Sir Io. Mand. hath the same report.
Will. de RubruquisW. de Rubr. saith, that they haue diuided Scythia amongst them, from Danubius to the Sunne rising, euery Captaine knowing the bounds of his pastures which they feede, in the Winter descending Southwards, ascending in the Summer Northwards. Their houses are moueable, remoued on great Carts which containe twentie foot betweene the wheeles; their houses on each side ouer-reaching fiue foot, drawne by aboue twenty Oxen. When they take them downe, they turne the doore alwaies to the South. Ouer the Masters head is an Image of Felt, called the Masters brother: and another ouer the head of the good wife  or Mistres, called her brother, fastened to the wall; and betwixt both of them is a little leane one, which is the keeper of the whole house. Shee hath also at her beds feet a Kids skin, filled with wooll, and a little Image looking towards the Maidens and Women. Next to the doore on the Womens side (which is the East, as the mans side is on the West) there is an Image with a Cowes Vdder for the Women, whose office it is to milke the Kine: on the other side another with a Mares Vdder for the Men. When they make merrie, they sprinkle their drinke vpon these Images in order, beginning at the Masters. Then goeth a seruant out of the house with a cup full of drinke, sprinkling thrice toward the South, and bowing the knee at euery time: and this is done for the honour of the Fire. Then performeth he the like superstition toward the East, for the honour of the Ayre: next to the West for the honour of Water: and lastly, to the North, in the behalfe of the Dead. When the Master holdeth a cup in his hand to drinke, before he tasteth thereof hee poureth his part vpon the ground: if he drinketh sitting on horse-backe, hee first poureth part thereof on the Mane of the Horse. After the seruant aforesaid hath discharged his cups to the foure quarters of the world, hee returneth to the house: and two other seruants stand readie with two cups, and two Basons, to carry drinke vnto their Maister, and that Wife, which lay with him the last night, sitting together on a bedde. Their Sooth-sayers or Inchanters are their Priests.Rubruq. pars ^lt. M.S. To this may bee added out of the Manuscript aboue mentioned, their Diuination by three bones, thorough which (being first burned blacke) the Diuinor lookes; and if the sight passeth straight and right, it is a good token; but if it be inwardly crooked or broken, hee then vpon this euill presage ceaseth from his enterprise. (Master Ienkinson trauelled with certaine Tartars, which diuined by the blade-bones of sheepe, sod, and then burnt to powder, which being mingled with the bloud of the sheep, they writ therewith certaine Characters, with diuers words and Ceremonies, and thence diuined of their successe, ^hich they found true to their cost.) They vsed Diuination also by foure swords. Mangu Can desired a conference betwixt the Christians, Saracens, and Idolaters, to see which of them could make best proofe of his Religion. The Moal Tartars professed to beleeue one onely GOD, the Author of life and death: but as the hand, which is one, hath diuers fingers, so thought he and they, that this one GOD was pleased with diuers waies of deuotion. Their Priests were diuiners: they were many, but had one Captaine or chiefe Bishop, who alwaies placed his house or tent before that of the great  Can, about a stones cast distant. Hee had charge of the Waine which carried the Idols: the other Priests had their places appointed them. Some of them were Astrologers, specially that High-Priest, which foretold the Ecclipses of the Moone. All the people prouided them their meat, that they might not go out of their Tents. When an Ecclipse happens, they sound their Organs and Timbrels, and make a great noyse: and when it is past they make great feasting, drinking, and mirth. They foretell Holy-daies, and those which are vnluckie for enterprises. No warres are begun or made without their word. They cause all presents which are sent to the Can to passe through the fire: they purifie the houshold of the dead by the like rite, which before may not bee touched. On the ninth day of May they assemble all the white Mares, and hallow them: at which the Christians must be present with their Censors. They  then cast on the ground newChurned Mares-milke. Cosmos, and make a great feast. They foretell the destinies of Infants newly borne: and when one is sicke, they diuine by charmes whether the disease bee naturall, or proceed of Sorcerie. They are themselues Witches, Sorcerers, Inuokers of the Deuill: this they doe in the night, setting flesh in the midst of the house readie boiled, vsing charmes, Timbrells, and falling into mad fits are bound. Then comes the Deuill and giues them answeres. Thus much Rubruquis.
M. Paulus thus reporteth of their Religion: They say,L. 1. c. 4^* that there is a GOD on high in heauen, of whom lifting vp their hands, and smiting their teeth three times together, euery day with Censer and Incense they desire health, and vnderstanding.L. 2. c. 2^. They place a Table aloft in the wall of their house, in the which is written a name, that representeth this god. They haue another,  which they call Natigay (or Itogay) of Felt or other stuffe in euerie house. They make him a wife and children, and set his wife on the left hand, and his children before him, which seeme to doe him reuerence. This they call the God of earthly things, which keepeth
 their children, beasts, and corne: and when they eat they annoint his mouth with the fat, and the mouthes of his wife and children, and then cast out the broth out of the doore vnto other spirits. And when their God hath had his part, they take theirs. Of this Natigay, they with like Ceremonies of lifting vp their hands, and smiting of their teeth, desire temperature of the ayre,L. 2. c. 26. fruits of the earth, children, and such like. Their wiues are exceeding chaste and obseruant: and though they bee many, yet can Rachel and Leah, yea, ten or twentie of them, agree with a maruellous vnion, intent vnto their houshold, and other businesse, whereby they are gainefull, and not chargeable to their Husbands. When they marry,W. de Rich. in this sort. the Husband couenanteth with the Father of the Maide, who hauing giuen him power to take her wheresoeuer hee shall finde her, hee seeketh her among some of her friends, where shee hath then  of purpose hidden her selfe, and by a kinde of force carrieth her away. They marry with any, except their owne Mother and Sister. Their Widdowes seldome marry, because of their seruice to their former Husbands in another world, except the sonne marrie his fathers wiues, or the brother his brothers, because they can there in the next world bee content to resig^e them to their former Husbands againe. The women buy, sell, and prouide all necessaries into the house, the men intending nothing but their Armes, Hunting, and Hawking. If one hath buried a Male-child, and another a Female, the Parents contract a marriage betwixt those two, and painting in papers Seruants, Horses, Clothes, and Houshold, and making writings for the confirmation of the Dower, burne these thing^ in the fire, by the smoake  whereof they (in their smokie conceits) imagine all these things to be carried and confirmed to their ch^ldren in the other world: and the Parents of the two dead parties claime kindred each of other: as if they indeed had married their children while they liued.
In Xamdu did Cublai Can build a stately Palace, encompassing sixteene miles of plaine ground with a wall, wherein are fertile Meddowes, pleasant Springs, delightfull Streames, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the middest thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure, which may be remoued from place to place. Here hee doth abide in the moneths of Iune, Iuly, and August, on the eight and twentieth day whereof, hee departeth thence to another place to doe sacrifice on this manner: He hath a Heard or Droue of Horses and Mares, about ten thousand, as white as snow; of the milke whereof none may taste, except hee bee of  the bloud of Cingis Can. Yea, the Tartars doe these beasts great reuerence, nor dare any crosse their way, or goe before them. According to the direction of his Astrologers or Magicians, he on the eight and twentieth of August aforesaid, spendeth and poureth forth with his owne hands, the milke of these Mares in the a^^, and on the earth, to giue drinke to the Spirits and Idols which they worship, that they may preserue the men, women, beasts, birds, corne, and other things growing on the earth.
Their Sects and Orders.These Astrologers, or Necromancers, are in their Art maruellous. When the skie is cloudy and threatneth raine, they will ascend the roofe of the Palace of the Grand Can, and cause the raine and tempests to fall round about, without touching the said Palace. These which thus doe, are called Tebeth, and Chesmir,Tebeth and Chesmir. two sorts of Idolaters, which delude the people with opinion  of their sanctitie, imputing these workes to their dissembled holinesse: and for this cause they goe in filthy and beastly manner, not caring who seeth them, with dirt on their faces, neuer washing nor combing themselues. And if any bee condemned to death, they take, dresse, and eate him: which they doe not if any die naturally. They are also called Bachsi,Bachsi. that is, of such a Religion or Order; as if one should say a Frier-Preacher, or Minor, and are exceedingly expert in their diuellish Art. They cause that the Bottles in the Hall of the Great Can doe fill the Bowles of their owne accord, which also without mans helpe, passe ten paces through the ayre, into the hands of the said Can; and when hee hath drunke, in like sort returne to their place. These Bachsi sometimes resort vnto the Officers, and threaten plagues or other misfortune from their Idols, which to preuent they desire so many Muttons with black heads, and so many pounds of Incense, and Lignum Aloei,  to performe their due sacrifices. Which they accordingly receiue and offer on their Feastday, sprinkling Broth before their Idols. There be of these, great Monasteries, which seeme like a small Citie, in some whereof are two thousand Monkes, which shaue their heads and beards, and weare a religious habite, and hallow their Idols Feasts with great solemnitie of Hymnes and Lights. Some of these may bee married. Other there are, called Sensim,Sensim. an Order which obserueth great abstinence and strictnesse of life, in all their life eating nothing but Bran, which they put in hot water, and let it stand till all the white of the meale bee taken away, and then eate it being thus washed. These worship the Fire, and are condemned of the other for Heretikes, because they worship not their Idols, and will not marry in any case. They are shauen, and weare hempen-garments of black or bright yellow, and although  they were Silke, yet would they not alter the colour. They sleepe on great Mats, and liue the austerest life in the world.

Of their Astrologers in Cambalu were not fewer then fiue thousand; Christians, Catayans, and Saracens, maintained with food and rayment at the Great Cans charge. These, by their Astrolabe foretell of the change of weather, mortalitie, warres, diseases, etc. And if any enterprise any great worke, he resorteth vnto them, and telling the houre of his Natiuitie, by their Art is informed of the successe. They hold the soule to be immortall, and according to euery mans merits in his life, to passe into a more noble creature, till it be deified; or ignoble, as to a Pesant, and then to a Dogge, and so by degrees to the vilest. They shew much reuerence to their Parents, to whom if any bee vngratefull in their necessitie, there is an Office and Officers appointed to trie and punish the offence. In the Emperours hall none  dare spit, but for that purpose carrieth a little vessell to spit in: nor dare any there make any noyse or loud talking. The Tartars were at first very vncharitable to the poore, and would curse them, saying, That if God had loued them, he would haue prouided for them: but after the Idolatrous Bachsi had commended Almes for a good worke, there was great prouision made for them, and euery day at least twentie thousand dishes of Rice, Mill, and Panike, by certaine Officers distributed amongst them. And for this liberalitie they adore him as a God.
Cingis amongst his first Lawes enacted (as saith Vincentius) the punishment of death to bee inflicted vpon offenders in those three vices,Vincent. Bel. spec. histor. lib. 30. ca. 70. which before time had beene most rife amongst them, namely, lying, adulterie, and theft: of which yet towards other men that were not Tartars they made no conscience.
 They are great Vsurers, taking ten in the hundreth for a moneth, besides vse vpon vse:Ca. 75. insomuch, that a Souldier in Georgia, which had borrowed fiue hundred pieces of coyne, called Yperpera, retaining the same fiue yeeres, was constrained to repay seuen thousand. And a Tartarian Lady for seuen yeeres vse of fiftie sheepe, demanded seuen thousand Yperpera. They are so couetous, that though they abound in cattell, they will scarce allow any to their owne expence, while it is sound and good, but if it die, or be sicke. They are addicted to Sodomie or Buggerie. They eate sometimes for necessitie, mans flesh, sometimes to delight themselues, and sometimes to terrifie others, reckoning it a great glorie to haue slaine many,Ca. 76. Ca. 77. and that by varietie of crueltie. Their heads they shaue from eare to eare, in manner of a Horse-shooe: wearing long lockes at their eares and neckes. There bee some of the Tartars,  which when they see their fathers grow old and diseased, they giue them fat meates which may choake them. And when they are thus dead, they burne their bodies,Ca. 26. reseruing the ashes as a precious jewell, sprinkling their meates with that powder. But if any thinke not this enough (which I am afraid the most will deeme too much) let him resort to the large reports of Vincentius in his three last Bookes, an Author, I confesse, otherwise fabulous and monkish, but herein to be beleeued, as receiuing his Reports from the eye-witnesses.


CHAP. XIIII. Of the festiuall Solemnities, and of the Magnificence of the Grand Can.
WEe haue alreadie spoken of the solemne sacrifice obserued on the eight and twentieth day of August: we reade in our AuthorMarcus Paulus. Marcus Paulus, an eye-witnesse of these his Relations, of other the Grand Cans grand solemnities. Of which, two are principall; one, on his birth-day, which in Cublai Cans time was the eight and twentieth of September. On which himselfe was royally clothed in cloth of gold, and twentie thousand of his Barons and Souldiers were all apparelled in one colour, and like (excepting the price) to himself, euery one hauing a girdle wrought of gold and siluer, and a paire of shooes, some of their garments richly set with pearles and  jewels, which they weare on the thirteene solemnities, according to the thirteene Moones of the yeere. On this day all the Tartars, and seuerall Princes subiect, present him with rich gifts; and all sects of Religions pray vnto their gods for his health, and long life.
But their chiefe feast is on the first day of their yeere, which they begin in February, celebrated by the Grand Can, and all the Countries subiect to him: in which they are all arrayed in white, a colour in their estimation portending good lucke. And then he is presented with many Clothes and Horses of white colour, and other rich presents, in the same religiously obseruing the number of nine; as nine times nine Horses, if they bee able, and so of pieces of Gold, Cloth, and the rest. Then also the Elephants (which are aboue fiue thousand) are brought forth in sumptuous furniture: and Camels couered with Silke. And in the morning  they present themselues in the Hall as many as can, the rest standing without in their due order. First, those of the Imperiall progenie; next, the Kings, Dukes, and others, in their due place. Then commeth forth a great man or Prelate, which cryeth out with a loud
 voyce; Bow downe your selues, and worship: which they presently doe, with their faces to the earth. This Prelate addeth, GOD saue and preserue our Lord, long to liue with ioy and gladnesse. They all answere; GOD grant it. The Prelate againe; GOD increase his Dominion, and preserue in peace all his subiects, and prosper all things in all his Countries. Whervnto they answere as before. Thus doe they worship foure times. After this, the said Prelate goeth to an Altar there, richly adorned; on which is a Red Table, with the name of the Great Can written in it, and a Censer with Incense, which he incenseth in stead of them all, with great reuerence performed vnto the Table. This done, they returne to their places, and present their gifts, and after are feasted.
When Cublai had ouerthrowne Naiam his vncle (as before is said) vnderstanding that  the Christians obserued their yeerely solemnitie of Easter, hee caused them all to come vnto him, and to bring the Booke of the foure Gospels, which he incensed often with great Ceremonies, deuoutly kissing it, and caused his Barons to doe the like. And this he obserueth alway in the principall Feasts of the Christians, as Christmasse and Easter. The like he did in the chiefe Feasts of the Saracens, Iewes and Idolaters. The cause (he said) was because of those foure Prophets, to which all the world doth reuerence: IESVS of the Christians, Mahomet of the Saracens, Moses of the Iewes, and Sogomambar Can the first Idoll of the Pagans; and I (saith he) doe honour to them all, and pray him which is the greatest in Heauen, and truest, to helpe me. Yet hee had best opinion of the Christian Faith, because it contained nothing but goodnesse: and would not suffer the Christians to carrie before them the Crosse,  on which so great a man as Christ was crucified. Hee also sent Nicolo and Maffio, the Father and Vncle of Marco Paulo our Author, in Embassage to the Pope, to send him a hundred wise men which might conuince the Idolaters, that boasted of those there Magical wonders, whereas the Christians that were there, were but simple men, not able to answere them; which if it had beene effected, he and his Barons would haue beene baptized. Thomas a Iesu, a Iesuite in his second booke of Procuring the conuersion of all Nations, reporteth, that Clement the fifth ordained Iohn a Monte Coruino, a Minorite, Archbishop of Cambalu, and nine other of the same Order he consecrated Bishops, and tooke order for the successour of the Archbishop, when he died. Whether these went or no, is vncertaine. Great pitie it is, that the Iesuites, men of so refined wits, and such mightie miracle-mongers, (our world must witnesse  the one, and the East and West the other) were but of yesterdaies hatching, and that Ignatius had not broken his legge before those times. These had been (if they then had been) the onely men to haue remoued those obiected scandals of the simplicitie of Christians, and to haue confronted these Magicall Montebankes, as the Can here required. But these were reserued to times more fatall to the Pope, to helpe a^ a dead list, by peruertings here, and conuertings there, to hold vp the supposed sanctitie of the triple Diademe. But looke wee to our Tartars.
Odoricus Vinc. and Io. Boem.Odoricus saith, that in his time the Can celebrated, besides the former, the Feasts of his Circumcision, Marriage, and Coronation. But before the Conquest of Cathay, they obserued not any day at all with festiuall solemnities.
Cublai Can was of meane stature, of countenance white, red, and beautifull. He had foure  wiues, which kept seuerall Courts, the least of which contained at least ten thousand persons. He had many Concubines; euery second yeere hauing a new choice of the fairest Maidens in the Prouince of Vngut, most fertile (belike) of that commoditie: which passe a second election at the Court, and the fairest and fittest of them are committed to Ladies, to proue and to instruct them. Their parents hold it a great grace so to haue bestowed their children: and if any of them proue not, they impute it to their disastrous planet. They hold it for a great beautie, to haue their noses flat betweene the eyes.
In December, Ianuary, and February, hee abideth at Cambalu, in the North-East part of the Prouince of Cathay, in a Palace neere to the Citie builded on this manner. There is a circuit  walled in,The Grand Cans Palace. foure square, each square containing eight miles, hauing about them a deepe ditch, and in the middle a gate. A mile inwards is another wall, which hath sixe miles in each square; and in the South side three gates, and as many on the North. Betwixt those wals are Souldiers. In euery corner of this wall, and in the middest, is a stately Palace, eight in all, wherein are kept his Munitions. There is a third wall within this, containing foure miles square, each square taking vp one mile, hauing sixe Gates and eight Palaces, as the former, in which are kept the Grand Cans prouisions. And betweene these two wals are many faire Trees and Meadowes stored with many beasts. Within this is the Grand Cans Palace, the greatest that euer was seene, confining with the wall abouesaid, on the North and South.  The matter and forme thereof is of such cost and Art, with such appurtenances of pleasure and state, as were too long heere to recite. Hee for a superstitious feare suggested by his Astrologers, of a rebellion which sometime should bee raised against him in Cambalu,
 built a new Citie neere thereunto called Taidu,Odoricus calleth it Caido. twentie foure miles in compasse, and yet not able to receiue the Inhabitants of the old Citie, whence hee remoued such as might moue suspicion, hither. This Citie was built by line, in foure squares, each whereof contained sixe miles, and three gates, so streight, that vpon the wall of one gate one might see the gate right against it. In the midst of the Citie is a great Bell, which is rung in the night, to warne men to keepe within doores. The Great Can hath 12000. Horse-men, vnder foure Captaines to his Guard. He keepeth Leopards, Wolues, and Lions to hunt with, and with them to take wild Asses, Beares, Harts, etc. and one sort of Eagles able to catch Wolues. The two Masters of his hunting game had ten thousand men vnder each of them, the one part clothed in red,  the other in skie-colour: and when the Emperour hunteth, one of these Captaines goeth with his Men and Dogges on the right hand, the other on the left, compassing a great quantitie of ground, that not a Beast can escape them. From October to March, they are bound daily to send in a thousand head of Beasts and Birds. He hath also when hee trauelleth,Odoricus reckoneth a greater number. ten thousand Falconers, diuided in diuers companies, himselfe abiding in a chamber, carryed vpon foure Elephants, whence he may see the game, hauing also his tents pitched for his solace neere thereby. None may carry Hawke or Hunting-dog out of his Dominion, nor may Hawke or Hunt neere the Court by many daies iourneys, nor at all, in their times of breeding, from March to October.
But hee that list to be more fully informed herein, let him reade M. Paulus andVincent. l. 30. 31. Io Bo^m. Munster. Maginus. G. B.B. etc. others,  which haue written of this Argument. It is Religion to vs, further to suspend our discourse of Religion.


CHAP. XV. Of the alteration of Religion among the Tartars: and of the diuers Sorts, Sects, and Nations of them now remaining.

 @. I. Of the Precopite, or Crimme Tartars.
AFter so long narration of the Religion of the ancient Tartars, and of the Cathayans, where their Emperours fixed their abode: it followeth to consider of the times following, wherein they haue beene diuided both in Policie and Faith. MaginusMag. Geogr^ Precop. Desert. Zagathai. Cazai and Morgat. diuideth them into fiue principall sorts; which may likewise bee subdiuided into many inferiour branches of Hords. The first of these he calleth Tartaria Minor, or the lesse, which is in Europe betwixt Boristhenes and Tanais, comprehending Taurica Chersonesus, inhabited by the Precopite Tartars, or as  BroniouiusMart. Broni^. Tartaria. termeth them, Perecopenses of Perecopia, a Town and Castle in Taurica: they are called also Ossouenses and Crims, of two Townes bearing those names. These are now subiect to the Turke both in State and Religion, hauing some Townes and Mahumetane Temples, and Monasteries, and Turkish Garrisons, and a few Temples and persons Christian, of the Armenian, Grecian, and Westerne profession. They liue in their homely Cottages in the Winter, but in the Summer wander in their Carts, as the other Tartars, then whom they are somewhat more ciuill. They pay three hundred Christians yeerely to the Turke for tribute: of whom their Can, since the time of Zelim, receiueth a banner, and his approbation to the Empire, giuing his children or brethren in hostage. They elect also an heire apparant to their Empire, whom they call Galga: and if the Can will preferre his sonne  to that dignitie, he killeth all his brethren, as the Turkes also deale with theirs:
It should seeme that they deriue their pedigree from Cingis, descended (if I may coniecture, where certaine Historie fayleth) of some of the sonnes of Bathy, the great Con^ueror in those parts of the World. Lotchton Can was the first which ruled in Taurica: long since Bathy's time. TheyDe his Tar. vid. L. Chalcond. l. 3. A Guag. de Sarmat. Sigism. ab Herberst. Pet. Bertius in tab. Chyrraeus, Anto. Geufr us de imperijs ex 4. sect. Ma^um. etc. vse the Chaldaean and Arabian Letters: they haue their Cadies to administer Religion and Iustice, as haue the Turkes.
They count the Don or Riuer Tanais holy, in respect of the commodities which it yeeldeth them. ThesePh. Camerar. in Med. Hist. Cent. cap. 98. Tartars passing through the confines of Polonia and Podolia, to helpe the Turkes in the warres of Hungary, the wayes being secured and defended with the Garrisons, they vsed a new stratagem to make way, by driuing a multitude of Buls before them, which contrarie to their expectation, affrighted with the Ordnance, recoiled vpon their driuers, treading them downe, and scattering them. The Chan, when Saint Bathor, King of Poland,
 was dead, sent his Embassadours to be elected their King; affirming, that their Pope should be his, their Luther his also: and for dainties, Horse-flesh would content him. His suit was reiected with laughter.Guil. Brussius de Tar. William Bruise a Scot, from the relation of Anthony Spinola, descended of that Family in Genua, and then Embassador from Casghere the Crim-Tartar into Polonia, affirmeth diuers things of the Tartarians, as namely, of threescore and ten diuers Kingdomes of them, the names whereof are scarce known to any Tartar: differing in language and manners, but all agreeing in the Tartarian appellation, warring, wandring, hard and spare diet: all sometimes subiect to the Great Can, now inferiour in power (as the Crims say, which know nothing of him but by tradition) to the Crim or Precopite.
These Precopites abhor Drunkennesse, punish Adulterie with death; steale not from their  Countrey-men, nor conceale any thing which they find, walke not with weapons, haue few Lawes, the Interpreters of which are their Priests, which they greatly reuerence, as they doe also those of the Christians: if any thing bee not expressed by Law, they referre it to that generall Head, whereon hang the Law and the Prophets, To doe as men would be done to. The Sar or Emperour sitteth himselfe in Iudgement, with the Galga, and Soldans (so they call the Princes children) and the Chancellour, with other Senators, whose sentences being first deliuered, hee determineth, and present execution followeth. All mettalls are the Sars prerogatiue (except gold, which is the Turkes peculiar) he hath also the tenths of the spoiles, and of euerie Captiue a Chekine, and if he be of great estate, three. He receiueth  5500. Duckets a yeere from the Turke, for which hee is bound to warre vpon none but the Muscouite without his leaue. He brings into the field 150000. Horse-men (leauing at home but one man in a house) and when the Circassians and Astracans adioyne their forces, two hundred thousand. It is paine of death not to come. They bring with them three moneths victuall, which are dried Flesh, Cheese, Garlicke, Rootes, and a spare Horse for food, besides a better for seruice. Their haires tied to long poles, are their banners; onely the Prince receiueth from the Turke one of silke. Both Horse and Men are exceeding skilfull in swimming. In passing ouer large streames, they set their Saddles and Baggage on Reedes or Rushes, which they tye to diuers Horse-tailes, themselues holding them by the Manes, and guiding them: sometimes they sit themselues on those Rushes, and sometimes they kill and flay  some of their Horses, and turning the inside outward, timbering them with the ribs of the Horse, and sowing them with the hayre, make Boates for transportation. They take off the wheeles of their Carts, and setting them on Rushes, as aforesaid, transport them. The spoile is diuided in common, and euery mans losse thence made good: to conceale any thing is death, whether pillaged from the enemie, or found of their owne people.
D. Fletcher Desc. of Russia, 19.In the yeere 1571. they came to Musco and fired the Suburbs, which being of wood, burned with such rage, that in foure houres space it consumed the greatest part of the Citie, being thirtie miles or more in compasse. The rufulnesse of this sight was seconded with a more dismall euent, the people burning in their houses, and streets, and whiles they sought to flye out of the Citie, they wedged themselues with multitude so fast in the Gate (which was furthest from the enemie) and the streets adioyning, as that three  rankes walked one vpon the others heads, the vppermost treading downe those that were lower: so that there perished at that time, as was said, by the fire and the presse, the number of eight hundred thousand people or more. The Tartar sent the Russe a knife, (as vpbraiding him this losse and his desperate case) therewith to stab himselfe. The cause of this quarrell is, the Tartars title to Cazan, Astracan, and Mosco it selfe, which the Moscouite was wont to acknowledge with this homage yeerely in the Castle of Mosko, to giue the Cans or Crims Horse Oates out of his Cap, himselfe on foot, the Crim abiding on his Horse. This homage Basilius changed into a tribute of Furres, which also by his sonne Iohn was denyed. Hereupon once or twice euery yeere, sometime about Whitsontide, but oftner in haruest, hee inuadeth the Country: either in great numbers, if the Can himselfe come, or otherwise in fewer,  with lighter border-skirmishes. Their common practise is to make diuers Armies, and drawing the Russe to one place, to inuade another: They are all Horse-men, carrying nothing but a Bow, a sheafe of Arrowes, and a Fauchion Sword: they are expert Riders, and shoot as readily backward as forward. The Morses or Nobles haue Armour like the Turkes, the Common-people none other then their apparell, viz. a Black-sheeps skin, with the wooll-side outward in the day time, and inward in the night, with a cap of the same.
They haue a rule, that Iustice is to be practised but towards their own: and therefore will promise any thing when they besiege a Citie, but being once possessed of the place, performe all manner of hostilitie. When their number is small, they make greater shew with counterfeit shapes of men set on horse-backe. In giuing onset, they make a great shout, crying,  together,God help vs Olla billa, Olla billa; they will dye rather then yeeld, contrary to the Turkes custome. The chiefe bootie they seeke for is store of Captiues, specially yong boyes and girles:
 for which purpose they haue bands intending nothing else, and baskets like Bakers Pannyers, to carrie them tenderly. If they tyre or sicken on the way, they dash them against the ground or some tree, and so leaue them dead. The Russe borders being vsed to their inuasions, keepe few other cattell but Swine, which their Religion abhorreth to touch.
They differ herein from the Turkish Religion,Their Images. that they haue certaine Idoll puppets made of silke or like stuffe, of the fashion of a man, which they fasten to the doore of their walking-houses, to be as Ianusses or Keepers of their house. And these Idols are made not by all, but by certaine Religious women, which they haue among them for that and like vses. They haue besides, the Image of their King of an huge bignesse, which they erect at euerie Stage,  when the Armie marcheth: to which euery one must bow as he passeth by, both Tartar and Stranger. They are much giuen to Witch-craft and ominous coniectures. In marriage they onely abstaine from the Mother, Sister, and Daughter: neither doe they account that woman a wife, which hath not honoured them with the name of a Father, and then beginneth he to take a dowrie of her friends of Horse, Sheepe, Kine, etc. If shee bee barren after a certaine time, he turneth her home againe.
Vnder the Emperour they haue certaine Dukes or Morseys, which rule ouer hords of ten, twentie, or fortie thousand, which are bound to serue the Emperour, with a certaine number of men double-horsed. They preferre horse-flesh before other meates, esteeming it stronger nourishment: this notwithstanding, they vsed to send thirtie or fortie thousand horse yeerely  to Musko, to exchange for other commodities. Their Herds of Kine, and Flocks of black Sheepe, they keepe rather for the Milke then the Flesh, though they sometime eate it. They drinke Milke or warme Bloud, and for the most part curde them both together: as they trauell they sometime let their horse bloud, and drinke it from his bodie. Townes they plant none not standing Villages, but haue walking houses built vpon wheeles, like a Shepherds Cottage; which they moue in the Spring from the South to the North, and so with Winter returne Southwards; when they come to their Stage or standing Place planting their houses in a rank, making the forme of a Towne and Streets. Gold and siluer they neglect, as they do also Tillage, which freeth their Countrey from inuasions.
For person and complexion, they haue broad and flat visages, of a tanned colour into yellow  and blacke, fierce and cruell lookes, thin haired vpon the vpper lip and pit of the chin, light and nimble bodied with short legs, practising themselues to ride and shoot from their child-hood, their Parents not suffering their children to eate till they haue shot within a certaine scantling of the marke. Their speech is sudden and loud, as it were out of a deepe hollow throat, their singing like a Cowes lowing. In the description of these Crim^ I haue been thus long, because they are now the chiefe knowne Nation of the wandring Tartars, and the rest differ little from them, except in greater Barbarisme.
Master George Barkly,G. Barkly. a friend of mine, a Merchant in London, hauing trauelled Liuonia, Russia, Lithuania, and Poland, went from Cracouia, with a Tartar Duke, (which had come thither to the Parliament to sue for his two Daughters, taken by the Polachs) and staied  with him in his hords (which consisted of about a thousand housholds of a kindred) six moneths. These Tartars sowed a three square graine, called Totarka; they liued in great ease and pleasure, euerie day hunting, that for worldly pleasure he neuer any where enioyed such a life, with such loue and liking of his Tartar-Host, as if he had beene his sonne. These vsed to make sudden inrodes vpon the Polachs: the Gentlemen of Poland not dyning without their Peeces and Souldierly-seruing-men, readie to giue them entertainment. If the Christians make head against them, they know not where to find them. Resolute they are, and will ride with their Bowes in the face of a Peece.


 @. II. Of Tartaria Deserta.
THE second part in this diuision is attributed to Tartaria Deserta, so called of the Desart huge tract of the Country betweene Tanais, the Caspian Sea, and the Lake Kitay: sometime knowne by the name of Sarmatia Asiation. It containeth many Tribes: of which the principall are, Zunelhensis, called Burgar Tartars, of Volga: betweene which Riuer and Iaich they haue their abode. This they called the great Hord, and the Emperor thereof Vlucan, in the yeere 1506. subdued by the Crim-Tartars before mentioned:  and after that by Basilius the Muscouite, to whose large stile Bulgaria is added, taking that name of Volga, as it were Volgaria, or of Bulgar, a Towne vpon that Riuer. Gazan and Astracan, Hords of these Zauol-Tartars, haue bin subiect also many yeeres to the said Great
 Duke,Anth. Jenkinson. who caused the Prince of Cazan (being taken prisoner when hee was young) to bee baptized. Neere vnto Cazan is Vachen, the people whereof are Gentiles; and the Cheremizes halfe Gentiles, halfe Tartars, and Mangat, or Nagai, Mahumetan Tartars, which in the yeere 1558. were thorow ciuill warres, famine, and pestilence, destroyed to the number of aboue a hundred thousand. These Nagayans haue their diuers Hords subiect to their seuerall Dukes, whom they call Murzes, hauing no vse of Money, Corne, or Arts. They, in the time of their distresse, would for one Loafe of bread, worth sixe pence, haue sold Sonne or Daughter to Master Ienkinson, if hee would haue bought a thousand, although other-whiles they deride the Christians, as liuing on the tops of weedes (so they call our Corne.) This our Author and Country-man trauelled downe the Riuer Volga to Astracan,  which Riuer, after it had runne aboue two thousand English miles, hath threescore and ten mouthes or falls into the Caspian Sea. Through this Sea hee passed to Manguslaue, another part of the Desart Tartaria. The Prince whereof (Tim^r Soltan) he found and saluted in aRegumque turres, Pauperum tabernae. little round house, not hauing Towne or Castle, made of Reeds, couered without with Felt, within with carpets, accompanied with the great Metropolitane of their country, esteemed of amongst that field-people, as the Bishop of Rome is in most parts of Europe. And had he not presented himselfe to him with the Great Dukes Letters, he had been spoyled of all that he had.
They passed thence with a Carauan of Merchants twentie dayes, not finding water, but  as they drew out of old deepe Wells, brackish and salt: and passed sometimes two or three dayes without the same. After that, they came to a Gulfe of the Caspian Sea againe, where the water is fresh and sweet. Not so the people; for the Customers of the King of Turkeman tolled of euery fiue and twentie, one; and seuen ninths for the said King and his brethren. Into this Gulfe the Riuer Oxus did sometimes fall, but is now intercepted by the Riuer Ardock, which runneth toward the North: and (as it were) loath to view so cold a Clime and barbarous Inhabitants, after he hath run with a swift race a thousand miles (as it were) in flight, hee hideth himselfe vnder ground for the space of fiue hundred miles, and then looking vp, and seeing little amendment, drowneth himselfe in the Lake of Kithay.
Thence they had three dayes iourney to Sellizure, where finding Azim Can, to whom hee  presented a ninth, hee receiued there the like festiuall entertainment as before with Timor, that is, theMinimo contenta Natura. flesh of a wilde Horse, and Mares milke without bread. Hee and his brethren ruled all from the Caspian Sea to Vrgence, and had continuall warres with the Persians; which space is called Turkeman: for the other Hords of that huge Tartarian Desart, the Kirgessen, Melgomazan, Scibanski, Thumen (which still is said to remaine vnder the obedience of the Grand Can) Bascheridi, Heseliti, harsh names of harsher people in those most harsh and horrid Desarts, will hasten my pen and your eares, to some more pleasing subiect. The Thumen and their Neighbours are great Inchanters, and by their Art (they say) raise tempests, and ouerthrow their Enemies. The Kirgessen obserue these stinking holies: theirOrtelius. Priest mixeth bloud, milke, and Cow-dung together with earth, and putting them in a Vessell, therewith climeth a tree, and after his deuout exhortation to the people, hee besprinkleth  them with this sacred mixture, which they account diuine. When any of them dye, they hang him on a tree in stead of buryall.
The Tartars in Turkeman vse to catch wilde Horses with Hawks, tamed to that purpose, which seising on the necke of the Horse, with his beating, and the Horses chasing, tyreth him, and maketh him an easie prey to his Master, who alwayes rideth with his Bow, Arrowes, and Sword. They eate their meate, and say their prayers sitting on the ground crosse-legged, spending the time very idlely. As Master Ienkinson with his company trauelled from hence towards Boghar, they were assayled with fortie theeues; of whom they had intelligence somewhat before, and therefore certaine holy men (for so they account such as haue beene at Mecca) caused the Carauan to stay while they made their praiers and diuinations touching  their successe. They tooke certaine sheepe and killed them, and tooke the blade-bones of the same, which they first sod, and then burnt, mingling the bloud of the said sheepe, with this poulder of their bones, with which bloud they wrote certaine Characters, vsing many other Ceremonies and words, and thereby diuined that they should meete with enemies, which after much trouble they should ouercome: which accordingly proued true. Of the faithfulnesse of these holy men he had good proofe, both heere and elsewhere, they refusing not to expose themselues to danger, and (faithlesly-faithfull) to forsweare themselues, rather then betray him and the Christians to their theeuish Country-men. For these robbers would haue dismissed the Bussarmans, so they call their Catholikes, if they would haue deliuered the Caphars, that is, Infidels, as they esteeme the Christians, vnto their power. One of their  holy men (which the enemies had surprized) by no torments would confesse any thing to the preiudice of his fellowes. But at last they were forced to agree, and giue the theeues twentie
 ninths, that is, twentie times nine seuerall things, and a Camell to carry the same away.Simocalta and Niceph. Cal. l. 11. cap. 30. This Countrey of Turkeman or Turchestan, is the first habitation of the Turkes, and the people were called by that name, both in Haithons time, and in the time of Mauritius, as in the Turkish Historie you haue heard. Pliny nameth the Turkes neerer Maotis: but whether in deuouring the people with their swords, as they did the pastures with their cattel, they came from hence, or these from thence, or that Pliny might easily wander in so wandering a subiect; all auer, that from hence they went first into Persia, and in succeeding ages haue made many fertile Countries, like their Turcomania, where Master Ienkinson saith, groweth no grasse, but heath whereon the cattell feed: The Ottoman-horse blasting with his breath the ground he  treads on (according to their owne Prouerbe) there neuer groweth grasse more. The Turkeman Nation is (saith Haithon) for the most part Mahumetan, and many of them without Law at all. They vse the Arabike Letters.


@. III. Of the Zagathayan Tartars.
THese Desarts and Theeues haue almost made vs forget our diuision, according to which wee should haue told you, that from the Caspian Sea hither, you must  (according to Maginus) call the Tartars generally Zagathayans,M. Paulus. l. 1 so called of Zagathay, the Great Cans brother, sometime their Prince. Which nameG. Boter. comprehendeth also diuers other Nations more ciuill then the former, possessing the Countries, sometime knowne by the names of Bactriana, Sogdiana, Margiana, now Ieselbas, that is, Greene heads, of the colour of their Turbants: differing from the Persians, whom they call for like cause, Red-heads. These haue cruell warres continually with the Persians, whom they call Caphars (as they doe the Christians) for their supposed heresie, of which in the Persian relation hath beene shewed, and for that they will not cut the haire of their vpper lips, for which they are accounted of the Tartars great sinners. InAnt. Ienkins. Boghar is the seat of their Metropolitane, who  is there more obeyed then the King, and hath sometime deposed the King, and placed another at his pleasure. There is a little Riuer running through the Citie, whose water breedeth in them that drinke thereof (especially strangers) a worme of an ell long, which lieth in the leg betwixt the flesh and the skin, and is plucked out about the anckle, with great Art of Surgeons well practised herein. And if it breake in plucking out, the partie dieth. They plucke out an inch in a day, which is rolled vp, and so proceed till she be all out. And yet will not the Metropolitane suffer any drinke but water or Mares milke, hauing Officers to make search, and punish such as transgresse, with great seueritie. Zagatai liued the space of one hundred twentie and one yeeres before Marcus Paulus, and was (as hee saith) a Christian, but his sonne f^l^owed him in his Kingdome, not in his Religion.
Here in this Countrey is Samarcand, the Citie of Great Tamerlaine, (of some called Temir  Cuthlu, that is, as Mathias a MichouMicbouius Lib. 1. Cap. 8. interpreteth it, Happy Sword) whose Armie contained twelue hundred thousand: whose Conquests exceed (if Histories exceed not) all the Great Alexanders, Pompeys, Caesars, or any other Worthies of the World. And one of the greatest Monarch now of the Earth. The Great Mogore is said toIesuit. Epist. Rel Mogor. descend of him.
Of him are many Histories written by someLeunclav. Perond Iouius, etc. that haue liued since his time, and could not well know his proceedings, it being generally deplored, that this Achilles wanted a HomerCic. Orat. pro Arch., which Alexander applauded in him, but wanted for himselfe: onely one Alhacen (an Arabian which then liued) hath written largely thereof, and that (as he saith) by Tamerlans command, which Iean du BecThis Historie of Alhacen, or the principall parts thereof, I haue published in my Pilgrimes, To. 2. li. 1. Brusius also tels of his lamenesse, with other things of his schooling in Caramania, where his fellow schollers, chose him their King, and other things not seeming credible., Abbot of Mortimer, in his voyage into the East Countrie,  met with, and had it interpreted to him by an Arabian, and wee vpon his credit: which if any thinke to be insufficient, I leaue it to his choice and censure. That Author saith, that Tamerlan descended of the Tartarian Emperours, and Og his father was Lord of Sachetay, who gaue to his sonne Tamerlan, (which name signifieth Heauenly grace in their Tongue) his Kingdome, while hee yet liued, appointing two wise Counsellours, Odmar, and Aly, to assist him. Hee was well instructed in the Arabian learning, and a louer of Learned men. Nature had set in his eyes such rayes of Maiestie and beautie, that men could scarce endure to looke on them. He wore long haire, contrary to the Tartarian Custome, pretending, that his mother came of the race of Sampson. He was strong, and had a faire leg: whereas Leunclauius saith, he was called Tamurleng, of his lamenesse. His first Warre was against the Muscouite,  whom he ouercame: The second, against the King of China, with like successe (I mention not his battailes in ciuill warres:) The third, against Baiazet the Turke (whom he captiued) passing thither by the way of Persia; where Guines Author of the Sophian Sect, a great Astrologer,
 and accounted a holy man, encouraged him with prophesies of his good successe. This Warre he made against Baiazet in behalfe of the Greeke Emperour, and others, whom the Turke oppressed. He went priuately to Constantinople, and had sight of the Citie, with all kindnesse from the Emperour. He inuaded Syria and Aegypt, ouerthrew the Soldan, and won Cairo; destroyed Damascus, visited and honoured Ierusalem, and the holy Sepulchre, and granted great Priuiledges thereunto. The Princes of Lybia and barbarie, by their Embassages in Aegypt, acknowledged his Soueraigntie: In his returne by Persia he was encountred by Guines, who brought with him an infinite number of sundry kindes of beasts, which he made tame, and by which he taught men. As soone as he saw Tamerlan, he made his Praiers towards the Heauens for his health, and for the Religion of the Prophet, excommunicating  the Ottomans, as enemies to the faithfull beleeuers. Tamerlan gaue him fifteene or sixteen thousand of hisSome say 30000. prisoners, which he instructed in his opinion: and after conquered Persia, and so returned to Samarcand, where he had vowed to erect a Church and Hospitall, with all sumptuous Magnificence: thence he went to Mount Althay, to burie his vncle and father in law, the Great Chan, in whose State he succeeded. He enriched Samarcand with the spoiles gotten in his warres, and called the Temple which he there built, the Temple of Salomon, wherein he hanged vp Trophees and Monuments of his victories, and caused all his battailes there to be ingrauen, thereby (said he) to acknowledge the Goodnesse of GOD. His Religion was not pure Mahumetisme, for he thought GOD was delighted with varietie of  worships: yet he hated Polytheisme and Idols, onely one GOD he acknowledged, and that with much deuotion, after this manner. Thus he beat downe all the Idols in China, but honoured the Christians, with great admiration at the strict life of some Votaries. When Aly his Counsellour was dead, he built a stately Tombe for him at Samarcand, and caused prayers to be said three dayes for his soule. Being neere his end, hee blessed his two sonnes, laying his hand on the head of Sautochio the elder, and pressing it downe, but lifting vp the chinne of Letrochio the younger, as it were presaging vnto him the Empire, although the elder were proclaimed. But this Empire was too great, and too suddenly erected to continue. Of his successe and successors in Persia, you haue heard before in the eight Chapter of this Booke.  
These three sorts of Tartars which we haue hitherto mentioned, are all, for the most part, Mahumetans. There are some yet (as MichouiusLib. 1. Cap. 7. affirmeth) neere the Caspian Sea, which are not Mahumetans, nor shaue their haire off their heads, after the Tartarian manner; and therefore they call them Calmuch, or Pagans.


@. IIII. Of the Cathayan and Mogol Tartars, etc.
THE fourth are those which in greatnesse are first, namely, the Cathayans, called  Carabas (that is Black-heads) of their Turbants, as the former, Ieselbas. But of their Religion, further then that which hath beene before expressed, we can say little. And it seemeth by the relations mentioned in the former Chapters, that they are Gentiles or Christians, and not of Mahomets errour. Chaggi MemetChag. Memet., a Persian Merchant, related (as in part is said before) to Ramusius, that he had beene at Campion, Damir Can then raigning, and that vnto Camul, the Westerly part of Tanguth, they were Idolaters and Ethnikes: from thence Westwards, Musulmans, or Saracens. In the Epistle of CarualiusCarual. Epist. the Iesuite, it is reported by a Mahumetane Merchant, that they were Christians, for those reasons (is seemes) yee haue heard before. By Benedictus Goes his obseruations yee haue seen them so deuoted to Mahomet, that a tender Lady of the weaker sexe (in the strength  of sect) from the remote parts of Cascar, bordering on China, visited Mecca in Pilgrimage. And their zeale, or pretence thereof, put him into often perils, for his faith shall I say, or his goods? yet doth he make a difference between the Saracens and the Tartars; these it seemes professing robbery, and little minding any religion. They worship in those parts to the West, for that way stands Mecca.
The fifth and last forme of our Tartars, are those which abide in those places, whence the Tartars first issued to ouer-whelme all Asia with their Armies: of which is related at large in the eleuenth Chapter: of which, for want of probable intelligence, I can say little more. Our Maps place there the Hords of the Danites, Nephthalites Ciremissians, Turbites, and other, which some deriue from the dispersion (as is said) of the ten Tribes. Here is Tabor  also, whose King was by Charles the fifth, Emperour in the yeere 1540. (as before is said) burned at Mantua, for soliciting to Iuduisme.

Pope Innocent, King Lewes of France (by meanes of William de Rubruquis) and the King of Armenia, solicited (as you haue partly heard) both the great Can, and his chiefe Princes, to become Christians: and it is likely that the Tartars might, if diligence had beene vsed, and some Superstitions had not darkened the Christian profession, haue thereunto beene perswaded, which many also of them were, as appeareth in Haiton. Mat. Westmonast. and Vincentius.
But the Saracens which had before polluted those Countries, where the Mahumetan Tartars now abide, by that sutablenesse of their Law to their lawlesse lusts of Rapine and Poligamie, preuailed (as MichouiusLib. 3. Cap. 5. reporteth) with Bathi and those other Tartars, to  embrace Mahumet, and refuse Christ. They say, Eissa Rocholla, that is, Iesus is the Spirit of the Lord; Mahomet Rossollai, that is, Mahomet is the Iustice of GOD. They obey (saith hee) the Pentateuch of Moses, are circumcised, obserue the legall Ceremonies: they haue no Bels, but euery day crie, La illo illo loh, which signifieth, that there is but one GOD. They professe themselues Ismaelites, the Christians they call Dzintzis, that is, Pagans; and Gaur, InfidelsSee the Saracen History.. They obserue three Feasts: the first Kuiram, to which they prepare themselues, with their thirtie dayes Lent, and in that Feast offer Rammes, Birdes, etc. The second they celebrate for All Soules, for which they fast a moneth, visit the graues, and doe workes of mercie. The third, they keepe for themselues and their owne saluation, and fast twelue dayes.
Iosafa BarbaroL. 1. apud Ram. (a Venetian, which liued among the Tartars about the yeere 1437.) saith, That they embraced not the faith of Mahomet generally, but as euery man liked, vntill about that time, in the dayes of Hedighi, a Captaine vnder Sidahameth Can, who first compelled them thereunto, being before free vnto their Idolatries, if they pleased. And of the other Tartars neere the Zagathayans, he saith, That many of them were Idolaters, and carried Idols in the Carts: yea, some of them vsed to worship whatsoeuer Beast they first met with, after they went abroad in the morning: This Docter Fletcher reporteth of the Mordiuit Tartars, adding that they vse to sweare by it all that day, whether it bee Horse, Dog, or whatsoeuer else. And when his friend dieth, hee killeth his best Horse, and flaying off the skin, carrieth it on high vpon a long Pole, before the corps to the place of buriall.
 The Moxij, at a certaine time in the yeere, take a horse, which they set in the field, with his foure legges tyed to foure posts, and his head to another post, fastened in the ground. This done, one of them standing in a conuenient distance, shooteth him to the heart. Afterwards they flay him, and obseruing certaine ceremonies about the flesh, eate the same. The skin they fill with chaffe: and in each of his legges thrust a straight stick, that hee may stand vpright, as if hee were aliue. Lastly, they goe to a great Tree, and loppe there from as many boughes as they thinke good, and make a Roome or Sollar in that tree, where they set this horse on his feet, and worsh^p him, offering vnto him Foxes, and diuers Beasts which beare rich Furres; of which offerings the Trees hang full.
Master Ienkinson mentioneth a Nation liuing among the Tartars, called Kings; which are  also Gentiles, as are also the Kirgessen (of whom wee haue spoken) and the Colmack^s, which worship the Sunne, as they doe also a redde Cloth, fastened to the toppe of a Pole, and eate Serpents, Wormes, and other filth. Neere to which hee placeth (in his Mappe of Russia) certaine Statues, or Pillars of Stone, which sometime were Hords of Men and Beasts feeding, transformed by diuine power (if it bee not humaine errour) into this stonie substance, retayning their pristine shape. These Nations are eyther Tartars, or, in manner of life, like vnto them, and may therefore passe vnder that generall appellation. And this may suffice touching the Tartarian Nation and Religion, which in the West and South parts of their abode is Mahumetane, in the more Northerly and Easterly, partly Heathenish, partly Iewish, or Moorish, or mixed, or as may best aduantage them, and most please them, wandring in opinion in like  sort, as in their habitation.D. Flet. desc. of Rus. Cap. 19. Doctor Fletcher reckons these things as generall to all the Hords of Tartars. First, to obey their Magistrates whatsoeuer they command about the publike seruice. Secondly, Except for the pulique behoofe, euery man to bee free and out of controlement. Thirdly, No priuate man to possesse any Lands, but the whole Countrey to bee common. Fourthly, To neglect all daintinesse and varietie of meates, and to content themselues with that which commeth next to hand. Fifthly, To weare any base attire and to patch their clothes, whether there bee any need or not. Sixthly, to take or steale from any stranger whatsoeuer they can get. Seuenthly, Towards their owne to bee true in word and deede. Eightly, To suffer no stranger to come within their Dominion, but the same to bee slaue to the first taker, except they haue a Pasport.
 But by this time I thinke the Reader will wish mee their pasport to bee gone from them, who haue shewed my selfe no Tartarian, whilest I dwell so long on this Tartarian discourse, happily herein as tedious to him, as staying in one place would be to the Tartar; a thing so
 abominable, as in anger he wisheth it as a Curse, Would GOD thou mayest abide in one place, as the Christian, till thou smell thine owne dung. Indeed this Historie, not throughly handled before by any one, drew me along, and I hope will purchase pardon to this prolixitie.



CHAP. XVI. Of the Nations which liued in, or neere to those parts, now possessed by the Tartars: and their Religions, and Customes.
M. Paulus l. 1.FRom those Countries, inhabited by the Persians and Zagathayan Tartars Eastward, we cannot see with M. Paulus his eyes (the best guides wee can get for this w^y) any Religion but the Saracen, till we come to Bascia, a Prouince somewhat bending to the South, the people whereof are Idolaters and Magicians, cruell and deceitfull, liuing on Flesh and Rice. Seuen dayes iourney from hence is Chesmur, wickedly cunning in their deuillish Art, by which they cause the dumbe Idols to speake, the day to growe darke, and other maruellous things, being the wel-spring of Idols and Idolatrie in those parts. They haue Heremites after  their Law, which abide in their Monasteries, are very abstinent in eating and drinking, containe their bodies in straight chastitie, and are very carefull to abstaine from such sinnes, wherewith they thinke their Idols offended, and liue long. There are of them many Monasteries. They are obserued of the people with great reuerence. The people of that Nation shed no bloud, nor kill any flesh: but if they will eate any, the^ get the Saracens which liue amongst them, to kill it for them. North-eastward from hence is Vochan, a Saracenicall Nation; and after many dayes iourney ouer mountaines (so high, that no kind of birds are seene thereon) is Beloro, inhabited with Idolaters. Cascar (the next Countrey) is Mahumetan, beyond which are many Nestorian Christians in Carchan. There are also Moores, or Mahumetanes, which haue defiled with like superstition the Count^ies of Cotam and  Peym (where the women may marrie new husbands, if the former be absent aboue twenty dayesThis marriage admits no Non-residence., and the men likewise) and of Ciarcian, and Lop. From Lop they crosse a Desart, which asketh thirtie dayes, and must carrie their victuals with them. Here (they say) spirits call men by their names, and cause them to stray from their companie, and perish with famine. When they are passed this Desart, they enter into Sachion, the first Citie of Tanguth, an Idolatrou^ Prouince, subiect to the Great Can: there are also some Nestorians and Saracens, where they haue had the Art of Printing these thousand yeeres. They haue Monasteries replenished with Idols of diuers sorts, to which they sacrifice, and when they haue a male child borne, they commend it to some Idoll, in whose honour they nourish a Ramme in their house that yeere, and after on their Idols festiuall, they bring it, together with their  Sonne, before the Idoll, and sacrifice the Ramme, and dressing the flesh, let it stand till they haue finished their prayers for their childs health: in which space (they say) their Idoll hath sucked out the principall substance of the meate: which they then carrie home to their house, and assembling their kinsfolke, eate it with great reuerence and reioycing, sauing the bones in goodly vessels. The Priests haue for their fee, the head, feet, inwards, skinne, and some part of the flesh.
When any of great place dieth, theyFunerall obseruances in Sabion. assemble the Astrologers, and tell the houre of his natiuitie, that they may by their Art finde a Planet fitting to the burning of the corps, which sometime, in this respect, attendeth this fiery constellation a weeke, a moneth, or halfe a yeere: in all which time they set before the corps a Table furnished with bread,  wine, and other viands, leauing them there so long as one might conueniently eate them, the Spirit there present (in their opinion) refreshing himselfe with the odour of this prouision. If any euill happen to any of the house, the Astrologers ascribe it to the angry soule for neglect of his due houre, agreeing to that of his Natiuitie. They make many stayes by the way, wherein they present this departed soule with such cates, to hearten it against the bodies burning. They paint many papers, made of the barkes of trees, with pictures of Men, Women, Hors^s, Camels, Money, and Rayment, which they burne together with the Body, that the Dead may haue to serue him in the next World. And all this while of burning, is the Musike of the Citie present, playing.
Idolaters, how vnderstood in this Booke.CHAMVL, the next Prouince, is Idolatrous, or Heathenish: for so we distinguish them  from Saracens, Iewes, and Christians, which I would were not as guilty of Idolatrie as the former, in so many their forbidden Rites, although these haue all; and the other, part of the
 Scriptures, whereof those Heathens and Idolaters are vtterly ignorant. Here they not onely permit, but account it a great honour to haue their wiues and sisters at the pleasure of such strangers as they entertaine, themselues departing the while, and suffering all things to be at their guests will: for so are their Idols serued, who therefore for this hospitalitie (they thinke) will prosper all that they haue. And when as Mangu Can forbad them this beastly practice, they abstained three yeeres; but then sent a pitifull Embassage to him, with request; That they might continue their former custome, for since they left it, they could not thrine: who ouercome by their fond importunitie, granted their request; which they with ioy accepted, and doe still obserue.
 In the same Prouince of Tanguth is Succuir, whose Mountaines are clothed with Rheubarbe, from whence it is by Merchants conueyed through the World. Campion is the mother Citie of the Countrey, inhabited by Idolaters, with some of the Arabian and Christian Nations. The Christians had there, in the time of M. Paulo, three faire Churches. The Idolaters had many Monasteries, abounding with Idols of wood, earth, and stone, couered with gold, and artificially made, some great, ten paces in length lying along, with other little ones about them, which seeme as their Disciples, to doe them reuerence. Their religions persons liue, in their opinion, more honestly then other Idolaters, although their honestie is such, as that they thinke it no sinne to lie with a woman, which shall seeke it at their hands; but if the man first make loue, it is sinfull. They haue also their Fasting-dayes,  three, foure, or fiue in a moneeh, in which they shed no bloud, nor eate flesh. They haue many wiues; of which; the first married hath the first place and preheminence. Here Marcus Paulus liued about a yeere.
Touching the Religion and Customes in Tanguth, the reportsRamusius. of Caggi Memet in Ram^sius (who of late yeeres was in Campion) are not much diferent. He sayth, That their Temples are made like the Christians, capable of foure or fiue thousand persons. In them are two Images of a man and woman, lying in length fortie foot, all of one piece, or stone: For which vse they haue Carts with fortie wheeles, drawne of fiue or sixe hundred Horses and Mules, two or three moneths iourney. They haue also little Images, with sixe or seuen heads, and ten hands, holding in each of them seuerall things, as a Serpent, Bird, Flower,  etc. They haue Monasteries, wherein are men of holy life, neuer comming forth, but haue food carried them thither daily: Their gates are walled vp; and there are infinite of Frier-like companions passing to and fro in the Citie. When any of their kindred die, they mourne (...) white. They haue Printing, not much vnlike to that which is vsed in Europe; and Artillerie on their walls very thicke, as haue the Turkes. All the Catayans and Idolaters are fordidden to depart out of their natiue Countrey. They haue three Sciences, Chimia, Limia, and Simia: the first, Alchymie; the second, to make enamoured; the third, Iugling, or Magicke.
Succuit also is, according to his report, great and faire, beautified with many Temples. Their Rheubarbe they would not bestow the paines to gather, but for the Merchants, which  from China, Persia, and other places fetch it from them at a cheape price. Nor doe they in Tanguth vse it for Physike, as we here, but with other ingredients make perfumes thereof for their Idols: and in some places they burne it in stead of other firing, and giue it their Horses to eate. They set more price by an herbe which they call Membroni cini, medicinable for the eyes, and another called Chiai Catai, growing in Catay at Cacianfu, admirable against very many diseases, an ounce whereof they esteeme as good as a sacke of Rhubarbe; whose description you may see at large, according to the relation and picture of the said Chaggi, in Ramusius: for (to adde that also) they haue many Painters, and one Countrey inhabited onely by them. These Tanguthians are bearded as men in these parts, especially some time of the yeere.
 Northwards from Tanguth is the PlaineM. Paul. of BARGV, in customes and manners like to the first Tartars, confining with the Scythian Ocean, fourescore dayes iourney from Ezina, in the North parts of Tanguth, and situate vnder the North starre. Eastward of Tanguth (somewhat inclining to the South) is the Kingdome of Erginul, addicted likewise to Ethnike superstitions, wherein yet are some, both Nestorians and Mahumetans. Here are certaine wilde Bulls as big as Elephants, with manes of white and fine haire, like silke; of which, some they came, and betwixt them and their tame Kine engender a race of strong and laborious Oxen. Here is found a beast also as big as a Goat of exquisite shape,Muske of a beast. which euery full Moone hath an apostemation or swelling vnder the belly, which the Hunters (at that time chasing the said beast) doe cut off, and drie against the Sunne, and it proueth the  best Muske in the world.
The next Easterly Countrie is EGRIGAIA, idolatrous, and hauing some Christians of the Sect of Nestorius. But Tenduc, next adioyning, was at that time gouerned by King George, a
 Christian and a Priest of the posteritie of Presbyter Iohn, subiect to the Grand Can. And the Gran Cans giue commonly their daughters in mariage to this generation and stocke of Presbyter Iohn. The most part of the inhabitants are Christians; some Idolaters and Mahumetans being there also. There bee also that are called Argon, descended of Ethnikes and Moores, the wisest and properest men in those parts. All the people from hence to Cathay, are Christian, Mahumetan, and Gentile, as themselues like best. In Thebet, the next Countrey, the people in times past (saithW. de Rubr. c. 28. Odoricus saith the same. William de Rubruquis) bestowed on their parents no other Sepulchre then their owne bowels, and yet in part retaine it, making fine cuppes of their deceased parents skuls, that drinking out of them in the middest of their iolitie, they may not forget their progenitors. They haue much gold, but hold it an high offence to imprison  it, as some doe with vs, in Chests or Treasuries; and therefore hauing satisfied necessitie, they lay vp the rest in the earth, fearing otherwise to offend GOD. Cambalu is in the Northeast parts of Cathay: and fortie miles Westward from hence (all which way is enriched with Palaces, Vineyards, and fruitfull Fields) is Gouza, a faire Citie, and great, with many Idoll-Monasteries. Here the way parted, leading Westward into Cathay, and Southeastward vnto Mangi, or China. TANIFV and Cacianfu are Prouinces, which tend Westward from hence, inhabited with idolatrous Nations, and here and there some of the Arabian and Christian profession, full of Cities. Cunchin and Sindinfu are Ethnikes; as is Thebeth: where they haue a brutish custome,L. Vert. reporteth the like custome in Calicut. not to take a wife that is a Virgin; and therefore, when Merchants passe that way, the mothers offer vnto them their daughters, much striuing which of  them may be the most effectuall bawde to her childe. They taking to their pleasure such as they like, gratifie them with some iewell, or other present, which on her mariage day shee weareth, and shee which hath most of such presents, bringeth the most a^cepted dowrie to her husband, as testimonies of the great fauour of their Idols. This Thebeth contained sometimes eight Kingdomes, with many Cities, but was now desolated by the Tartarians There are great Necromancers, which by their infernall skils cause Thunders and Tempests. They haue Dogges as bigge as Asses, with which they catch wild Oxen and all sorts of beasts.
CAINDV is an Heathenish Nation, where in honour of their Idols, they prostitute their wiues, sisters, and daughters, to the lust of Trauellers; which being entertained in the house, the good man departeth, and the woman setteth some token ouer the doore, which there remaineth  as long as this stallion-stranger, for a signe to her husband, not to returne till the guest be as well gone from her house, as honesty from her heart, and wit from his head. They make money of salt, as in Cathay of paper. In Caraian also, (a large Prouince adioyning) there are some Christians and Saracens, but the most Ethnikes, which are not discontented, that other men should lie with their wiues, if the women be willing.
CARAZAN is of like irreligion, their soules captiuated to the Olde Serpent, and their bodies endangered to mighty huge bodies ofThe serpents of Carazan. Serpents, tenne paces long, and tenne spannes thicke, which that Coun^rey yeeldeth. They keepe in their dennes in the day, and in the night prey vpon Lyons, Wolues, and other Beasts, which when they haue deuoured, they resort to some water to drinke, and by their weight leaue so deepe impression in the sand, that  hereby men knowing their haunt, doe vnder set this their Tract with sharpe stakes, headed with yron, couering the same againe with sand; by this meanes preying on the spoyler, and deuouring the deuourer; esteeming nothing more sauorie then the flesh, nor more medicinable then the gall of this Serpent. More Serpentine then this diet, was that custome which they vsed, when any proper and personable Gentleman, of valourous Spirit, and goodly presence, lodged in any house amongst them: in the night they killed him, not for the spoyle, but that his soule furnished with such parts of body and mind, might remaine in that house. Much hope of future happinesse to that house did they repose in so vnhappy attempts. But the great Can killed this Serpent also, ouerthrowing this custome in the conquest of that Prouince.  
CARDANDAN confineth on the Westerne limits of Carazan. They make blacke lists in their flesh, razing the skinne, and put therein some blacke tincture, which euer remayneth,Naked pride accounting it a great ornament. When a woman is deliuered of a child, the man lyeth in, and keepeth his bed, with visitation of Gossips, the space of fortie dayes. They worship the ancientest person of the house, ascribing to him all their good. In this prouince, and in Caindu, Vocian, and Iaci, they haue no Phisicians, but when any be sicke, they send for their Witches or Sorcerers, and acquaint them with their maladie. They cause Minstrels to play while they dance and sing, in honour of their Idols, not ceasing till the Diuell entereth into one of them, of whom those Sorcerers demand the causeInfernall Physicke. of the parties sickenesse, and meanes of recouerie. The Demoniake answereth, for some offence to such, or such a god.  They pray that God of pardon, vowing that when he is whole, he shall offer him a sacrifice of his owne bloud. If the Diuell see him vnlikely to recouer, he answereth, that his offences are
 so grieuous, that no sacrifice can expia^e: but if there be likelihood of recouery, he enioyneth them a sacrifice of so many Rams with blacke heads, to be offered by these Sorcerers, assembled together with their wiues, and then will that god be reconciled. This is presently done by the kinsemen of the sicke, the sheepe killed, their bloud hurled vp towards Heauen. The Sorcerers and Sorceresses make great lights, and incense all this visited house, making a smoke of Lignum Aloes, and casting into the ayre, the water wherein the sacrificed flesh was s^dden, with some spiced drinkes, laughing, singing, dancing in honour of that God. After all this reuel-rout they demand againe of the Demoniake, if the God be appeased* if so, they f^ll to those spiced drinkes, and sacrificed flesh with great mirth, and being well apayed, returne  home; if not, they (at his bidding) renue their superstition, ascribing the recouerie (if it happen) to that Idoll; and if he dyeth notwithstanding, they shift it off to the want of their f^ll due, fleecing, or tasting the same before, to the Idols defrauding. Thus doe they in all Cathay and Mangi. Thus much out of the large reports of Paulus that renowmed Venetian,Of him, his wealth and family see Ramus. Preface: his Palace is yet in Venice, now deuided into 70. dwellings. Mich. Lock. saw both it and his Mappa mundi mentioned by Ramus. and his Sepulchre. to whom our Relations are so much indebted.
Rubruquius telleth ^he like of CAILAR and CARACORAM, where hee had beene in these Catayan Prouinces, concerning their Christopher or Giant-like Idols, and Idol Temples: in one of which he saw a man, with a crosse drawne with inke on his hand, who seemed by his answers to bee a Christian; with Images like to that of Saint Michael, and other Saints. They haue a Sect called Iugures, whoseHypocritical Shauelings. Priests are shauen, and clad in Saffron-coloured garments,  vnmarried, an hundred or two hundred in a Cloyster. On their holy-dayes they place in their Temples two long formes, one ouer against another, whereon they sit with bookes in their hands, reading softly to themselues. Nor could our Author (entring amongst them) by any meanes breake this their silence. They haue, wheresoeuer they goe, a string about them full of nut-shels, like the Popish beadrols; alway they are vttering these words, Ou ^am hactani, God thou knowest, expecting so many rewards, as they make such memorials of God. They haue a Church-yard, and a Church-porch, with a long pole on it (as it were a steeple) adioyning to their Temples. In those porches they vse to sit and conferre. They weare certaine ornaments of paper on their heads. Their writing is downewards, and so from the left hand to the right; which the Tartars receiued from them. They vse Magicall  Characters, hanging their Temples full of them. They burne their dead, and lay vp the ashes in the top of a Pyramis. They beleeue there is one God, that he is a Spirit: and their Images they make not to represent God, but in memoriall of the rich after their death, as they professed to Rubruquius. The Priests (besides their Saffron-iackets buttoned close before) weare on their left shoulder a cloake descending before and behind vnder their right arme, like to a Deacon carrying the Housel-boxe in Lent. They worship towards the North, clapping their hands together, and prostrating themselues on their knees vpon the Earth, holding also their foreheads in their hands. They extend their Temples East and West in length; vpon the North side they build (as it were) a Vestrie; on the South, a Porch. The doores of their Temples are alwayes opened to the South. A certaine Nestorian Priest told him of so huge  an Idoll, that it might be seene two dayes before a man came at it. Within the Quier, which is on the North side of the Temple, they place a chest long and broad, like a Table, and behind that chest stands their principall Idoll, towards the South: round about which, they place the other lesse Idols: and vpon that chest they set candles and oblations. They haue great Bels like vnto ours. The Nestorians of those parts, pray with hands displayed before their breasts, so to differ from that Iugurian Rite of ioyning hands in prayer. Thus farre William de Rubruquius, who was there Anno, 1253. In Thebet (sayth Odoricus) resideth the Abassi, or Pope of the Idolaters, distributing Religious preferments to those Easterne Idolaters, as the Roman Pope doth in the West.


CHAP. XVII. Of other Northerne people adioyning to the Tartars, and their Religions.
THE Permians and Samoits that lye from Russia North, and North-east,D. Fletcher. c. 2^ are thought to haue taken their beginning from the Tartar-kind, whom they somewhat resemble in countenance. The Permians are subiect to the Russe, they liue by hunting and trading with their furres, as doe the Samoits,  which dwell more toward the North-Sea. The Samoit, or Samoed, hath his name as the Russe sayth, of eating himselfe, as if they had sometime beene Canibals: and at this time they will eate raw flesh, whatsoeuer it be, euen the very carrion that
 lyeth in the ditch. They say themselues, that they were called Samo^e, that is, of themselues, as if they were Indigenae, there ^^ad, and not transplanted from any other people. I talked (sayth our Authour) with certaine of them, and finde that they acknowledge one God, but represent him by such things as they haue most vse and good by: and therefore they worship the Sunne, the Olle^, the Losy, and such like.
The PERMACES,W. Pursgloue. and SEBYRIANS are of the Russe Religion. The Yougorians are clothed after the Pormacke fashion, but worship Images as doe the Samoeds. The Tingoseys a people farre more Easterly, are sayd to worship the Sun and Moone. They weare their apparell all of Deere-skinnes, made closer to them then the Samoeds, being also a taller people. BeyondRusses trauels translated by Rich. Finch. Onecko hist. ap. Hessel. Gerard. Whose Mappe makes these things more plaine. the Tingoseys liue the Boulashees: beyond them the Seelahee. Beyond  the riuer Yenisey the Imbaki, and Ostaki, a kind of Tartars, Beyond the Tingoseys is a Riuer called Get^. This space extending Eastward from Ob, a Russe was a Sommer in trauelling and liued there sixe yeeres, Onecko another Russe was first occasion of subduing the Samoyeds to the Russian Dominion, in the raigne of Pheodor Iuanowich. He sending his sonnes into the Samoyeds Country, found that about the Riuer Ob they were gouerned by the ancientest, had no Cities, liued in hords or companies, eate the beasts they tooke, knew not corne nor bread, were good Archers, sharpning their Arrowes with fish bones and stones sewed Furres with bones and sinewes for their clothing, which they ware inward in Winter, outward in Summer, couered their houses with Elkes-skinnes: He grew rich by trading with them for Furres. The Muscouite sent thither Messengers gallantly attired, which easily obtayned leaue to erect  Castles neere Ob, to which he sent condemned persons, and brought it into the forme of a petty Kingdome. Boris the next Emperour built Tooma 200. leagues vp the riuer Ob, and many other Townes on both sides the Riuer, the which were peopled with Samoyeds, Tartars, and Russes. It is ten weekes trauell from Ob to the Tingoseys through the Desarts. They in hords, haue deformed swellings vnder the throat. These trauelling Eastward passed a Riuer which they calledThe Russes call it great Ob. W. Pursgloue and Ios. Logan. Pisida, and heard the sound of brazen bels: which if it be so, is argument of some more ciuill people, eyther of Cathay or the parts adioyning. The Cathayans are said to trade to Sergolt: From the mouth of Pechora to Ob is tenne dayes sayling. Ob and Ienisey runne North and South. The Samoyeds report that in Ienesey are great vessels drawne with ropes.
In the yeare 1611. Iosias Logan and William Pursgloue, sailed to Pechora, where they anchored  Iuly the tenth, and on the sixteenth came to Pustozera: where Master Logan wintered, but Pursgloue trauelled from thence by Land to Colmogro. The nine and twentieth of Nouember hee departed with Russes and Permacks, for Slebotca in a sled drawne with two Deere: in their Argeshey (so they call their whole company) were two hundred and tenne sleds: and they had aboue fiue hundred for change when the other were weary. These kept company till the fourth of December, and then in company of foure sleds and a Samoyed for a guide, he left the laden sleds, and went in post for Slebotca, where he arriued the ninth day at night: and thence trauelled day and night to Colmogro, where he arriued the twelfth being two hundred and fiftie Versts or Russe miles, somewhat shorter then ours, He returned againe with a better passage to Pechora, by reason of much snow falne in the meane while and frozen, passing ouer the mountaines, which are not high, but a Champaine Countrey.  Hee left the company the fift of Ianuary, and in forty houres continuall post, passed (by report) three hundred and fifty versts. About the mouth of the Riuer Ob,Elata Baba Ortel. G. B. E. is sayd to bee an ancient Idoll, in forme of an olde woman, holding in each arme a child, and a third at her feet, called by her worshippers (the Iugri, Obdarani and Condorani) Zlata Baba, that is, the golden olde wife, to which they offer precious Furres, and sacrifice Harts, besmearing the mouth and eyes of the Idoll with the bloud. In the time of their sacrificing, the Priest demands of the Idoll touching things to come, and sometime receiueth answere. Docter FletcherD. Fletcher Desc. of R.C. 20. found this to be a very fable, Onely (saith he) in the Prouince of Obdoria, on the Seaside neere the mouth of Ob, there is a Rocke, which naturally (being some what helped by  imagination) seemes to beare the shape of a ragged woman with a child in her armes (as the Rocke by the North Cape, the shape of a Fryer) where the Obdorian Samoites vse to resort, by reason of the commoditie of the place for fishing: and there sometimes practise their Sorceries, and ominous coniecturings about the good or bad successe of their iourneyes, fishings, huntings, and such like.
The Samoits or SAMOYEDS are clad from head to foot in Deeres-skinnes, or in Seale-skinnes, with the hairy side outwards downe as low as the knees, with their breeches and netherstocks of the same, both men and women. They are all blacke haired, naturally beardlesse. And therefore the men are hardly discerned from the women, but by the lockes which the women we are downe their eares. They liue a wilde and sauage life rouing from one  place to another, without any property of House or Land. Their leader in euery company is their Papa or Priest.

The Samoyeds are Idolaters and Witches, obseruing Deuelish superstitions, as witnesseth Rich. Iohnson, who on the fifth of Ianuary, in the yeere, 1557. saw amongst them, asR. Johnson apud Hak. to. 1. followeth. The Samoyeds about the bankes of Pechore, are in subiection to the Muscouite, and when they will remoue from one place to another, then they will make Sacrifices, in manner following. Euery kindred doth Sacrifice in their owne Tent, and hee that is most Ancient, is their Priest. And first the Priest doth begin to play vpon a thing like a great Siue, with a skinne on the one end like a Drumme; his Drumme sticke is about a spanne long, and one end is round like a ball, couered with the skin of an Hart.
Also the Priest hath as it were a white garland on his head, and his face is couered with a  peece of a shirt of male, with many small ribbes, and teeth of fishes, and wild beasts hanging thereon. Then he singeth, as wee vse here in England to hollow, whoope or shout at Hounds, and the rest of the company answere him with this Outes Igha, Igha, Igha, to which the Priest with his voyce replyeth. And they answere him with the selfe same words, so many times, till in the end, he become, as it were, madde, falling downe as he were dead, hauing nothing on him but a shirt, and lying on his backe. I perceyued him yet to breath, and asked why he lay so: they answered, Now doth our God tell him what wee shall doe, and whither we shall goe. And when he had lyen still a little while, they cryed thus three times together, Oghao, Oghao, Oghao, and as they vse these three cals, he ryseth with his head, and lyeth downe againe; and then he rose vp and sang with like voyces as he did before, with the  like answere, Igha, Igha, Igha. Then he commanded them to kill fiue Ollens, or great Deere, and continued singing still, both he and they as before. Then he tooke a sword of a Cubite, and a span long (I did mete it my selfe) and put it into his belly halfe way, and sometime lesse, but no wound was to be seene; they continuing their sweete song still. Then he put the sword into the fire, till it was warme, and so thrust it into the slit of his shirt, and thrust it thorow his body, as I thought, in at his Nauell, and out at his fundament, the point being out of his shirt behind, I layd my finger vpon it. Then he pulled out the sword, and sate downe.
This being done, they set a Kettle of water ouer the fire to heate, and when the water doth seethe, the Priest beginneth to sing againe, they answering him. For so long as the water was in seething, they sate and sang not. Then they made a thing being foure square, and  in height and squarenesse of a chaire, and couered with a gowne very close, the fore-part thereof, for the hinder part stood to the Tents side. Their Tents are round and are called Chome, in their language. The water still seething on the fire, and this square seat being ready, the Priest put off his shirt, and the thing like a garland, which was on his head, with those things which couered his face, and hee had on yet all this while a payre of hosen of Deere-skinnes with the hayre on, which came vp to his buttockes. So he went into the square seat, and sate downe like a Taylor, and sang with a strong voyce or hollowing. Then they tooke a small line made of Deere-skinnes of foure fathomes long, and with a small knot the Priest made it fast about his necke, and vnder his left arme, and gaue it to two men standing on each side of him, which held the ends together. Then the kettle of hot water was set before him in the square seat, which seat they now couered with a gowne of broad cloth-without  lining (such as the Russes vse to weare.) Then the two men which did hold the end of the line, still standing there, began to draw, and drew, till they had drawne the ends of the line stiffe, and together; and then I heard a thing fall into the kettle of water, which was before him in the Tent. I asked what it was, and they answered, his head, shoulder and left arme, which the line had cut off, I meane, the knot which I saw afterward drawne hard together. Then I rose vp, and would haue looked whether it were so or not, but they layd hold on me, and sayd, that if they should see him with their bodily eyes, they should liue no longer. (And the most part of them can speake the Russian tongue, to be vnderstood, and they took me to be a Russian,) Then they beganne to hollow with these words Oghaoo, Oghaoo, Oghaoo,  many times together: in the meane while I saw a thing like a finger of a man, two times together, thrust thorow the gowne from the Priest. I asked them that sate neere to me what it was, that I saw, and they sayd, not his finger for he was yet dead; and that which I saw appeare thorow the gowne, was a beast, but what beast they knew not, nor would not tell. And I looked vpon the gowne, and there was no hole to be seene. At last, the Priest lifted vp his head, with his shoulder and arme, and all his body, and came out to the fire. Thus farre of their seruice, which I saw during the space of certaine houres. But how they doe worship their Idols, that I saw not: for they put vp their stuffe to remoue from that place where they lay. And I went to him that serued their Priest, and asked him what their God sayd to him, when hee lay as dead. Hee answered, that his owne people doth not know, neither is it for  them to know, for they must doe as he commanded.
William Pursgloue tolde mee of the like eyther iuggling or Magicall prankes practised by Samoyed-Coniurours or Priests, whom they haue in great veneration. They haue (as hee
 reporteth) certaine Images, some in likenesse of a Man, others of a Beare, Wolfe, etc. which they be hang with the richest Furres they can get, hiding them in Caues in the Woods, for feare of the Russes: who trauell those Countries to hunt after wild beasts, as Sable, Fox, and Beuer: who, if they light vpon those furred Deities take away the Furres, and bestow on them greater heat in fires. Pustozera is in 68. degrees 50. minutes. The inhabitants hold trade with other Samoieds, which haue traffique with the Ougorians and Molgomsey, for Sables, blacke and white Foxes, Beauers, Downe, Whales-Finnes. The Russes malegning others that gaine which themselues find in the Samoied-trade, traduced the English amongst them as Spies. The Ozera or lake before the Towne was frozen ouer, the thirteenth of October,Ios. Log. and so continued till the twentieth of May. Iosias Logan there obserued, and the  eleuenth of December, hee could see but the way of the Sunne-beames: on the thirteenth, the beames but not the Sunne: which on Christmas day he saw rising at South and by West, and setting at South West and by South: not wholy eleuated from the Horizon, but all the way the nether part of the Sunne seeming iust and euen with it. They found the harbor of Pechora full of Ice in Iuly,R. Finch. the tide strong and dangerous. The Towne of Pechora is small, it hath three Churches: the poore in the Spring and Summer time liue by catching Partridges, Geese, Duckes, Swans: salt the flesh and liue on them most of the Winter. Sayling from Pustozera in August towards Nona Zimla,W. Gourden. they fastened themselues to a piece of Ice, which caused their returne homewards.
W. Pursgloue.The Samoieds know these vnknowne Desarts, and can tell where the Mosse groweth,  wherewith they refresh their wearied Deere, pitching their tents of Deere-skins neere the same. Their wiues and daughters fetch wood sometimes tenne versts off, they hang kettles on the fire with snow, of which melted, euery one drinkes a carouse. When they haue supped, they spread a Deeres skinne on the snow within the Tent. Whereon he resteth couered with his day-apparell. Tenne or twelue of the boyes, or maides watch the Deere to keepe them from Wolues or Beares: making a great shout if they see any. For two hundred and fifty sleds they pitch euery night three Tents. The light of the Moone and snow helpe them in their trauels.
The Hollanders in the yeere 1494, sent to discouer a way to Cathay and China, by the North-East,Hak. Voy. 10.1. Gerad. de Veer. ap. De Bryin. 3. par. Iud. Orient. which by Master Burrough, Pet and Iacman, Englishmen, had beene long before  in vaine attempted. William Barents was the chiefe Pilot for this discouerie. This yeereNauig. 1. they sayled thorow the straits of Vaygats, and thought themselues not farre short of the Riuer Ob, The next yeere they returned for the same discouery. TheyNauig. 2. landed in the Samogithians or Samoyeds Countrey, and named a place, because they there found Images carued of wood, Idall nooke. They gaue names to places long before discouered by the English, as if they had beene the first founders. They learned of certaine Muscouits, that the Inhabitants of Noua Zemla, had neither religion, nor Ciuility prescribed them by any Law, but worshipped the Sunne, Moone, and North-Starre, and euery yeere offered vnto them sacrifices of Deere and other things. On the nine and twentieth of August there arose a thicke fogge, whereupon Oliuer Brunel (which had beene three seuerall yeeres sent by the King of Denmarke, for the discouery of Groenland) reporteth that in 76. Degrees hee had  often obserued such thicke fogges, that some perished thereby. These happened most commonly in October and Nouember. The last of August they had speech with the Samoyeds, they were ofDescription of the Samoyeds. short stature, scarsely foure foot high, with long hayre, broad faces, great heads, little eyes, short and bow legges, very swift, clothed with beasts skins, whereof the hayrie side was outward. They know no God. The Sunne (whose presence they are long depriued of in the Winter (which is recompensed in their nightlesse Summer:) is worshipped amongst them. And when the Sunne is declining out of their sight, the Moone or North-Starre, is his receiuer or successour (if you will) in that tribute of their deuotions. They haue besides, many Idols rudely carued. In times past they had no King; but now they chuse  one to that dignity. They bury the dead, and offer yeerely their sacrifices for them to the Sunne, Moone, and North-Starre, of their Deere, which they burne, except the head and feet. They eate the flesh of wild beasts, eyther raw, or dryed in the ayre; which make them haue very vnsauory breath. On the sixth of September two of them went on shore, on the Continent of Moscouia, and encountred with a Beare, which killed one of them: his crie brought in other of their fellowes (which were also stragling about) to his rescue, but the Beare laid hold also vpon one of them, and could not be driuen to forsake his prey, till himselfe became a prey in recompence. The two torne carkasses were there buried. They tooke from one Beare which they killed, an hundred pound of fat, which serued them for their lamps: the skinne was nine footFrom Cherry Iland they brought home a Beares skin 13 foot long. Ionas Pooly. long, and seuen wide.  
In the yeere 1596.Nauig. 3. there were sent other two shippes, to prosecute this Discouerie, which on the fourth of Iune had sight of a triple Sunne, attended and guarded with a double
 Rainbow, one encompassing them, the other crossing them ouerthwart. After many dreadfull combats with the Ice, and one of the ships departing from the other, they were forced to winter in Noua Zemla; where they built them a house to serue them for a fortifica^^on against the sauage Beares, tempestuous stormes, continuall snowes, Ice, and vnspeakeable cold; and (if worse may bee) a worse then all these, they endured a continuall n^ght of many weekes, wherein neither the Sun, nor any of his courtly traine, the least rayes to be the harbingers of his desired presence, did present themselues to their eyes: and the fire could scarcely preuaile against the insulting tyranny of the cold to warme them. The Beares together with the Sun forsooke them, but plentie of Foxes remained; and with the Sun the Beares  also returned, sometime laying violent siege to their house. From the fourth of Nouember, till the seuen and twentieth of Ianuarie they saw no Sun. Their Watch also or Clocke was by violence of the cold forced to stand still, that they could not measure their times. Thus did they waite in expectation of the Sunnes returne, that they also (not able futher to pursue the voyage) might returne home, which eleuen of them did in October following.
But seeing these North-easterne Seas are so frozen and vnpassable, I will therefore in an inkie Sea finde an easier passage for the Reader, with more, both ease end securitie, to the mightie Kingdome of China, whereof wee are next to speake.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kingdome of China.

@. I. Of the Names, Prouinces, Cities, and situation thereof.
CHina is supposed of some, to be that Countrey, whose people of Ptolomey  arePtol. Geog. l. 7. Cap. called Sinae. Some thinke them to bee the people mentioned by the Prophet EsaiEs. 49.12. Os^r. in parap. Iun. Annot., whereunto Iunius also inclineth. The Arabians call them (...) Tzinin: and the Portugals first of all other (because they could not pronounce it aright) called them Chinians (saithScal. Cau. Isag. l. 3. Ioseph Scaliger) Pierre du Iarric, saith,Pierre du arric. l. 4. del histoire des Indes. Orient cap. 17. Gotard. Arthus hist Indiae Orient. C. 49. that before that time in all the East they were called Chijs, and the Inhabitants of Ceilan were called Chingales, because they were mixed with the Chinois; and Cinamom, was of the Persians named Darchini, that is, wood of China, as some thinke: he addeth their opinion that deriue that name from the Chinian salu^ation, in which they vse the word Chij, Chij, as a nickname therefore giuen them: and others that thinke the Citie Chincheo gaue name to the whole Region: but it were tedious to recite heere the seuerall opinions in this question. And fitter it is to heare Ricius his iudgement, who being sent  into the Indies Anno 1578. after foure yeeres stay at Goa and Cochin, was by the Iesuiticall Visitor employed for China, in which he liued, about eight and tweetie yeeres; some of which he spent in Nanquin and other places but the ten last in Paquin, the Royall Citie and Residence. Hee out of his experience could best informe vs of China affaires, and a lit^le before his death (which hapned the eleuenth of May 1610.Silke when inuented.) writ certaine Comm^ntaries of his obseruations, which Trigautius another Chinian Iesuite, hath since reuised and published; protesting sincere truth in his Relations, which (hee saith) many former Writers, euen of their societie, wanted in many things, partly receiuing by heare-say of China-Merchants, partly staying small time, and but in the skirts of the countrey. This I premise, that none impute  to mee a fault, so much after so good intelligence, to haue increased this History of China, the most admirable this day in the world. For the name he acknowledgeth Ptolomey his Sinae, and the ancient Serica Regio, to agree with this, where the poorest, are clothed in silke, and whence other countries are therewith stored, the inuentione whereof their Annals report 2600. yeeres before Christ. But of all these namesAs neither of Cin, Cauchin-China, Batte-china, Cathay, etc. the Chinois know none: whose custome is, that when any new family attaineth the soueraigntie, the Countrey receiueth with the new Lord, new Lawes, and a new Name. So they write that it hath sometimes beene called Than, which signifieth Broad; after that Yu, that is, Rest; next Hia, or Great; afterwards Sciam, Adorned; then Cheu, which is Perfect; Han, the Milken way in Heauen; with other names many. But in the reigne of this family, which is called CIV, the Kingdome  is stiled MIN, which signifieth Brightnesse, to which they adde TA, calling itPerera hath this name, Escalanta Tangis. Odorico, N. di Conti, Mangi. Polo this, and Cin. Longobard saith, that the Magistrates called the Count^les far from the cour^ Mangines, that is barbarous. Tamin, or Great Brightnesse. Few of the neighbour Nations obserue this, and by diuers of them it is diuersly named; Those of Siam and Cochin call it Cin, whence the Portugals call it
 China; the Iaponites, Than; the Tartars Han; the Westerne Saracens (as hath beene obserued) Cathay: and the Chinois themselues haue one name common to all ages Ciumquo, as also Chium hoa; which signifie, the former, a Kingdome, the other a Garden, in the middest: they conceiuing the Earth square, and their Countrey in the midst thereof, which made them offended with our Maps, that placed them in the furthest East; and Ricius so disposed his Maps after, that hee placed them in the middle of the same. The King is entituled Lord of the Vniuerse, which how boysterous soeuer, is more excusable then in many other inferiour Potentates, the Chinois thinking (according to their Geographie) that the World contained but few other Nations, and those for the most part so contemptible, that they willingly relinquished them, or thought them not worth the conquering. Neither was euer any one Kingdome  so worthy the name of GREAT, beginning at the Ile Hainam (which signifies the South Sea) in the 19. degree, and extendeth Northwards to 42. and from the 112. degree in Longitude (reckoning from the Canaries) in the Prouince Yunan, to the 132. Eastwards. This hath been obserued by Mathematicall Instruments and obseruations of Eclipses in their Kalenders, and especially for the Northerne computation, it is out of doubt. But for illustration hereof, we will adde out of one of their own bookes, entituled A description of that Kingdome, printed 1579. thus interpreted. In this Kingdome are two Royall or Parliament Prouinces, Nanquin and Pequin (the one signifying the South Court, the other the North) and besides these, thirteene others. In these fifteene Prouinces or Kingdomes,  are numbred by another diuision 158. Regions or Shires (they call them Fu) the most of which haue twelue or fifteene Cities, besides Townes, Villages, Castles, and Hamlets. In these are two hundred seuen and fortie great Cities, which they call CHEV, rather in dignitie then greatnesse, or otherwise, exceeding the inferiour Cities, called Hien, of which are 1152. The persons of such as are growne to mans estate (all which pay tribute to the King are 58. millions, 550. thousands, 801: not reckoning the feminine Sexe, Boyes, Striplings, or Youths, Eunuches, Souldiors, Magistrates, the Kings kindred, Students, and many others. And yet of Souldiors, notwithstanding their long peace, are maintained in perpetuall pay and seruice aboue one million; the three Northerne Prouinces, being almost halfe of them in militarie stipend. The bordering Kingdomes tributarie,  are to the East three, to the West fiftie three, numbred in that Booke; though this tribute bee of no great value. The Kingdome is also fortified by Nature and Art: the Sea on the South and East, and steepe Precipices ioyned together with a strong wall, the space of foure hundred and fiue leagues to the North, and a sandie Wildernesse on the North-west; all conspiring to the strength thereof: and for the South-west it is full of Hills and Desarts, with a few small Seignories, vnworthy their feare or desire. It is diuided into fifteene Prouinces,I. Pan^ogia. six whereof border on the Sea, Cantan, Foquien, Chequiam, Nanquin, Xantum, Paquin: the other nine be in land, Quiamsi, Huquam, Honan, Xiensi, Xansi, Suchion, Quoicheu, Iunan, Coansi. Some sound these names some what otherwise. The Kings residence is at Paquin, though Paquin enioyeth also a Court Royall, as being the Royall Seat of the ancient Kings;  which some place in Quinsay: but of that afterwards.


@. II. Of the Commodities of China; and commodious Riuers and shipping: with two Maps, one made by HONDIVS, the otherOf the large China Map, see an exposition, To. 2. of my Pil^rimes. M. Ricci. taken out of a China Map made there by the Chinois.
BY reason of this large extent both East and West, and North and South, it comes to passe, that no Countrey yeelds such varitie of things, growing in such varitie of Clime and Soyle; making other indebted to it, but it selfe not indebted to any  Countrey, either for necessitie or delicacie of diet. Neither haue wee scarcely any thing in Europe, which is not there found; and what is missing, is more then recompenced in other things exceeding. There is store of Wheat, Barley, Millet, Panike, and other kindes of graine. In Rice (their chiefe food) it farre excelleth Europe. Of Beanes and Pease (wherewith they feed their Beasts) in some Prouinces they haue two or three Haruests in a yeere. None of our principall fruits, but Oliues and Almonds, are wanting: other they haue vnknowne to vs, as those which they call Longanas, Coco-nuts, and other Indian fruits. Their Oranges, Limons, Pome Citrons, farre excell the Europaean in varietie and delicacie. The like we may say of their Garden hearbes, which Religion to some, to other Pouertie, haue made their only  food. Great is their varitie of Flowers; many heare vnknowne: but there, the colour more respected then the sent. As for distillations, they neuer, till of late by vs, had heard of such an Art. Bettele and AreccaSee l. 5. c. 12. growes in the foure Southerne Prouinces. Their Wine is



THE MAP OF CHINA (...)map of China, East Asia, with inset representations of Matteo Ricci, a Chinese man, and a Chinese womanMATHAEUS RICIUSA picture of a Chinese manPicture of a China woman


HONDIVS his Map of China.map of China, East AsiaCHINA farre inferior to ours; for their Grapes are fewer, and lesse pleasant: nor doe they make Wine of them, but of Rice and other things; which is both well tasting, and not so burning as ours. They commonly feed on Porke: they haue store also of Beefe, Mutton, Goats flesh, Hennes, Duckes, Geese: they feed also on Horses, Mules, Asses, Dogs, which are sold in the Shambles as well as other flesh. But in some places, either for Superstition or Husbandry, they spare their Beeues and Buffalls. Venison, especially of red Deere, is plentifull, Hares, and other things, all verie cheape. Their Horses are not so comely as in these parts, but in number, cheapenesse, and vse for burthen, excelling. Yet is there lesse need of such carriages, by reason  of plentie of Riuers, which Nature or Art hath prouided through all the Countrey. Hence is there such store of shipping, that a moderne Author hath written, that there liue as many on the Waters; as on the Land: which, to such as sayle in those Streames, will not seeme too excessiue an hyperbole. And I dare affirme this as a thing credible, that there is as much shipping in this Kingdome, as in all the world besides; vnderstanding this assertion of fresh-water vessels: for their sea-vessells are fewer and worse then ours. PantogiaPantogia and Ric. Exped. reporteth his owne iourney from Macao to Paquin, the space of six hundred Spanish leagues (which the next way, by land, is reckonedRicius accounts from the chiefe Citie of Cant^n to Paquin 7065. China measures, fiue of which make a mile, fifteene a league. 450.) in all that space trauelling but one day by land, for shortning his way; otherwise all the way by water, carried in a Riuer, called of the Chinians a little Sea for the greatnesse, (being the greatest which euer he saw, in some places two or three myles  broad, often tempestuous, and cause of many shipwrackes.) The Chinois dare not sayle in it by night: and they say, That if one fall in, hee is so whirled, that swimming can scarcely saue him. They call it Yamsu, or the sonne of the Sea. It abounds with Sea-fish a hundred
 leagues from the Sea. Hee sayled after that in another Riuer of like bignesse, whose waters were thicke and myrie, which they clarifie with Allome, before they can drinke it: All the rest of the streames that hee passed, were made by mens hands, aboue two hundred leagues. That yellow or muddie streame, at his beginning makes a Lake, and then runnes Westward beyond the walls, to the Tartars, and then backe againe by those walls, compassing the Prouince of Sciensi, running South, and after East, to the Sea. It often ouerflowes, and doth much harme, not subiect to their walls and lawes, and often changes the sandie channell. Some Magistrates are appointed to appease the Spirit therof with rites, (for they ascribe Spirits to the rule of many things.) From Nanquin to Paquin, the space of three hundred leagues, it seemed to be, as it were, a continued street of ships: and though they came in the  morning betimes to Nanquin, yet were there the same houre aboue fiue hundred sayle of Vessels vnder sayle, readie to enter, which were laden with prouision for the Citie. The Kings ships in that Region, about Nanquin, are reported to be about ten thousand, to carrie his rents and tributes, besides a thousand sayle belonging to priuate men. The ships wherein the Mandarines or Magistrates and Officers are carried, are not inferior in sumptuous statelinesse to the ships Royal in Europe; and some exceeding them, hauing Parlors, large Hals, Kitchens, with other Offices; and many windowes, with silke curtaines, and curiously painted; without, enuironed with galleries; the height, as of high houses; and painted within and without with a certaine liquor, made of a gumme, called Claran, of shining brightnesse, and  long continuance, besides great store of carued workes, that they seeme Princes Palaces. Escalanta and Gaspar de Cruz report a Prouerbe of the Chinois, That their King is able to make a bridge of ships from China to Malacca, which is neere fiue hundred leagues. They haue so great store of timber, that a ship may there bee built for a fourth part of that which it will here cost. The Riuers are no lesse adorned and beautified with Cities, Townes, and Villages; so many, as that in all this way being neere or against one, they had alway sight of another, that all the way seemed a continuall habitation; and so great, that sometime they sayled two or three houres alongst the walls of some Citie. Their Townes and Cities haue high walls.
But to returne to their Horses: Such as are for Warre, are innumerable, but vnfit for seruice, running away at the fi^st neighing of a Tartarian Horse: besides that, they are vnshod  with yron, and therefore too tender-hoofed, for hard trauell: neither haue they skill to manage them. Fish is there aboundant, by the neighbour-hood of the Sea, store of Riuers, and Lakes (for their greatnesse and depth) as it were little Seas; besides Fish-ponds plentie, maintained to that intent and pu^pose, which euerie day store the Market.
Their Forrests breed no Lyons, but great quantitie of Tygres, Beares, Wolues, Foxes: Elephants none, but at Paquin, for shew in the Court. Flaxe they haue not, but Cotton enough for the world; and yet not aboue foure hundred yeeres since it was brought thither. Silke is plentifull and cheape: of Hempe and certaine other hearbes they make cloth: their wooll they sheare, and make thereof slight clothes; but good cloth they know not how to make; although thatA note for our English East-India Merchants. which is thither brought, bee deare sold. And this note I would  commend to our English Merchants, that can best furnish them. For the cold in the Northerne Prouinces, seemes more then the Climate threatens, farre beyond the Countries of Europe in the same height, their huge Riuers and Lakes being frozen ouer, the cause vnknowne, but guessed to bee the Tartarian Mountaines snowie tops, not farre distant: against which, they vse furred garments.
All sorts of Metalls are here found. Besides the ordinarie Brasse and Copper, they make another kind, white as Siluer, no dearer then the former. Of melted yron, they make Cauldrons, Bells, Morters, Furnaces, Ordnance, and the like, all ch^aper far then here. Their gold is not base, but not so fine as ours. Siluer is vsed for money, but by weight, not by coyne; and so in all bargaines they vse the ballance, the price higher or lower, as the Siluer is in finenesse: wherein much fraud is vsed. In many places they haue small coynes of Brasse,  which come out of the publike Mint. Their great men haue vessels of siluer and gold, but not so common as in Europe. But the women spend much gold and siluer in adorning their heads. Porcelane is their vsuall Table-furniture; the most excellent whereof, is made in the Prouince of Kiamsi, of yellow earth: whence it is dispersed into the other Prouinces, and euen to vs. They will with wyre sow the broken pieces together, and make them hold liquor, as we doe with woodden dishes. Their glasse is not comparable to ours. Their buildings are of Timber, euen the Kings houses, the lower walls sometimes of Bricke; which, together with their store of shipping, argues their plentie of Timber: the kindes, most part, such as with vs. Okes are scarce; but in stead thereof, they haue a hard kind of euerlasting wood, which the  Portugalls therefore call Iron, being like it also in colour. Cedar they vse for Funerall Coffins and Tombes, in which they are curious and costly. They haue also a kind of Reed (the Portugalls call it Bambu) almost as hard as yron, the greater sort, though hollow and distinguished
 with knots, yet supplying the roome of studs, or posts, in smaller houses, being as big as with both hands may be griped: the smaller serue for launces, and other manifold vses. Of these is exceeding plenty and cheapnesse.
For Fuell, they haue Wood, Coales, Reeds, Stubble, and a kinde of pitchy bituminous matter, calledThis seemes to be some kind of Coale, such as is found in diuers places of our Iland. Mui (they haue the like in the Bishopricke of Leege) digged out of the earth, very cheape, and not troublesome with the smoake. Here growes plenty of Rhuba^be, and Liguum sanctum: here is also store of Muske. Salt is made not only by the Sea-side, but of diuers waters within land. Sugar is more vsed then Honey, yet like plenty of both. Waxe is there not of Honey alone, but another whiter and better, and burning clearer, made  by certaine Wormes, which they keepe on Trees to this purpose: and a third sort, made of the fruit of a Tree. Their Paper will not last with ours, nor beare Inke but on one side: yet they haue as white as ours, made of Cotton.
They haue Marbles of diuers colours, precious Stones, odoriferous Woods, and Gums, with other rarities. Amongst the rest, a certaine Shrub, the leaues whereof are gathered in the Spring, and dried in the shadow, and so preserued to their daily decoctions; which they drinke continually, both at Table, and when one friend enters anothers house, or oftner, If he makes any stay. They call it Cia, sup it hot, more healthsome then toothsome, for it hath a bitter smacke. The Iaponians will giue ten or twelue duckats for one pound of the best, and drinke it in poulder mingled with two or three spoonfuls of boyling water: but the  Chinois steepe the leaues. They haue another pitchy substance like milke, which they straine out of the barke of a certaine Tree, whereof they make their Cie, the Portugals call it Ciacon, wherewith they varnish their houses and houshold-stuffe, and ships, in diuers colours, with glasse-like shining to the eye, smoothnesse to the touch; besides the long continuance, pleasingly maiesticall: the cause they need no clothes for their Tables; which are easily restored to their crystall lustre with a little washing, if by any fatty substance dimmed. Oyle is also expressed out of the fruit of another Tree, of vse like the former, but inferiour somewhat, and more plentifull. Cinnamon and most excellent Ginger are here growing; Pepper, Nutmegs, Aloes, and other like, are here plentifully, out of the Ilands and bordering Kingdomes. Gunpoulder they haue in great store, which they vse not so much in Peeces  (whereto they are more vnapt) as in Fire-workes; in which they are curiously artificiall, liuely expressing Trees, with their fruits, and other rarities. In the first moneth of the yeere wee saw as much this way spent at Nanquin, as would haue serued for two yeeres continuall warre.


@. III. Of the Cities and Castles in China: and of Quinsay.
 OF the number of their Cities and their differing sorts is mentioned before.Ant. Dalmeida Barros. Escalanta c. 8. Gaspar de Cruz. Besides these, they haue two sorts of Castles, both for fortification and habitation, with priuiledges also of Market, the greater sort named Huy 293. the lesse of greater number 2593. Their Villages are innumerable. In each Citie is an Officer that hath charge of the walls, whereby they are kept faire and strong: and for further beautie, besides commoditie of shadow, they plant trees at their doores, which continue greene all the yeere long. The Cities generally are like one another, except in greatnesse.
The streets are strait, yeelding prospect from one gate to another. Canton (so the Portugals call it, according to the name of the Prouince: the Chinois call it Quamcheu, or Canceu) is accounted the least of the Metropolitan Cities: it hath on one side a great nauigable  Riuer, elsewhere enuironed with a deepe trench, filled with water, which is nauigable also: the walls haue fourescore and three Bulwarkes: the streets so broad that ten men may ride in front, and paued, adorned with many triumphant Arches, and shops on both sides: the bridges there and elsewhere in the Kingdome are many, of large free stones very costly, the high wayes very stately which leade to the Cities: and the Kings houses for the publike Officers very magnificent after their manner. Such was the plenty and abundance, that in this one Citie were spent euery day betweene fiue and sixe thousand Hogs, and betweene ten and eleuen thousand Duckes, besides a great number of Kine, Birds, Hens, Conies, Frogs, Dogs, Fish of many sorts: and yet the most vsuall meate of the Chinois is Rice boyled with water.
 Nanquin standeth in two and thirtie degrees, and is eight or ten leagues from the Sea, with a Riuer leading thither.Pantegia. It hath three faire brick walls, with large and stately gates. The first wall contayneth the Kings Palace, which it selfe also is compassed with three walls,
 in manner of a Castle, with ditches full of water round about them. This I dare be bold to say (it isChrist. exp. l. 3. cap. 10. Ricius his report) that no King in the world excells this King in a Palace, if we compare not particulars, but all things together. This first wall is in circuit foure or fiue Italian miles. The second wall contayneth the first; and withall, the best part of the Citie, hauing in it twelue gates placed with Iron, furnished with Ordnance; it comprehendeth eight dend Italian miles. The third wall is not continued, but Arte supplying Nature elsewhere fortifying it; the compasse whereof can scarcely be knowne. The Inhabitants say, that two went out on horsebacke, one this way, the other that, and met againe at night, hauing spent the day, each in his semicircle. The greatest part is very populous, howsoeuer there are also Mountaines, Gardens, Groues, and Lakes within the Citie. This circular  forme is to bee obserued, as of greatest capacitie. There are fortie thousand Souldiers in continuall garrison. It is full of Palaces, Temples, Bridges, Towers; of best aire, fertilitie, and ingenious Inhabitants. The Riuer doth not onely passe by, but entreth the Citie with diuers channels made by arte, capable of gre^t ships.
The streets are (saith Pantogia) of two leagues, or of two and a halfe in length, wide, and paued. The compasse is at least eleuen or twelue leagues, and contayneth by coniecture two hundred thousand houses, and (according to all the opinions of the Iesuites there abiding*) equalling, or exceeding in people foure of the greatest Cities in Europe.
Paquin in 40. degrees.Paquin (or as Ricius alway calls it P^quin) is situate about a hundred miles from that famous Wall against the Tartars: in greatnesse and neatnesse exceeded by that of Nanqui^,  but in multitude of Inhabitants, Souldiers, and Magistrates, exceeding it. Two high and strong walls compasse the South parts, so wide, that twelue horse may easily runne thereon together, without hinderance. Those walls are of bricke, sauing at the foundation of huge st^n^^, filled with earth in the midst, farre higher then those in Europe. On the North side the^e is but one. On these walls as diligent watch is kept euery night, as in the hottest warre^ in the day-time Eunuches watch at the gates, or rather exact customes. The Kings Palace is within the inner Southerne wall, neere the Gates, and so runnes vnto the Northerne wall, the rest of the Citie stretching on both sides. It is lesse then the Palace at Nanquin, but more glorious, that seeming by the Kings long absence a carkasse without life. The Citie is troublesome (being little of it paued) in winter with durt, in summer  with dust, which in that Region, wherein it seldome raines, vpon any blast of winde, fills their houses, and to preuent the trouble, there is none of any ranke which goes on foot, or rideth without a vaile hanging downe to their breasts and couering their faces, so thinne that it may hinder the dust and not the sight, preuenting also the tedious knowledge and salutations by others. There are Muletters and Hackney-men in euery corner, to let their beasts to such as will hire them, who also know all chiefe places, and make way in those populous streets vnto their customers, both for a little money. But for this there is also a Booke which relateth the scite and streets of the Citie: they may also hire chaires and bearers to carrie them.
In the Prouince of Sciantum is Cinchiamsu (which in Paulus his time, had two Churches  of Christians) whence is a Riuer made by hand (a thing vsuall in China) whereby they haue passage to Suceu, and to the Metropolitane Citie of Chequian, Hamceu. This Riuer is so cloyed with ships, because it is not frozen in winter, that the way is stopped with multitude: which made Ricius exchange his way by water into another (more strange to vs) by wagon, if we may so call it, which had but one wheele, so built that one might sit in the middle as it were on horse-backe, and on each side another; the wagoner putting it swiftly and safely forwards with leuers or barres of wood (those wagons driuen by wind and saile, he mentions not) and so he came speedily to Suceu and Hamceu, which are of the Chinois esteemed Paradises.Trig. ep. 1612. They haue a prouerbe, thien Xam thien tham, ti Xam su Ham: that which the Hall of heauen or Presence-chamber is in heauen, that on earth are Sucen and Hamceu. And first  for Suceu,Suceu. the beautie, plentie, frequency, situation, make it admirable. It is seated as Venice, but better, in a pleasant Riuer of fresh water, if it may not rather be called a Lake for the stilnesse. They may passe quite through it, either by water or land, all the streets and houses are founded vpon piles of Pine-tree, and the merchandise brought from Marao, and other parts and ports are here sold, as the fittest centre for dispersion. It hath one gate into the land, other passages by boat; innumerable bridges, very stately and durable, but in those narrow rills hauing one only arch: butter and milke-meates no where more spent, nor better wine of rice, which is carried thence to Paquin: by the frequencie of the Hauen and multitude of ships, almost denying faith to the eyes, which would thinke all the ships of the Kingdome here assembled, and notwithstanding the continuall going out so supplied  as if they neuer weighed: the hand-made Riuers that are made from Nanquin-ward hither, so peopled with Townes, Cities, Villages, as no where in the Kingdome more, as
 from hence also to Hamceu. It is scarsely two dayes iourney from the Sea, and the head of that Region, in which are eight Cities. When Humui expelled the Tartars, this Region held out longest against him, and therefore to this day payes an excessiue tribute, euen halfe of all which the earth brings forth: some two small Prouinces not paying so much as this one Region, and thePantagio. Citie alone (as in the printed Booke of the Kings tributes is extant) payes twelue millions to the King, more then the greatest Kingdome in Europe, if some haue not accountedBotero. Relat. part. 2. which yet of France, etc. cannot be iustified. Trigant. ep. 1612 Prouince of Chequian. falsely; and he which knowes this Citie will not maruell at it. It is still kept with a strong Garrison, for feare of innouation.
But Hamceu or Hanceu, the Metropolitane of Chequian, is perhaps more to be admired,  situate South-east from Nanquin almost nine dayes iourney, not two dayes from the Sea, in 30. degrees. This Prouince of Chequian is the chiefe of the thirteene washed on the East with the Sea, hauing Nanquin and Kiamsi on the West, Fuquian on the South, Xanton on the North: numbring twelue greater Cities, the chiefe of sixtie three lesse, besides innumerable Townes, Castles, Villages; the best wits, and most learned students in the whole Kingdome; it yeelds a fertile soyle, Art contending with Nature for varierie of Riuers, so many as may seeme impossible to humane industrie, adorned with numberlesse Bridges of many arches, made of huge stones, equall to the Europaean workmanship, and so abounding with Mulberie trees and Silke-wormes, that all the China Markets, besides other Countries, are hence furnished; and ten vests of Silke may bee here had at a cheaper price, then one of  Cloth in Europe. Hamceu is the chiefe Citie of this Prouince, yea, in all this Kingdome,Hamceu, Hamcheu, o^ Hanceu. lesse perhaps somewhat in compasse of walls then Nanquin, but better peopled: no place in the Citie emptie, nor occupied with Gardens, but all builded, and all the buildings almost with diuers stories, which in other Cities of China is not vsuall. The Inhabitants are so many, and the Tribute so much, that the Iesuites durst not relate that which hereof they had heard by graue testimonie, for the incredibilitie: the description would aske a whole volume. The chiefe street is almost halfe a dayes iourney in length, and cannot be lesse then admirable. For whereas the Chinois vse to erect triumphall Arches, as Monuments, to wel-deseruing Magistrates and ornaments to their Cities; this one street hath at least three hundred such (besides very many others in other parts of the Citie) of massie stones, and exceeding  curious workmanship, that if the houses, on both sides yeelded the like splendour, the world could not shew such a spectacle. But they occupie it all with shops, and build the most magnificence of their houses inwards, and yet those not like the Europaean Palaces. There is also a Lake close to the Citie, which the eye can scarcely measure,The Lake. See the Map. which sliding into a valley encompassing, embossed with diuers hillockes, hath giuen occasion to Arte to shew her vtmost in the adorning the same, beautifying all those spacious bankes with houses, gardens, groues; a very labyrinth to the bewitched eyes, not knowing whereat most in this maze to be most amazed, wherein most to delight. And in delights doe they spend their dayes, filling the Lake with vessels, furnished with feasts, spectacles and playes on the water. There is a pleasant Hill in the middle of the Citie, whereon is a faire Tower or  Steeple, where they measure their houres by a strange deuice. Out of huge vessels water droppeth from one to another, the lowest being very large, in the middle whereof is perpendicularly raised a rule, distinguished with houre-spaces, which by the ascent or descent of the water, diuide the rising and declining day, and declare the houres: euery halfe houre some men appointed by tables with cubitall letters, to giue notice of the time to all men. From this Hill is a prospect ouer all the Citie. All the streets being set with trees, make shew of pleasant gardens. It is so full of Riuers, Lakes, Rills, Ponds, both in the Citie and Suburbs, as if a man would frame a Platonicall Idaea of elegancie to his minde.Quinsay, ciuitas coeli. See it described supr. 98. The Idoll Temples are many and stately, which Idolatrie where it is wanting in China, hath a worse successour, Atheisme.
 Let vs stay a while and gaze (for where haue you such an Obiect?) Is not Quinsay (whilome the Royall Seat of the Kings of Mangi, as Venetus recordeth, supposed by our moderne Geographers to be swallowed vp with some Earthquake, or in Bellona's all-consuming bellie) here raised vp from the graue? The Lake situate on the oneHa da vna banda vn lago, etc. side, (so Paulus reports of Quinsay) the Name Quinsay signifying the Citie of Heauen, and this called a Heauenly Paradise by the Chinois; and Han signifies Lactea via in Heauen; and Ceu, perfect: yea, Quinsay, or as Odoricus calls it, Canasia, and Han or Chanceu, not so disagreeing in sound, as different Dialects are wont: the excellency being chiefe Citie in the Kingdome, and this Prouince sometimes royall, as Pequin now and Nanquin are: the situation, South-east from Cinczianfu, andThat which is before said almost two dayes iourney, is to be vnderstood of the Chinois iournies, which make slow passage, somtime but sixe miles a day. fiue and twentie miles from the Sea: the high houses,  and shops vnderneath: the exceeding trade, reuenue, pastimes by water, multitudes, fairenesse, and length of the streets; all so conspiring to proue this Han or Hamceu to bee that Quinsay of Paulus. True it is, that Quinsay was then greater, being as Venetus sayth, an
 hundred miles about: But the euerting of that Farfur and his Familie, then raigning, the diuerting of the Court to Cambalu by the Tartars, and after to Nanquin by Humvn, and neuer returning hither, might lessen the same. And might not warres, in that long siege by the Tartars, in the recouerie thereof by the Chinois, easily circumcise her superfluitie? Besides, who knoweth whether all this huge Lake might be contained in that account of Paulus, still compassed about with buildings? Or before those warres, the Lake it selfe might (as Suceu now is) be builded on; which Time and Warre hath consumed; nor since the remoue of the Court were so necessarie. Mandeuile mentions warres at Quinsay in his time; Nicolo di Conti (which was here about the yeere 1440.) saith Quinsay was in his time new built, of thirtie miles compasse. Or if any like better, that Suceu it selfe (to which also  many of these arguments agree) should be this Quinsay, I contradict not. That which somtimes I haue thought that Quinsay, after so long a sicknesse, and consumption of warres, died; bequeathing her Land-greatnesse to Nanquin, her Sea-treasures to Suceu, both arising out of the ashes of that Quinsay-Phenix; I finde cannot (I meane for Nanquin) agree with the distance betwixt Suceu and Nanquin, aboue foure dayes iourney. Of this Quinsay,M.P. l. 2. c. 68. let the Reader take a large and leasurely view in Marcus Paulus, which but for tediousnesse I could hither haue transcribed. Whether Hanceu or Suceu bee it, or whether both these Paradises doe now succeed that Citie of heauen, or wheresoeuer else it be, it was (which  these are) the wonder of the world: reported (saith Paulus) to haue 12000. bridges, 1600000. housholds: in which was a rich Mart of all commodities of the world; there was spent euery day 9589. pounds of Pepper, it had ten principall Market-places, square, each square halfe a mile, the chiefe streets leading thereto being fortie paces wide, and running strait from one end of the Citie to the other, these Market-places foure miles asunder. But I forbeare the rest; this Citie had twelue principall Companies or Arts, each of which had 12000. shops: the adioyning Countrey (reckoned the ninth part of Mangi) paide sixe millions and 400000. Duckats to the Great Chan yeerely for custome of Salt, made of the Sea-water, by the heate of the Sunne in large plaines: besides sixteene millions and 800000. Duckats otherwise.
But let vs looke on some of the meaner Cities, one (of those called Hien) is Scianhai in the Prouince of Nanquin, in 29. degrees ouer-against Cerra, and within foure and twentie  houres sayle of Iapon, and therefore is defended with a Garrison and a Nauie; it hath about 40000. housholds, and the iurisdiction adioyning seemes a continued Citie with Gardena intermixed; payes to the King 300000. Duckats: there is great store of Rice and Cotton, and in this Citie and the Suburban liberties are 200000. Weauers thereof: the aire wholsome, and they liue ordinarily to a great age, some to fourescore, and fourescore and ten, and many to a hundred yeeres. The keyes of Cities are euery night brought to the Gouernours, and thousands appointed to watch to preuent theeues, themselues being the worst: they ring bells at certaine spaces to each other.
These Cities of China ordinarily want that elegance and magnificence, which stately Temples and sumptuous building doe affoord vnto our Cities of Europe. Their houses are  lowe; without the ornament of Porches, Galleries, Windowes, and prospect into the streets. Besides these habitations, they haue many which dwell not on land but in their ships. For their shipping is of two sorts, one for sayle, another for habitation also, and these meanes or fairer, according to the wealth of the owners. In the one side they carrie their families, in the other side their passengers. Many Barques are as victualling houses by the way, and likewise as shops of merchandize. Many of the poorer water-dwellers get their liuing by labour on land: their wiues ferry ouer passengers, and vse meanes to get fish. They bring vp thousands of Duckes, hatched with artificiall heate in dung, which hauing fed with a little Rice in the morning, they put out at a doore into the water, which presently swim on land, and eate the weedes which growe among the Rice (these weeders thereby procuring  some wages of the husband-men to their owners) and at night are called home with a Tabor, each resorting to their owne Barque. They haue certaine Sea-crowes or Cormorants, wherewith they fish, tying their gorges that they cannot swallow the fishes which they take, till their Masters turne being serued, they are suffered to hunt for themselues: which one in this Citie of London hath lately imitated and effected.
In the winterAnth. Dalmeida. they haue store of Ice and Snow, whereby the Riuers are frozen euen about Nanquin. They haue abundance of all things necessarie to the life of man, fruits, flesh, and fish, with prices correspondent. They haue two, and somewhere three haruests in the yeere. Few Mountaines, but Plaines of an hundred leagues. Wine they make of Rice. They eate thrice a day, but sparingly. There drinke (be it water or wine) they drinke hot,  and eate with two stickes of Iuorie, Ebonie, or like matter, nor touching their meate with their hands; and therefore little napery serueth them. Their warmeOf the wholsomenesse and vse of warme drinkes: See A. Perst. del ber caldo. drinkes and abstinence
 from fruits, are great preseruatiues of their health, which for the most part they enioy, and none of them haue the stone, which some say is with vs caused by cold drinkes: but let vs take more full view of their persons and conditions.


@. IIII. Of their Persons, Attire, and many strange Rites.
 SOme of the Chinois haue faces almost square: many in the Prouinces of Canton and Quamsi, haue two nayles on their little toes, a thing common to all the Cauchin Chinois. Their women are all of lowe stature, and account small feet their greatest elegance, and therefore binde and swaddle them so from their infancy all their liues, that they seeme, in going, stump-footed: which seemes to be by deuice of some to keepe them within doores. Neither men nor women euer cut off their haire (which is generally blacke, and other colour a deformitie) they let it growe on their crownes only till fifteene yeeres of age, after that all their heads ouer, loose on their shoulders till twentie yeeres, when they put on their virilisVrilis pi^eus to the Chino^s as vir lis Togd to the Romans. pileus, the cap of manhood, and then gather it vp, the men into caules or hats, hollow at the top for the haire to passe thorow; which the women vse not, but trimme vp their haire on knots with gold, siluer, stones, and flowers, earerings  also at their eares, but no rings on their fingers. Both men and women weare long garments with wide sleeues. The men weare shooes of silke with curious workes and knots: none weares of leather but the basest: yea, their soles they make of cloth. The learned men weare square caps or hats, others round. They bestow long time euery morning in trimming their haire. They vse no shirts, but weare their inmost garment of white cloth, and vse often washing. They haue visants or vmbrellas to keepe off the sunne or raine, borne ouer them by their seruants; the poorer carrie them of lesse forme, themselues. The generall colour of the Chinois is white, more or lesse according to the climate. Their beard is thin, long before it comes, of a few staring haires (in some none) noses little, scarse standing forth;  eyes prominent, blacke, little, of egge-fashion; (many dreames they had of Pantogia's eyes of a darke gray colour, as if iewels and precious things might thereby be knowne where they were hidden) their eares are small. If they would paint a deformed man, they giue him a short garment, great eyes, and beard, with a long nose, like to vs.
Their custome of names is very strange. The surname is ancient, vnchangeable and significant, of which there are not a thousand in all China. The name is also significant,Names. Surnames few. and arbitrary, at the fathers pleasure, if a sonne: For daughters haue no names, besides the surname, but are called after their age and order; the sonnes also are so called by others; first, second, or otherwise, with their surname; the parents onely and ancestors calling them by their names, and themselues in their writings. It would bee accounted an iniurie if any other  should call them thereby: or if he should call his father or kinsman by his name. When first a childe betakes himselfe to studie, his Master giues him another name, which hee and his schoole-fellowes may call him by, and no man else. When he puts on his Mans hat, and marries a wife, some chiefe man giues him another name more honorable, by which all men may call him, but his seruants, or such as are subiect to him. This they call the Letter. Lastly, when he is of full ripe age, some graue man giues him his most honorable name, which they call Great, and by this any one may stile him: which yet his parents and elders doe not, but onely by the Letter. If any make profession of Religion in any of their Sects, his ghostly Father or Authour of his profession giues him a new name (which they call) of Religion. When one visits another, if hee doe not write in his letter (of which afterwards) his honorable  name or surname, the Visitee askes him of it, that he may call him thereby without iniurie. And the Iesuites did also take to themselues in China-fashion such honorable names.
They are studious of Antiquities. Pictures artificially drawne with inke,Seales. without other colours they haue in highest price; the characters also and writings of the Ancients, with their Seales annexed. For many will seeke to gull men with counterfeits. All Magistrates haue the Seale of their office deliuered to them by Humvu, which if they lose, they are both depriued and punished, most diligently therefore preserued, carrying it with them to all places, and laying it vnder their heads at night. Men of good sort goe not in the streets on foot, but are carried in a close chaire by foure men, the curtens drawne on all parts but before: to distinguish them from Magistrates, whose chaires are euery way open. The Matrons  are also carried in chaires closed euery way, by the forme easily knowne from those of Men. Coaches and Chariots the law forbids. Dice and Cards are common playes in China; Chesse also somewhat vnlike ours: for the King goes not out of foure places next him,
 and the two Bishops haue their Queenes: two men also goe before the Knights, besides the ordinary pawnes. They haue another play which makes the skilfull therein well esteemed, though he can doe nothing else, with two hundred men, some white, some blacke, on a table of three hundred diuisions. This is vsed by the Magistrates. Women goe not abroad, except seldome to see their neerest kindred, or some of basest condition.
In their offices of vrbanitie and courtesie they goe beyond all others, haue many bookes thereof, and reckon it one of those fiue vertues, which they call Cardinall. I feare to be in the relation, as they in action, tedious: and will but salute their salutations. They vncouer not the head to any, nor stirre the knee or foot, or vse embraces or kissing the hand. Their hands are hid and ioyned in their wide sleeues, except they doe some worke or with  a fanne coole themselues, and in salutations first lift vp both sleeues and hands aloft in a modest manner, and then let them fall againe, standing face to face, and saying, Zin, Zin, which word is a rituall interiection, without any signification. When one visits another, or when friends meet in the streets, they doe thus, bowing also their bodies with their heads almost to the ground: they call this Zo ye: the inferiour placing the superiour, and the visited the visitor, on the right hand (in the Northerne Prouinces on the left) and then turne themselues both to the North. In solemner salutations, on high dayes, or after long absence, after the first bowing they kneele and touch the ground with their forehead: and then rise and doe it againe three or foure times ouer. In visitations, after other officious ceremonies, they offer him Chia to drinke (of which we haue spoken) with other iunkets. Except there bee  great familiarity, he which will salute a friend, must at the doore deliuer to the seruant a letter before for his harbenger, to signifie his name in modest termes and affection towards him, with termes answerable to his estate. He is hereby warned to prepare himselfe for entertainment, clothing himselfe with apparell for that purpose, as must the guest also. If they were vnknowne to each other, they prostrate themselues, and knocke the ground diuers times with their foreheads. If they send a Present, they send withall a Letter, contayning the Inuentorie of the things sent, with termes very complementall; which he must answere with another Letter of thankes, and a Present of like or greater value besides a recompence to the messenger. Their partings from each other are as full of ceremonie. In their feasts, they set each guest to tables, one furnished with flesh and fish, the other with fruits and iunkets.  They send a Paitre or Letter (the day, and sometime fiue or sixe dayes) before, to inuite them; and he which cannot come, with another Letter must excuse himselfe. On the day, with the first light he sends new inuitations, and againe a little before the time, or else his guests will not come. Much curtesie is in the meeting, exceeding much strayning and striuing about the place of sitting, as much solemne ceremonie in eating, as if they were bidden to be witnesses of their Hosts ostentation, to view and a little to taste his meates: but after sixe houres spent in this banquet, they may goe home to fill their bellies. In this officious trifling the Chinois spend a great part of their liues; but especially at the beginning of the new yeere fifteene dayes together, and at their birth-dayes.
When seruants salute their Masters, or the baser people their Superiors, they fall on their knees and thrice touch the ground with their foreheads, iust as they doe to their Idols: and  when the Master speakes to his seruants, they stand at his side, and at euery answere fall on their knees; and so doe the people to the great men. When one speakes to another they neuer vse the second person, nor the first when they speake of themselues, except Masters and Superiours to their seruants or inferiours. Many formes of complementall modestie in termes they haue, but the lowest, to call himselfe by his proper name, as we vse the pronoune I: and if they speake of any, they vse some more honorable name and circumlocution, if of themselues some modester termes. The Iesuites obserue a state and keepe within doores, not easie to be spoken with, because the Chinois contemne such as obserue modestie, and price men by their maiestie and solemne reseruations.  
When they send presents to each other, they may without inciuility take some and refuse others: they also vse to send presents in money. If a man be not within, when one comes with his Letter to visit, they leaue the Letter at the doore, to signifie his purpose: and this is enough also for the visited partie when in reuisiting he findes him absent. For euery one that visits must within three dayes be visited, in which respect the Iesuites were forced to cause their Porter or Seruant to keepe a note of them all, lest they should forget to repay these offices. If one meet another which hath not on his salutatory habite, he may not performe these rites till the other be vested for it; for which cause their seruants attend them with these robes; or else he that was attired must put off, and both salute in ordinary habit.
In drinking, the Inuiter beginnes, holding vp his cup in a dish with both hands, all the  guests turning to him, and pledging him together at once: supping vp their liquor, at foure or fiue times, although it be water, and not at one draught. No bread is brought into their
 feasts, nor Rice. None are compelled to drinke more then they please. The maiestie of feasts is in variety of dishes, none being taken off the table that are once set on, till the feast ended, and then bestowed on the guests seruants.
Their bookes are full of precepts of obseruance to Parents and Superiours, which outwardly is there performed more then in all the world besides. They neuer sit in equall site, or ouer-against their betters, but on the lower side. This the Scholers performe to their Masters, speaking to them with great reuerence, and (if they bee poore) nourishing them whiles they liue with their owne labour. And when one is admitted Scholer to another,Trigaut. the Master sits in the higher end of the Hall (which is ordinarily to the North, all the Temples,  and priuate buildings, if it may be, opening to the South) with his countenance to the doore. The Scholer comes before him, and foure times bowes his body, and as often kneeles downe and toucheth the ground with his forehead: euer after (though higher preferred) sitting at his side in euery meeting: although he hath beene his Scholer but one day.


@. V. Of the mechanicall Arts in China, their Printing, etc.
 WHere Nature is so prouident of Materials,M. Ricci. l. 1. c. 4. Art is easily induced to triall of experiments: of which we will name such as to vs seeme rarest. They generally are not so curious for exquisite workmansh^p, as to make things saleable at easier and cheaper rates: where Nob^litie is wanting, and the Mandarines pay what they please, and sometime force their employments. They build for themselues, not minding continuance to posteritie: nor will they beleeue without mu h astonishment the magnificence and antiquitie of European buildings. Fou^dations they lay not deepe (vsually not at all) within t^e earth: which makes the greatest buildings sho^t liued, and their Citie walls to be often repaired. The roofes of their houses, euen where the walls are bricke, are sustained with pillars or posts of wood, and not on those walls.Printing. Printing is with them of  ancient vse, at least fiue hundred yeeres, some say, more then a thousand and sixe hundred. Their manner differs much from ours, and is rather an expression then impression: they prouide a table of Peare-tree, or other smooth wood, and vpon the same lightly glue the whole sheet or written copie, which being dried is cunningly tak^n off, so as the characters remayne on the same table, which is p esently carued and cut with Iron instruments, that nothing but the draughts or lineaments of the letters are eminent and standing vp. Then with incredible celeritie and facilitie they print off the same, one man sometimes fifteene hundred in one day. And in cutting their tables they ^re so ready and expedite, that one of our Composers seemes to mee as long in setting a sheet of ours, as they in cutting theirs. The reason is, the greatnesse of their characters; for so small as our letters could not easily bee  engrauen in their tables. This commoditie they haue, that they may be layd by for as many impressions as they please, and in the meane time be may print off, for number of copies, as he findes sale: both which are wanting in our manner of printing. This makes their bookes so many and so cheape: and this easinesse made the Iesuites print at their owne houses, what bookes they liked. They haue also another way of printing. An Epitaph or other copie being cut in stone or wood, they lay thereon a leafe of moist paper, and on the same a woollen cloth: and then beat it on with a hammer till the thinne paper insinuate it selfe into the emptie spaces of the mould or forme, and then lightly lay on inke or what other colouring they please, so that the Epitaph or Copie remaynes in an elegant white: prouided that this be vsed where there is vse of greater characters.
 That which some hold of sleeping and burning the earth, of which their Porcelane is made an hundred yeeres in the earth, remouing it euery eight dayes, others gainsay, and our Iesuite is silent. Linschoten affirmeth, that the earth is naturally hard, beaten small, steeped,Scal Ex. 92. Mons. de Monfart Linsc. l. 1. c. 23. often stirred, and of the finest swimming in the top the finest made. Painting is much vsed but not in such perfection as with vs: which is true also of grauing and caruing. To adorne their pictures with oyle, or shadowes and landskips they know not, and in statues they haue no other rule of symmetrie but the eye. Their bells haue woodden clappers, and seeme not able to indure Iron, and therefore not comparable in sound to ours. Musicall Instruments they haue many and manifold: but they want Organs (except some blown with the mouth) and all such a^ goes with keyes, their strings are wouen of raw-silke, and know not our way  of making them. Nor doe they know the discord-concord in musicall harmonie of diuers voyces; so that their musike to vs is harsh, in their owne opinion glorious. For measuring houres they vse houre-glasses of water and other deuices, but in this and dyalling very rude.
 They are much addicted to Comedies and therein excell vs: many young men trauelling through the Kingdome in this profession and practice, or abiding in chiefe places of resort: But there (as here) the dregs of mankind. They are hired vnto feasts, whither they come prouided for what play shall be demanded: offering to that end their booke of Comedies to the feast-Master, to chuse which hee liketh: which the guests behold in their feastingtime with such pleasure, that they continue sometimes ten houres in feeding their eyes, and tastes, with one seruice after another in both kindes. Their Comedies are ancient, few of later writing, which the Actors pronounce in a singing accent. They haue also dancers on the rope, tumblers, and other feat-workers. Mathan an Eunuch feasted the Iesuites, where all these kindes were employed, being of his owne familie. One of them cast three kniues  vp into the aire, still catching them by the hafts. Another lying on his backe, tossed with his feet lifted vp, an earthen vessell euery way, so as hardly might be done with the hands: the like tennisse-play with his feet he vsed with a bell, and a great table. They had also dumbe shewes acted: and a boy dancing very artificially: on a sudden start vp a boy of earth keeping the same measures, and much admirable sport betwixt them.
Seales are in much vse, not onely for their Letters, but for other their writings, Poems, Pictures, and other things: they contayne onely their name, surname, degree and dignitie. They vse not one, but diuers, not in waxe, but coloured red; the Grandes hauing at table a boxe full of Seales, which contayne their diuers names engrauen (for euery Chinois is called by many names) and are of diuers matter, Wood, Marble, Iuorie, Brasse, Crystall, Corall,  and other stones more precious. The makers of them are many and those learned, the characters differing from the vulgar, and sauoring antiquitie. The arte of Inke-making also is not here illiberall, which they make vp in balls,I haue bad of it in a square forme, to be carried in a mans pocket, as it were a marking stone. of the smoake of oyle, and grinde with water on a stone, and then take it vp with pensils made of Hares haire, and write therewith, not with pennes, their paper being like thinne transparent parchment.
They all of both sexes vse fannes, without which none of them come abroad, not so much for necessity (especially in colder places and seasons) as for a kind of grace: Euen as gloues with vs are most for ornament, and the most vsuall presents, so are fannes in China; of diuers matter and forme, Reed, Wood, Iuorie, with Paper, Silke, or a kind of odoriferous Straw; round, square, ouall, with sentences written therein. In these things these differ  from vs, in other things are very like, in the vse of tables, stooles, beds, which other people neere and farre obserue not, but sit, feede, and sleepe on carpets spred on the ground.
Things are there exceeding cheape:Pantogia, and Mendoza, c. 4. a hundred pound of Sugar may be bought for nine or ten six-pences; and other things proportionable: so that though there are none rich, as wee interpret the word in Europe, for such and such reuenues: yet this cheapnesse doth recompence that other defect. They haue Artificers of all trades: and in idlenesse none may liue. The impotent are well prouided for in Hospitals. They haue no Gentlemen, but euery man is a Plebeian vntill his merits raise him. Preferment is atchieued onely by learning. This maketh them generally studious.  


@. VI. Of their language, writing, Astrologie, Philosophie, and Phisike.
THe beginning of this discourse must bee with their words, letters, and writing: wherein this is first to be admitted, that they haue not one booke written in the vulgar idiome or common language.Quonhoa signifie^h of the Court, by this meanes the M^gistrates need not in euery new Prouince learne a new language. But they haue one language called Quonhoa, for their Courts, and writings, which is common through all China, which alone the Iesuites learned, and which the learned and strangers commonly vse; women also and  children attayning by this common vse to the vnderstanding thereof. As for the differing languages of each Prouince, it is not so necessary nor commendable, being but of vulgar both vse and reckoning. But in euery Tongue and Dialect the words are euery one Monosyllables, howsoeuer sometimes two or three vowels fall into one diphthong. As for them, they mention not vowels or consonants, or letters, but in writing, the letter, syllable, and word is all one, being nothing else but hieroglyphicall characters, of which there are no fewer then words, or things; which yet they so compound and connexe, that they haue not aboue 70. or 80000. If we pronounce any of their words in two syllables, it is when two of their characters are applyed to signifie one thing. Some 10000. of these characters are necessary for vsuall writing: for to know them all, is that which few either can, or need. Their  sound also is in great part the same, and yet both figure and signification different: so that there is no so equiuocall a language; neither can a Hearer write out an Oration or Speech
 from the Speakers mouth, nor a booke be vnderstood of them which heare it read, but they must look, and discerne with their eyes that equiuocation which their eares cannot. And in speaking they are often hereby forced sometime to repeat that which hath before been elegantly deliuered, sometimes to write it, or (if such meanes be wanting) with water on the Table, or Characters formed with the finger in the ayre, to expresse their mindes to the conceit of others: and this is most common amongst the most learned which speake in print, and affect inke-horne Rhetorike. They haue fine accents, by which they also distinguish this equiuocation, that one and the same word thus by accents diuersified, shall signifie fiue seuerall things nothing alike. This makes the language hard to be learned of strangers; which  yet the Iesuites haue learned to write and reade: and I would all the Equiuocators amongst them (that teach to illude oathes, and delude the World by their two-fold, two-forked, serpentine Equiuocation in Mental reseruations, and Verbal double-significations) were all there,Equiuocation, Mentall and Verball. learning the China language to conuert Heathens, rather then here practising the Romish equiuocating Dialect to peruert Christians to worse then Heathenisme. Peruerse Masters, louers of strange language, in Prayers to GOD, in Oathes and Assertions to Man; in the one, Parrats without reason; in the other Deuils, without Religion: this being the strongest bond which Religion hath, binding at once to GOD and Man, and yet these Religious Mountebanks, by iuggling querks dissoluing these bonds, and at once deluding both GOD and Man. Foolish Romans! that sent backe the Legates to Hannibal,Cic. Offic. l. 3. that by equiuocation had before  fulfilled their Oath of returning! foolish Regulus! that returnedst to thy Tormentors, chusing thy selfe rather then thy Oath to be tortured! and most most foolish Martyrs, that so sleightly for want of this sleigh^, ran vpon Fire, Swords, Lyons! And might not we begin a contention with that assertion, That an Oath for confirmation is to men an end of contention,Hel. 6.16. which in this equiuocating Hydra is rather multiplied? That nei^her Rome Ethnike, nor primitiue Christian Rome, could (at least by imitation of diabolicall ambiguous Oracles) deuise in those dayes so transcendent a suttlety, but Moderne Rome by Iesuiticall midwiferie, must be the Mother of so super-fine a babe! But what doth this Brat in our way? I will rather follow the Iesuits in China then in Rome (except when Rome followes them thither too) and herein with thankfulnesse accept their report. The reason of this equiuocall sound of words  is ascribed to the Chinois account of eloquence, in writing rather then speaking, and therefore to furnish that, neglecting this: insomuch as familiar messages are sent by writing, and not by word of mouth. Musicall skill was a good helpe to the Iesuites in learning the language, by reason of their varietie of accents. And although this multitude of Characters be to the Memory burthensome, yet it helpes it as much another way in sauing the labour of learning diuers languages, whiles euery Prouince of China speaking diuersly, agree in writing; the Iaponians, also Corayans, Cauchin-Chinois, Leuhiees, all conceiuing the same Characters, although the Iaponians haue an Alphabet of letters to write after our manner, which the Chinois haue not.China writing. They write their lines from the top of the Page to the bottome downewards, which they multiply from the right hand to the left: whereas our custome is  quite contrary, from the left hand, side-wayes. We haue three consonants B.D.R. which the Chinois neither vse, nor can by any Character expresse: and in our words which haue them they borrow some sound neerest the same. Likewise, they neuer haue two consonants without a vowell betweene: and all their words end in vowells, except M. or N. of consonants onely. This and the diuers pronuntiation of their Characters in diuers places, made the Latin forme of Baptisme hard to be expressed by the Iesuites.
Now for the subiect of their studies, their chiefe is Morall Philosoph^e: in Naturall they are rude: and their Ethikes are confusedly deliuered, not dig^sted into formall method (for of Logicke they are ignorant) but in confused sentences and discourses. The greatest of the Chinian Philosophers was Confutius, who was borne fiue hundred and fiftie one yeeres before  the Incarnation of our Lord, and liued aboue seuentie yeres in great shew of learning and holinesse. And few of our Ethnike Philosophers haue equalled him, many he hath exceeded. The Chinois haue him in such reputation, that they thinke there neuer liued man more holy, and all his sayings are of authoritie beyond gaine-saying amongst the learned. And the Kings themselues haue euer since had him in veneration, not as a god, but as a most excellent man and Author of their learning; honouring his posteritie, the chiefe of which enioyeth by inheritance ample titles, immunities and reuenues.
They are also indifferently skilled in Astrologie and diuers Mathematicall Sciences:Astrologie. Vid Ep. Thaisonis Sinae ad Ric. See th next Chap @. 4. in Geometry and Arithmetike they haue beene more expert. The Constellations they doe not distinguish as we do, and number foure hundred Stars more then our Astrologers, reckoning  some smaller, which doe not alway appeare. They tell the Quantities, and foretell Eclipses, but not exactly: and referre all their Astrologie to that which is called Iudiciall, esteeming a fatall dependance of all things from the Stars: and haue borrowed in these Arts many
 things from the Saracens. The Author of this Royall Family forbad the studie of Iudiciall Astrologie to all but one Family, in which it continueth by inheritance. But he which now reigneth maintaines many at great cost, both Eunuchs in his Palace, and Magistrates without, which haue two Courts in Paquin, one obseruing China Kalenders, the other the Saracenicall, and compare both together. Both of them haue an open place on the top of a small Hill to contemplate the Starres, in which they haue Mathematicall Instruments, of exceeding greatnesse, of molten brasse, which seeme to bee ancient. On this Hill alwayes one of their Colledge doth watch by night to obserue,Colledges of Astrologie in Paquin and Nanquin, and not elsewhere. if any new Comet, or other raritie appeare in the Heauens: which if it happen, the next day they by libell admonish the King thereof, together with their opinion of good or euill ensuing. This place of contemplation  at Nanquin, is within the Citie, and in massinesse of Instruments excells that at PequinRicci. calls it alway not Paquin, but Pequin. or Paquin. The Pequin-Astrologers haue priuiledge of foretelling the Eclipses of Sunne or Moone; and the Magistrates and Priests are commanded to meet in a certaine place in their Robes and Vestments, to helpe the labouring Planet: which they thinke they doe with musicall sound of Cymballs, often bowing their knees, all the time of the Eclipse; fearing (as I haue heard) lest some, I know not what Serpent should then deuoure the same.
In Naturall PhilosophieNaturall Philosophy. they were too Naturall, and haue very little Art. They knew not the cause of the Moones Eclipse, by the interposition of the earth, but thought that being opposite to the Sunne, it lost the light by some amazement: others thought that the Sunne  had a hole in the midst, against which when the Moone came, shee lost her light. That the Sunne was greater then the earth seemed to them a strange paradoxe, much more that this might be spoken of the Starres: the like was it that the Earth was round (for they thought it square, and the middle and best part thereof to be their Kingdome) or that there could be Antipodes without falling, or that heauy things were attracted by the Center, or that there were Orbes; and for the ayre they thought it a vacuum or emptinesse, not reckoning it amongst the Elements, of which yet they numbred fiue, Metall, Wood, Fire, Water, Earth. Their Arithmetike was with beades on wyre-strings fastned to a linnen cloth. In these things Ricius declaring their ignorance and the Europaean Science,Flowers of China-learning. wan great admiration, they (which before thought all besides themselues Barbarians) saying, that they were to vs  as the rude Tartars to them, and that they left where we began, namely at Rhetorike and Grammar, which with Ethikes and Politikes are the chiefe. Some of the Idolatrous sects had more monstrous and ridiculous fancies, that the Sunne hid himselfe euery night in a certaine Hill called Siunni, which they said was fixed in the Sea 24000. miles vnder the water: and for Eclipses, they held that a certaine god named Holochan eclipsed the Sunne, couering it with his right hand; and so the Moone, with his left. Their Astrologers rather obserued their old rules, little knowing or seeking the Naturall causes. The Instruments which they had in their two Colledges at Nanquin and Paquin, were alike, very admirable, seeming to be made in the reigne of the Tartars. Foure of them were very great; One a Globe marked with paralells and meridians, as great as three men could fathom, set vpon a great Cube of brasse  likewise: the second was a Spheare, fiue foot in the Diameter, with Chaines in stead of Circles, diuided into 365. degrees, and a few minutes: the third was a Gnomon, ten foot high on a huge Marble: the fourth, and greatest consisteth of three or foure Astrolabes, each fiue foot in the Diameter, with other appurtenances very admirable.
Their Rules of PhysickePhysicke. differ much from ours: yet agree with vs in feeling the pulse, and are not vnhappy in their cures. They vse simple medicines, roots, hearbs, and the like, their whole Art in manner the same with our Herbarists. They haue thereof no publike Schoole, but as each priuately learneth of some Teacher. In both the Royall Cities, Degrees are granted to the Professors after Examination; but both this and that of little worth: none being thereby of greater authoritie, or without it hindered to practise. And neither in Physicke nor Astrologie doth any take great paines, which hath any hope of proficience in their  Ethikes, those being the refuges of Pouertie, this the high-way to Honor. Their Geography was such, that they called their Countrie Thien-hia, that is, All vnder heauen, thinking the World to haue little else of any worth.


@. VII. Of their Ethikes, Politikes, and Degrees in Learning.
CONFVTIVS, their Philosophicall Prince, compyled foure Volumes of the Ancient Philosophers, adding a fifth of his owne: these he called the Fiue Doctrines.  They containe Morall and Politicall Precepts of good Life and Gouernment, with the Examples, Rites, Sacrifices, and Poems of the Ancients. Besides these fiue
 Volumes out of Confutius, and some of his disciples, are gathered into one Tome, diuers Rules, Sentences, Similes, touching the wel ordering of a mans selfe, family, or the kingdome; which is called the Foure-bookes, and into so many parts diuided. These nine are their ancientest, and fountaines of the rest of their books, containing most part of their Hieroglyphicall Characters; authorized by royal Priuiledges and ancient Customes to be the Principles and Foundations of all Chinian Learning: wherin it is not enough to vnderstand the Text, but suddenly to write of euery sentence; to which purpose, thatFoure books aforesaid. Schoole-Masters. Graduats, and Commencements. Tetrabiblion must be cunned by heart.
They haue no publike Schoole, or Vniuersity, where Readers vndertake to expound them: but euery one is to prouide him a Master, at his owne choice and charge; of which are great  numbers: because in that multitude of Characters, one cannot teach many, and each man desires to haue his children taught at home. They haue three Degrees, which are conferred vpon such, as by examination are found worthy. This examination is onely in writing. The first Degree, called Sieucai,1. Sieucai. is bestowed in euery Citie by the Tihio (a learned man appointed thereunto by the King) in that place which is named the Schoole; and somewhat resembleth our Batchellors. This Tihio visiteth euery Citie in the Prouince, for this purpose: whither when he is come, all the Students in the Citie and Confines, that aspire to that Degree, resort, and submit themselues to a three-fold Triall. First, he is examined of certaine Masters, which are set ouer the Bachellors, till they attaine a higher Degree: in which, all are admitted to triall that will, sometimes foure or fiue thousand in one Citie. These Masters are  maintained by the King to this Office. These passe them ouer to a second proofe, by the Foure Magistrates of the Citie; which, of so great a number, chuse some two hundred of the best Writers, whom they commit to the third Examination by the Tihio, who intituleth twentie or thirtie of the chiefe of them, and numbreth them with the Bachellor of former yeeres. These are priuiledged to weare a Gowne, Cap, and Bootes, in token of their Degree: and in publike Assemblies, haue higher Places, besides larger Complements and Immunities, and are subiect to their Tihio, and those Foure Masters; other Magistrates little meddling with their cases. This Tihio doth also examine those former Bachellors, to see how they haue profited or decayed; which, according to their writing, are diuided into fiue rankes: the first, are licenced vnto some publike Offices, of lesse reckoning: the second, haue a reward,  but not so great: the third, haue neither reward, nor punishment: the fourth, are publikely scourged: the last, degraded, and ranked with the Communaltie.
Their second Degree is called Kiugin,2. Kiugin. somewhat like the Licentiates in some Europaean Vniuersities. This is conferred but once in three yeeres, in the chiefe Citie of the Prouince, in the eight moneth, and with greater solemnitie, to fewer, or more, according to the dignitie and largenesse of the Prouince. In Pequin, in Nanquin, 150. doe proceed Licentiats; in Cequian, Quiansi, and Fuquiam, 95. in the rest, fewer. Vnto this Triall, onely Bachellours, and but the choice of them, are admitted, not aboue thirtie or fortie of one Citie; which yet, sometimes, in one Prouince, amount to 4000. Competitors. That third yeere therefore, which happened with them 1609, 1612, 1615, etc. a few dayes before the eight Moone, which often falls out in September, the Magistrates of Pequin present vnto the  King the Names of 100. the chiefe Philosophers in China, out of which, hee chuseth thirtie (two for euery Prouince) to bee sent Examiners. One of these two, must bee of the Kings Colledge, called Han lin yuem. As soone as euer they are named by the King, they must post to their designed Prouince, many Spies attending, that they speake not with any one man of that Prouince, before the Kiugin are entituled. Other principal Philosophers also of that Prouince are chosen to assist these Examiners in the first Triall. In euery Prouinciall Citie is a huge Palace erected for this end, enclosed with high walls, in which are many roomes, wherein, without noyse, they may discusse those writings: and in the midst of the Palace aboue 4000. Cels, or little Studies, which can hold nothing but a small table, a stoole,  and one man, out of which, one is not permitted to see or speake with another. When these Posers are come to the Citie, they, and their Assistants of that Prouince, are shut vp in their seuerall Stations, before they may speake with each other, or any one else, and so continue all the time of this Act or Commencement, many Souldiers and Magistrates attending to prohibite all commerce and conference, on all hands, with any within or without the Palace.
In this examination, three daies, the ninth, the twelfth, and the fifteenth of the Moone are spent in euery Prouinciall Citie, from the earliest light, til the euening darkenesse, the doores carefully shut; some refection being the day before allowed them, at publike charge. When the Bachellers come into the Palace, they are narrowly searched, whether they bring any Booke or Writing with them; and are allowed only their Pensill, Paper, Inke, and writing  Plate or Stone. If any fraud bee found, they are both excluded and punished. Then the doores being shut and sealed, the two Examiners propound out of their Tetrabiblion, three sentences, on which euery one is to write so many Theames: also, out of those Fiue Doctrines*
 foure sentences, the arguments of so many other Theames or Orations. These seuen Writings must bee adorned both with eloquent phrase, and elegant sentences, according to the Chinian Rhetorike; not any one Writing exceeding fiue hundred Characters or Words.
The next day of triall they haue three questions of state propounded out of the old Chronicles, or of things which may after happen, to which they returne answer in three Writings. Likewise, the third day three cases propounded of such things as may be demanded in executing publike functions, which they answere in so many writings. Thus euery one hauing that dayes arguments written out, is by some thereunto appointed, brought vnto his designed Cell,In these studies they so spend their ambitious spirits, that many die thereof. Pantog. where he writeth in a Booke his Meditations, subscribing his owne, his fathers, grandfathers, and great grandfathers Names; then closing the booke, that none but they  which are deputed, may open it, to whom they offer it. These bookes, before they come to the Examiners, are new copied and transcribed by others in red inke, whereas the former were in blacke: and these transcripts, without the Authors names, deliuered to these Prouinciall Examiners, which are chosen to assist the two Principall, which reiect the worst, and offer twice so many of the best as are to proceed at that time, vnto the Kings Examiners. These make a new examination, chusing out so many as are to bee admitted Graduates, and obserue which are best, second, and third, composing them in their due order. This being done, all the Examiners together compare the Copies with the O^iginalls (knowne by certaine numbers indorsed) and taking out the Authors names, expose them, written on large  Tables, in Cubitall letters, about the end of the eight Moone, with great concourse of Magistrates, and applause of their friends. This degree enioyeth farre greater priuiledges and immunities, with a peculiar habit: and if they seeke not to proceed further, they are capable of many publike Offices. After this, the Kings Examiners publish a booke, which containeth the names of the Licentiates, and the chiefe writings on euery Theame; especially his, who obtained the first name amongst all the Competitors, who is called Quiayven.
The third degree answers to our Doctor: they call it Cin-su.3. Cin-su. This is conferred euery third yeere also, but only at Pequin, the yeere next after the former Proceeding. Euery Kiugin, or Licentiat, out of all Prouinces may bee admitted to the Examination, but onely three hundred are Speeders of fiue thousand Competitors. The Examiners are principall Magistrates:  the time, the second Moone; on the same dayes, and in the same manner, as the former. These being created and pronounced Doctors in that place where the Licentiates are made, all in the Kings Palace, before the chiefe Magistrates of the Court (the King himselfe was wont to be present) doe vndergoe a new Triall, and make a writing on a Theame propounded; according to which, the order of Offices, whereof they are made capable, is declared, being of three Rankes or Formes. He which had the first place in the examination of Doctors, is here sure to haue the third: but he which here obtaines the first or second place, is dignified with an honorable title (like to that of a Duke or a Marquesse with vs, if it were hereditary) all his life, and obtaineth the highest places in the gouernment. Anno 1604. three hundred and eight Doctors were made; and then another Triall was made for the Kings Collegiats of Hanlinyen: of that number were named twentie foure, chosen out of those three hundred and  eight, as in the former Trialls. These are chosen to the chiefe Magistracies in the Kingdome^ but so, as after many other trialls, onely twelue or fifteene of those twentie foure be chosen.
These Doctors enioy their proper Vest, Cap, Bootes, and other ensignes of Magistrates, and are admitted vnto the best functions, so as they alway exceed the Licentiates, and are suddenly become the Grandes of the Kingdome. Those Licentiates which are reiected from their Doctorship, if they haue no further hope, are admitted, and betake themselues to some places of gouernment. But if they intend to make and abide a new triall, the studie hard at home other three yeeres: some of them ten times aduenturing the same, without desired successe, wearing and wearying out their liues in priuate. There is a booke also published of the Doctors Commencement or Act, as of the former: and another yeerely, containing all  the Doctors names in the Kingdome, with their Countrey, Parents, Offices, and places of Residence. They also which are fellow Commencers, and proceed either Licentiates or Doctors the same yeere together, euer after affect each other as brethren, and their Examiners as Parents or Masters, although they sometimes attaine higher preferments then these. In some Cities they haue Exercises of Learning, euery learned man of chiefe note hauing his day appointed whereon to lecture or discourse of some Morall Vertues. And they haue also an especiall Officer, called Tauli, which on certaine dayes is to call an Assembly (he is a great Magistrate) and to exhort the people to vertue, as it were by preaching.
Militarie degrees.Militarie Honors are conferred in the same yeeres, places, titles, vnto the Professors therof:  the time, is the Moone following: the solemnitie much lesse, according to the Chinian account of Souldierie. Their first triall is on Horse-backe, and then in full carriere they shoot nine Arrowes: in the second, three at the same marke, on foot. And they which
 with foure arrowes mounted, and with two standing, haue hit the marke, are admitted to the third triall: in which, they are enioyned to write an Oration, or Theame, of some question propunded. And the Iudges declare in each Prouince some fiftie of these Licentiates: and when Doctors are made at Pequin, an hundreth of the best militarie Licentiates in all the Kingdome, after a threefold examination are there declared Doctors. The Doctors of this Societie, sooner then Licentiates, but not without bribes, are admitted to some militarie place of commaund. And both Philosophicall and Militarie, being admitted Doctors, write ouer their doores, in Cubitall letters, their Degree and Title. The Presidents and Iudges, in all Examinations, whether of Militarie, Mathematicall, Physicke, or Ethicke Sciences, are  their Philosophers, without assistance of any of other professors: so much doe they account of this Confutian Philosophie, as if it had made them able to iudge of all things.


@. VIII. Of the King, his Court, Issue, Reuenue, and Maiestie.
CHina is a Monarchie, not knowing the names of Aristocratie, or Democratie, or any other Polycratie: not so much as Dukes, or great Nobles, enioying either Title  there, or Dominion, (whereof in ancient times were many) these 1800. yeeres past. Sometimes it hath beene subiect to ciuile broyles, and sometimes diuided into many petty kingdomes: but was neuer quite subiected to forraine Soueraightie, till the Tartarian Conquest vnder one Tiemor (so the Chinois call that great Chan) which so continued till the yeere 1368. When one of their Chieftaynes (whom they called of the euent Hum-vu, that is, a floud of weapons) expelled the Tartars, compelled the Chinois to his subiection. The Kingdome passeth by inheritance. Some ancient Kings are yet commended for commending the Kingdome to the vertuous succession of some rarer men then their kindred yeelded: and sometimes the people rebelling haue dispossessed one and substituted another. In this kingdome are no ancient Lawes: But the first of any Family which obtayneth  the Soueraigntie, makes new Lawes at his pleasure, which his Successors in that family doe not easily alter. That Hum-vu the Conqueror is the founder of their present Lawes, either enacting new, or confirming the old, as he saw good. From ignorance of Geographie they esteemed their King Lord of the World, and therefore call him Thiencu, the sonne of Heauen: for they esteeme Heauen the greatest God. Yet commonly the people call him H^amsi, that is, the greatest Monarch. Hum-vu was a great both Warrior and Polititian. He ordayned that none of the Kings children should deale in publike functions or affayres of state: yet hee made them seeming amends, with assignation of most ample reuenues, and the title of Guam, a Prince or petty King. Their reuenue is paid out of the Exchequer, to preuent Clients and dependance of Tenants. Much complement of reuerence is done them by  the Magistrates, but no subiection. Their Children and Nephewes are honored also, but their titles and reuenues still decreasing as they descend further from the Royall stemme: till at last no more bee allowed them, then may supply their necessitie without trade or worke. Like care is had of the Royall daughters marriage and maintenance.
The Commanders which assisted him in the Conquest, hee vouchsafed honourable titles, militarie prefectures, with other immunities and reuenues, still descending to their posteritie, who are subiect neuerthelesse to the Citie Magistrates. One strange priuiledge of theirs is this. The exploits of the head of their family vnder Hum-vu, are grauen in an yron plate. This continueth with the first borne of that family, who thereby may challenge pardon for any man in any crime, three sundrie times, if hee offer the same to the King. Only treason is  vnpardonable, which depriueth the Traytor and all his posteritie for euer of all dignitie. Like honors doe the Kings sonnes or fathers in law enioy, and some others who haue well deserued of the State.
Only the Doctors and Licentiates are admitted to offices of gouernment, not preferred by fauour of others, or the King himselfe, but by the Law and his merits. All Magistrates are called Quonfu, that is, Presidents: and as an honourable titleSome falsly Loytia or Lonte^ Lau ye, or Lau sie, a Lord or Father. The Portugalls stile them Mandarines. And although these Magistrates can finish nothing, till by Petition they obtayne the Kings confirmation: yet he enacteth nothing which they doe not first sollicite. And if any priuate man preferre a Petition to the King (which seldome happens, because there is an Officer appointed to examine them before the  King sees them) yet the King referres them to that Tribunall whereto they belong. This I haue diligently searched and found for certaine, that the King himselfe may not giue a summe of money, or office to any man, vnlesse hee bee first petitioned by some of the Magistrates,
 except in his owne houshold: for those gifts are not taken out of the publike treasure, but the priuie purse. His Customes and Tributes, which exceede without controuersie a hundred and fiftie millions yeerely (euery house not priuiledged, paying tribute) are not brought into the Treasurie of the Palace;The Kings reuenues. nor may the King spend them after his pleasure: but all the money and prouision is brought into the publike Treasuries and Store-houses, which are through the Kingdome. Out of these a certaine allowance is appointed by Law, and nothing more or lesse, for the Kings expences, his Wiues, Children, Eunuchs, and Family. Thence the Magistrates and Souldiers stipends, and other officers through the Kingdom are discharged. Thence also the publike Edifices of the Palaces of the King and his kinsemen, Cities, Walls, Forts, and all prouisions of Warre are mentioned. And some yeeres  it happens, that this huge reuenue will not serue for necessary expences, but they are forced to new impositions. The ordinary Census or poll-money is three Mazes or halfe Duckets; besides the profits of the earth and handicrafts. The rest are Customes, which in Canton, one of the least Prouinces,Census. Tributum. Vect. gal. are neere eight millions.
Vanlie, that is now King, hath raigned fortie yeeres, a man of great wisedome, but vicious and tyrannicall.Trigaut. King Vanlie. Hee vseth his sonne and apparant Heire very hardly, and hath indeuoured to make a second sonne, which he had by a more beloued wife, his successor: but was gaine-said by all the Magistrates in the Kingdome, those of the Court resigning their robes and hanging them on the Palace walls, so that hee was forced to pro^laime the eldest. Whose mother lately lying on her death-bed, the Prince could hardly obtaine his fathers licence to  visit her, and then attended with two Eunuchs: the mother comforted her sonne, saying, It neuer yet happened that the heire of the kingdome dyed of hunger: (For the King scarse allowes him necessaries, none else daring for feare.) The King forbad mourning and publike pompe vnto her funeralls. The King respects beautie only in choice of his wiues (as doe all of the Royall bloud) nor doe the great men care to preferre their daughters to the Royall bed. For it is little they can doe, and much they must suffer, euer inclosed in the Palace, neuer admitted the sight of their friends, who also are not thereby aduanced to further preferments. The King hath Officers which make choice of women for him. One wife is chiefe and is as it were legitimate: the King and Heire apparant, marry other nine a little inferior: and after them sixe and thirtie others; all which enioy the title of wiues: to which  are added many more Concubines, not entituled Wiues or Queenes. Those which bring the King sonnes, proue most gracious, especially the mother of the eldest sonne: howsoeuer it fared otherwise in this before mentioned. This King was not the sonne of the first wife, nor is his Heire.
The Chinois are a deceitfull and trecherous people, and therefore the Kings in this age come not abroad in publike: and when in times past they did it, they obserued a thousand cautels for safetie, the Palace and the streets being all in armes for his guard nor was he scene when thus hee was seene, nor the seat knowne in which he was carryed, many other being then carryed to preuent intelligence. And when hee came into the Tribunall, hee appeared from a high window, couering his face with an Iuory table in his hand, and hauing another table on his head a cubit long, halfe so broad, so behanged with stones that they hid his  face. The Kings colour is yellow, his garment being embroidered with golden Dragons. These also are painted or carued in all the Palace,Ricius. Plate, and houshold furniture; the tiles also being yellow, and set forth with Dragons. This hath caused some to thinke them to be of gold or brasse, whereas they are of earth (as I haue often felt) and yellow, greater then ours, and fastned on the roofe with nailes, the heads whereof are guilded. If any priuate man should vse the yellow colour, or Dragons in priuate vse, except of the Kings bloud, it were high treason in him. These of Royall posteritie (being now aboue 60000. all maintained at publike charge, and daily encreasing) are a great burthen to the common-wealth: being idle, and as occasion is offered, licentious, on whom the King hath continuall spies. None of  them without the Kings leaue may goe out of the Citie appointed him, vnder grieuous punishments: nor may any of them reside in the Royall Cities Pequin or Nanquin. The Kings Palace hath foure opposite gates, by which whosoeuer passeth, they alight off their horses or seates in which they are carryed, and passe by on foot, which is also obserued at Nanquin. The South side hath three gates both within and without: by the middle of which the King passeth in or out, and is neuer else open; others at the right or left hand. No man speakes to the King but the Eunuchs, and the rest of his Family: others of all sorts speake to him only by Petition, and those so full of complement, that euery learned man cannot make them; besides, peculiar Magistrates are as it were Masters of Requests to examine all Petitions to bee exhibited. At the beginning of euery yeere (which is at the new Moone which next  goeth before or followes the Nones of February, the beginning of their Spring) a Legate is sent out of euery Prouince to the King, which is done with more formall solemnity euery
 third yeere. And in euery Citie, euery new-Moone-day, all the Magistrates assemble to a place in the Citie, where is the Kings Throne, and his Armes (gilded Dragons) and doe worship on their knees before the same, praying ten thousand yeares of life to the King. The same is done yearely on the Kings Birth-day; on which day, the Magistrates of Pequin, and other Legats out of the Prouinces, and all his kindred, come to the Court with gratulations and presents. All others that haue obtained preferments, by the Kings nomination, are to goe before day, and with appointed Rites to doe veneration to the Kings Throne, hauing on a Vest of purple, siluer and gilt head-tyres, for that purpose. The kingdomes adiacent are willingly refused of this King, whose predecessors sometime possessed, after freed them, as  bringing more burthen then profit: which of late appeared in Corea, which the Iaponites inuaded, the Chinois defended, as a butting on the frontiers: but when the enemy left inuading, the defender soone after voluntarily relinquished these new subiects. Yet these, Couchin-China, Sian, and other adioyning, pay a tribute rather voluntarie, for hope of protection or gayne, then required, exacted, or by the Chinois regarded. Fiue Prouinces, Chiansi, Cechian, Nanchin, Vquam, and Sciantum, pay their tributes in Rice and Wheat, which are carried in the Kings Vessels and Ships thereto appointed, which are before related to bee more then ten thousand, belonging to these fiue Prouinces, besides those belonging to Magistrates and Merchants: insomuch, that Merchants that dwell Southwards from it, are forbidden to enter those streames, lest the multitude of vessels should cloy vp the passage, or endammage  the King: and yet they are so many, that sometimes they are forced to stay many daies, especially in drier seasons, notwithstanding floud-gates made against Bridges, wherewith they stay, and heighten the waters; which being full, are opened, and sometimes in the Cataract, Vessels drowned as they goe out or in; the King being at a million of gold yeerely charge to make one Streame, called the yellow Streame of the muddle colour, nauigable and safe for his ships, which are drawne against the Streame by thousands of men. Neither dare they aduenture passage by Sea, for feare both of Pyrates, and of the Sea it selfe, which would bee farre more speedle, and lesse costly. The other tenne Prouinces pay their Tributes in Siluer. His Courtiers are Eunuchs; whom their poorer parents haue gelded in their youth, in hope of this Court-preferment: where, after they are admitted by that Manderine,  appointed to this Office, they are trained vp vnder elder Eunuchs, to bee made seruiceable. Of this drosse of mankind, are in the Court ten thousand; Pantogia supposeth sixteene thousand. This King is esteemed more tyrannicall then his predecessors: ne^ther doth hee euer come abroad, as they were wont once in the yeare, to sacrifice in the Temple sacred to Heauen and Earth. His Palace is farre more spacious, but not equall in workemanship to those in Europe. It is compassed with a triple wall, the first wherof might enuiron a large Towne. Herein, besides the many lodgings of the Eunuchs, are Hills, Groues, Streames, and other things of pleasure. The IesuitePantogi^. our Author saith, That he passed eight huge Palaces, before became to the lodgings of those Eunuchs, which were appointed to learne how to order their Clockes or Watches, wherewith they had presented the King: and there were as many  beyond. And ascending vp a Tower, hee saw Trees, Gardens, Houses, exceeding all that euer he had seene in Europe, who yet had beene in many the most sumptuous buildings therein. Within the third wall is the King, with his women, children, and such seruants as are thither admitted. When the heire apparant is proclaymed, all his other sonnes are sent away soone after, and confined to certaine Cities, where they nothing participate in affaires of State: otherwise, are honoured as the Kings kindred, liuing in pleasure in their Palace prisons, vnto the third and fourth generation. Neither is any meanes of greatnesse left to any: the Royall kindred not dealing with affaires of Gouernment, the Gouernours neither inheriting their Offices, nor leauing either place or name of Gentrie to their Families. And those which haue command of the Souldiers, pay not their wages; nor haue their Treasurers command  of their persons: and their imployments are (out of their natiue) in some remoter Prouince. Vpon occasion of the warres against the Iaponites in Corea (which much terrified this vnwarlike Nation) the Royall Treasure being exhaust, tyrannicall meanes were vsed to supply them. There is report of many Gold and Siluer Mynes in China, which the ancient Kings, vpon some policies, shut vp, and this now commanded to bee opened. Hee exacted also an imposition of two in the hundreth on all goods that were sold in the Kingdome: which had beene tolerable, if the Magistrates had beene employed: but hee vsed his Eunuchs; a proud, shamelesse, slauish, and imperious Nation; which, in stead of searching for Mynes, vsed their Commission in wealthy Cities, where euery rich mans house was a Myne; and except they would haue digged it vp, must bee redeemed. Some  Cities and Prouinces compounded at certaine summes, which was payd to the King, as extracted out of his Mynes. Some zealous and couragious Magistrates made complaint by Libels to the King, but themselues therefore punished. One Fumocean, of the Prouince
 of Vquam, was cruelly beaten, and cast in close prison: whom his Prouince so honored euen then, that they published his worthie acts in bookes: they made his picture to bee sold through all the Prouince, that all men might priuately honour him as a Saint; and erected vnto him some publike Temples, with tapers and odours continually burning. But the Eunuches, to the extreame distaste of all the subiects, continued in their tyrannicall exactions (or robberies rather) throughout the Kingdome; into one of whose hands the Iesuites fell, with their presents: The Magistrates hate them, and they insult ouer the Magistrates. At Nanquin are also some thousands of these Eunuches in the Palace, one being chiefe ouer the rest. Some of them are so arrogant, that they looke for apprecations of a thousand yeeres life (which is the custome to the Queenes and Kings children; whereas to  the King they say, Van van siu, that is, ten thousand yeeres, as Daniel to Nabuchodonosor, O King liue for euer) besides the bending of the knee, as to the chiefe Magistrates. The King will for light causes sometimes cause his Eunuches to be beaten, till they die vnder the blowes. When Ricius was dead, they coffined him after the China fashion, till they could find some place for his burial (which till that time was at Macao, whither they sent their dead) Pantogis put vp a petition to the King, in behalfe of Ricius his corpes. (This storie will be, I hope, acceptable, as shewing the manner of obtaining any thing at the Kings hand.) I IAMES PANTOGIA, a stranger of a most remote Kingdome, moued with the vertue and fame of your Noble Kingdome, haue in three yeeres saile, with much trouble, passed hither aboue 6000. leagues. In  the twentie eight yeere of VANLIE (for so,These petitions, see verbatim, Exped. Sinica. l. 5. Of the Officers, see the next @. as we, they account their yeres by the Kings reigne) in the twelfth Moone, I, with MATTHEVV RICIVS, came into your Court; where wee presented some gifts, and haue since beene sustained at the Kings charge. The nine and twentieth yeere of VANLIE, in the first Moone, we petitioned your Maiestie for a place of residence, and haue many yeeres enioyed the Royall bountie. In the eight and thirtieth of VANLIE, the eighteenth day of the third Moone, RICIVS died, I, a Client of the Kingdome of the great West, remaine a fit subiect of pitie. The returne into our Countrey is long, etc. And I now, after so many yeeres stay, suppose that we may be numbred to the people which followeth your Royall Chariot, that your clemencie, like that of YAOHe was a King of old, accounted a Saint., may not containe it selfe in the Kingdome of China alone, etc. So proceeds hee to set forth the good parts of Ricius, and with a long supplication to beg a place of buriall, some Field, or part of a Temple; and he, with his fellowes, should obserue their wonted prayers to the Lord of  Heauen, for thousands of yeeres to him and his Mother. This Libell was written with peculiar forme, Characters, Seales; many Rites herein necessarily obserued. Before any be offered to the King, it must be viewed of some Magistrate, and they got this to be allowed by one which is Master of Requests, which sent it presently to the King. They must also haue many Copies thereof, to shew to those Magistrates, to whom it appertaines; which they did: one of them affirming, That Ricius deserued a Temple also, with his Image to bee there set vp. This message he sent them by another: for when they fauour a cause, they shew great strangenesse. The King commonly answers the third day (except hee mislike, for then hee suppresseth) and sends it to the Magistrate that had presented it, who shewes which of the sixe is the peculiar Court, which iudgeth of these things: This being sent  to the Rituall Tribunall. Their answere is sent to the King within a moneth (which there is a short space) and repeating the Petition verbatim, and the Kings command to the peculiar Office, answeres what the Law sayth in that case, and concludes the Petition to bee agreeing to Iustice, and earnestly pleads and sues for confirmation. The King sends this answere to the Colao, which subscribed his approbation; which being sent againe to the King, hee subscribed with his owne hand Xi. that is, Fiat, or be it done: which the third day after was deliuered them.


@. IX.  Of the Magistrates, Courts, and Gouernment.
THat which the Philosopher wished, That Kings might be Philosophers, and Philosophers Kings, is in part fulfilled in China; where all the Gouernment is in their administration, which haue attained thereto, not by birth, fauour, wealth, or other Mediators, but their Philosophicall proficience and degrees, of which we haue spoken. Of these, there are two Orders: one, of the Court, which, besides their Offices in that Citie, moderate euen all those of the second sort, which are Prouinciall Magistrates, abroad in the Cities or Prouinces. Euery two moneths there is a new booke printed at Pequin, of all  their Names,1. Li pu, Court of Magistrates. Places, and Degrees. First, of the Officers of Court. There are sixe Tribunals, or chiefe Courts: the first, called Li pu (pu signifieth Tribunall) which is the Court of Magistrates,
 who are hence nominated throughout the Kingdome; which nomination is guided by the excellencie of their writings aforesaid. And all beginning with inferiour Offices, come by Degrees prescribed by the Lawes, in order, to the higher: except Iniustice cast them lower, or quite degrade them; which makes him past hope of regayning his dignitie. The second Tribunall, is Hopu, or the Treasurie,2. Hopu, Co^^^ of Treasurie. 3. Lypu. which receiueth and payeth out the Kings reuenues. The third, is Lypu, the Court of Rites, whence are ordered matters of Sacrifices, Temples, Priests, Schooles, Examinations, Festiuall dayes, Gratulations to the King, Titles, Physicians, Mathematicians, Embassages, with their Letters and Presents (for they thinke vnworthy the Maiestie of their King, himselfe to write to any.) The fourth Court is called  Pimpu;4. Pimpu. to which are subiect all Militarie Matters, and Charges, and Examinations. The fifth, is Cumpu,5. Cumpu. that hath the handling of publike Aedifices; as the Palaces of the King, of his Kindred, of the Magistrates; the Nauie, Bridges, Walls of Cities, and the like. The sixt, is Himpu,6. Himpu. of criminall Cases, Prisons, and Imprisonments.
All the publike affaires depend of these Courts, which haue their Officers and Notaries in euery Citie and Prouince, which informe them of all things. One in euery of these Courts is President, called Ciam, who hath his two Cilam, or Assistants, one at his right hand, the other at the left: These are accounted the highest D^gnities in the kingdome. Next to these, euery Court hath their seuerall Offices, and ouer each, many Officers, besides Notaries, Apparitors, and others. Besides these Courts, there is another, the greatest in the whole  Court and Kingdome, called Colaos,Colao^. which are three, foure, or sixe Councellors of State, hauing no peculiar charge, but looking to the whole. The King was wont to sit with them in Counsell: but now they doe it without his presence; euery day admitted into the Palace, and there remayning in consultation, send Libels many and often vnto Him, who approueth, disalloweth, or altereth at his pleasure.
Besides these and other Magistrates, there are two sorts, one called Choli, the other Zauli,Choli and Zauli. of each aboue threescore, all choise Philosophers, which haue before giuen approued testimonie of their sufficiencie. These are employed in affaires of moment extraordinarie with the Court or Prouinciall offi^e^s, with Royall authoritie: and their especiall Office is, to admonish the King by Libell, if any thing bee done contrary to Law through the Kingdome;  not dissembling the faults of the greatest Magistrates, nor of the King himselfe, or any of His: which they performe, to the astonishment and wonder of other Nations, at their integritie and libertie; neuer giuing ouer (frownes or threats notwithstanding) their complaints and admonitions, till they procure redresse. This is also lawfull to euery Magistrate, yea, to euery priuate man: but these are most respected, because it is their peculiar Function. These Libels and the Kings answers are printed by many, and so passe through the Kingdome, whence their Historians may bee furnished with intelligence. This was lately apparant in the case of the Prince, whom the King would haue dis-herited, the King being so incensed with numbers of Libels or Bils of Complaint, that hee depriued or deiected to inferior places aboue a hundred; whereupon the rest abdicating themselues (as is said)  he was forced to surcease his attempt. And lately, when the greatest of the Calaos tooke indirect courses, hee was accused by these Officers in a hundred Bills, within two moneths space, though in greatest grace with the King; which (as it was thought) killed him soone after with thought.
Besides these Magistrates in Court, there are diuers Colledges instituted, to diuers purposes; the noblest of which, is Han lin yuen,Han lin yuen Colledge. consisting of choise Doctors, which deale not in the Gouernment, and yet are accounted of greater Dignitie. Their Office is, to compose the Kings Writings, to compyle the publike Annales, and to write out the Lawes and Statutes. Of these, are chosen the Schoole-masters of the Kings and Princes. They wholly addict themselues to Studie, haue their Degrees of honour in the Colledge, which they attaine  by their writing; and are preferred to the greatest Dignities, but in the Court onely. None is chosen to be of the Colaos, but these. They gaine much, by composing Writings for their friends, as Epitaphs, and the like, which for their very name are precious. They are also Presidents and Iudges in the Examinations of the Licentiates and Doctors.
All these Magistrates (except the Colai) are as well at Nanquin as Pequin.Prouinciall Gouernment. The Cities attributed to them both, are gouerned as other Cities in other Prouinces. The gouernment of those thirteene Prouinces depends of one Magistrate, called Pucinsu, and of another, called Naganzasu, the former iudging ciuill cases, the later criminall. Their Residence, is in the chiefe Citie of the Prouince, with great pompe. In both these Courts are diuers Colleagues, called Tauli, which are also principall Magistrates, and sometimes reside without the Mother-Citie,  in some other, where they haue speciall charge. The Prouinces are diuided into diuers Regions, which they call Fu, and the proper Gouernor of each Region, Cifu. These are also subdiuided into Ceu and Hien, that is, nobler, or meaner Townes, as bigge yet as our
 Europaean greater (not greatest) Cities. Each of these hath a Prouost, called Ciceu, or Cih^en, Ci signifies to gouerne. These Prouosts or Gouernours haue their foure Assistants to helpe them. That which some thinke, that they are onely in repute of Cities, which are intituled Fu, and the rest Ceu and Hien but villages, is a tale. For both the Prouinciall Citie hath her Cifu and Cihien, and the Lieutenant of the Shire, or Region, hath no more power in the Shire-Towne, then in other Cities of the Shire, that is) the right of first Appeale. The second Appeale is to the Pucinsu and Nagaurasu, Gouernours of the Prouince. Besides these in euery Prouince, there are other two of more eminent place, sent from the Court: one of which is resident there, called Tillam; the other sent yeerely from the Court, called Cia yuen, The former hath power ouer all both Magistrates and subiects, and in millitarie aff^ires, and may  be compared to our Vice-ioyes, or Deputies. The other is a Commissioner, or Visiter, who enquireth into all Officers, and punisheth the faultie (except the greatest, whom be accuseth to the King) ang onely of all Magistrates executeth the sentence of death. Many other Officers in Cities, Towns and Villages, many Captaines and military Commanders, many which haue charge of Wals, Gates, Bridges, Forts, (euen as it were in time of Warre:) Musters daily, and Wrestlings might here be recited.
All the Magistrates, both Philosophicall and Militarie, are reduced to nine Orders, and according to their seuerall Order, they receiue Money or Rice monthly: which, in such maiestie of Maiestrates, is very small; the stipend of the highest not amounting to a thousand duckats yeerely, and euery one of the same Order receiuing a like; the chiefe in the militarie  Order receiuing the same stipend, which the chiefe in the Philosophicall. True it is, that more acorues to them by industrie, gifts, or otherwise: but this is the Legall allowance. All Magistrates weare the like Cap of blacke cloth, with eares or wings on both sides, of Ouall forme, apt to fall off: which is done purposely, to make them walke grauely, without light mouing of their heads. They weare all like attire, Bootes alike, of peculiar fashion and substance, of fine blacke Leather. They weare also a fa^re girdle, about foure fingers broad, large and loose, of curious embroiderie, and on their breasts and backes they haue square pieces of Cloth embroidered: by both these are discerned their Places and Dignities. They are also knowne by their Vmbrelas, which are carried ouer their heads, some blew, some yellow; some two, three, and some one: the meanest on horse-back, the greater on chayres,  carried on foure or eight mens shoulders, according to their Dignitie. They haue other Ornaments, Banners, Chaines, Cense^s, multitudes of Sergeants, or inferiour Officers, going before them, two and two in a ranke, with Halberds, Maces, Battle-axes, Chaynes, Canes, crying out to giue way, with such clamours and noyse, that euen dogs shrinke away, and not a man to bee seene in most populous streets: this more or lesse, according to the degree of the Magistrate. Thus haue we seene a Philosophicall Empire, all, euen the Souldiers, being subiect to them; yea, the Captaines beaten by them, as boyes by their Masters: Neither is the sentence of Militarie men, in matters of Warre, of authoritie with the King, like theirs; no, nor their valour comparable: these in maintainance of their loyaltie, being (as yee haue seene) prodigall of preferment and life. The Souldiers betake themselues to Handycrafts, or Seruice of great Men, making shew of themselues on Muster and Pay-daies.  Their Weapons, as their courage, ridiculous for offence or defence. I haue seene many Gunnes (saith Pantogia) in their Souldiers hands, but none, whose barrell was aboue a spanThis it is like, was mistaken by the Translator or Printer: for Captaine Saris hath seene many, and saith they are as long as pistols but the cock such, as makes them of little seruice. Botero Iaric, etc. long: a little Ordnance on their walls, but little seruiceable. Militarie men are little esteemed, in so long peace, where they feare no enemy, nor care for encrochments; that which some say, of their extending their Dominions to the Indies in former times, being a fable, and disagreeing with their Chronicles, which are studlously continued foure thousand yeeres to these times. Neither doe they conceiue the rest of the world worth the conquering. Maruellous also is the Symmetrie of all the Magistrates, the members of this great Body, both with the Head and each other, both in reall obedience and complementall Rites.  The inferiors, whether priuat men or Magistrates, seldome speaking to their superiors, in the Court, or elsewhere, but on their knees, and with honourable termes, how meane soeuer knowne before their Degree.
No man also enioyeth any place aboue three yeeres, except he be a new confirmed by the King: but vsually is preferred to a greater; but in another Region, to preuent acquaintance, an occasion of vniustice, or popular affection. And all the Pucinsu, Naganzasu, Cifu, Ciceu, Cihien, and the like principall Officers, must euery third yeere appeare solemnly at the Court at Pequin: at which time, diligent inquisition is made of all Officers in the Kingdome, with great rigour, euery one rewarded according to his desert. I haue obserued, that the King himselfe dares not alter any of those things, which in this Inquisition are constituted.  In the yeere 1607. foure thousand Magistrates, in this publike Disquisition, were condemned, as appeared by their names published in a Booke: some for couetous corruption,
 vsurping publike or priuate goods; these were wholly depriued: some for rigorous, seuentie were so serued: a third sort were such, as were old, sickly, or remisse; these might vse the ensignes of Magistrates, but liue a priuate life: the fourth were rash and vnaduised, which were put into inferior Offices, or sent to places of easier gouernment: The last ranke was of such as gouerned not themselues, or their families, in good order; and such were also for euer depriued. The like Inquisition euery fift yeere is obserued, concerning the Officers of Court, and Militarie. The Iesuites were acquainted with one great Magistrate, which was thrust into an inferior Office three yeeres space, onely for being too often at Feasts, and too much addicted to Chesse-play.
 No man may beare Office (except Militarie) in that Prouince where he was borne. Thus the Militarie men haue spurres of fidelitie, and the other want occasions of corruption: for which cause also, his house-hold seruants and children may not stirre out of doores, whiles he executes his Office; but when he goes out, he seales vp his doores, both priuate and publike, hauing all necessarie seruices performed by such as are appointed thereto by the State. None weare any Weapons in the Cities, not Souldiors or Captaines, nor men of Learning, but then when they goe to their Masters, Exercises, or Warres: onely some attend the chiefe Magistrates with weapons. Nor hath any weapons at his house, except some iustie Blade, for feare of Theeues when he trauailes: and further then scratching, or pulling off the haire, they manage no quarrels, esteeming no iniurie a mortall indignitie, and him the wisest  and most valiant, that flyes the furious, and offers no wrong. When the King dies, none of his bloud, but the heire onely, may stay in the Citie Royall, or remoue out of the Cities where they are confined, on paine of death. And when any contention ariseth amongst them, one of the chiefe of them, which is their Gouernor, decides it: if with others, not of the bloud Royall, the publike Magistrate.
When the King preferreth any Magistrates to some higher dignitie, if they haue verie well deserued, they are requested to leaue their Bootes behind, which are kept in the publike Chests, together with verses in their prayse, and are honoured with gifts. If they be of supereminent worth, a publike Marble Pillar is erected, with inscription of their deserts. Yea, there are two whom Temples are built at publike charge, and their Images as like as the workemen  can make, set on the Altars; with a yeerely reuenue, and certaine men appointed to keepe perpetuall odours and lights there burning, (supplications excepted) in manner as they doe to their Idols. The Cities are all full of these Temples, sometime by fauour more then merit, to which at certaine times they goe, and exhibite kneelings, with meat-offerings, and other things.
In some Prouinces, vpon speciall occasions, they alter their course, as to preuent Pyracies and Robberies. Some were constituted, with Commission extended into diuers Prouinces, some bordering parts of all those Prouinces obeying him as Vice-Roy: As at Canceu, one superior to the Vice-roy of the Prouince, hauing part of Chiansi, Fuchien, Canton, and Vquam subiect, hauing out of euery Prouince two Regions, all adioyning together, assigned to him.
 Although they haue no Nobilitie employed in Magistracie, yet there are some descendents of those Captaines and Great men, which helped Hum-vn in expelling the Tartars, which are borne Noble, called Quocum, as we haue elsewhere shewed. These are capable of Militarie places. One head of one of these families, resides at Nanquin, which liues in great magnificence, carried on eight mens shoulders; his Gardens, Palaces, household Furniture, Royall. Ricius was entertained in his Garden, wherein (besides other rarities) he saw an artificiall Mount made of vnpolished Marbles, which in the hollow places thereof contayned Chambers, Halls, Stayres, Trees, Ponds, and other Deuices; this increasing both delight and wonder, that it was of Labyrinthian forme, in a little space of ground detayning the steps two or three houres, in passing the many Mazes thereof. The coolenesse of this place was  conuenient both to their Studies and Feasts.


@. X. Of their Punishments Diuine and Humaine, and a Catalogue of their Kings.
WHen the King preferreth any to the dignitie of a Manderine, or to a higher Office, their custome is, to put vp a Libell or Supplication, inferring their insufficiencie,  with many modest refusals: yet loth to be beleeued, and that the King should accordingly refuse them; as sometimes (against their will) hee doth, and certainely would, if this officious forme of deprecation be omitted by them. Notwithstanding
 all prouisions to the contrarie, they are couetous, cruell, and exceedingly addicted to bribes: and where they finde not (as it often happens) they make Lawes, sometimes contrarie to others, alway for their owne will and aduantage.
None may execute the sentence of death, but by speciall commission from the King. And therefore the Malefactors are consumed in the prisons. But they haue authoritie with certayne Canes to beat men on the legs, thighs, and hammes, in such terrible crueltie, that a few blowes may either lame or kill the partie. And therefore no King is more feared then these Mandarines or Magistrates. In the middest of their Cities are Palaces of the Kings for these Officers to reside in. In Paquin and Nanquin the multitude of these Magistrates is incredible, one of these Cities contayning more then two thousand and fiue hundred, as many as somewhere are of Citizens. These all twice a day heare causes, and execute iustice.  
These Magistrates are no way comparable in wealth to the Nobles in Europe. Their sentence against guiltie persons is without solemne furniture of words; as Let him haue twentie strokes more or lesse, which by those Canine Cane-men is suddenly executed, the partie lying grouelling on the ground. These Canes are cleft in the midst, three or foure fingers broad: twentie or thirtie blowes will spoyle the flesh, fiftie or threescore will aske long time to be healed, an hundred are vncurable. They vse also the Strappado, hoysing them vp and downe by the armes with a cord. They bee aboue measure patient in hearing causes: and their examinations are publique. Condemned persons haue a pillory-boord fastned about their necke, and hanging downe before them to the knees, in which his Fellony or  Treason is expressed; which boord neither suffereth them well to sit or lye, to eate or sleepe, and in fine killeth them. There be in euery Metropolitane Citie foure principall houses, for those chiefe Officers before mentioned; the fourth for the Taissu, wherein is the principall Gaole or Prison, walled about high and strong, with a gate of no lesse force: within the same are three other gates before you come where the prisoners lye, in the meane space are such as watch and ward day and night. The prison within is so great, that in it are streets and market-places, and neuer void of seuen or eight hundred men, that goe at liberty. In Canton alone are said to bee 15000. prisoners: and in this and euery other Metropolitane Citie, thirteene prisons, sixe of which are alwayes possessed, or doe possesse rather, those which are condemned to death. In euery of them are a hundred Souldiers, with their Captayne  to keepe them. The offendors are allowed to worke in the day-time for their liuing; for little almes are giuen in China, and but a little Rice allowed them by the King. Such prisoners as are in for debt, haue a^ime appointed for payment: at which if they fayle, they are whipped, and a new time assigned: and so they proceed till the debt bee paid, or the debtor dead. If any man remoue his dwelling from one place to another, the Neighbours cause a Cryer to proclaime it with ringing of a Bason, that his creditors, if hee haue any, may come to demand their debts, which the Neighbours, if they neglect this dutie, are charged with. Executions of deadly sentence are seldome, and that with many ceremonies. Thus it comes to passe, that of whippings and imprisonment there die thousands yeerely. Theeues are slightly punished the first time. The second they are burned with two characters on the  arme: the third receiueth the same punishment on the face. If he steale oftner, hee is whipped more or lesse, or condemned for a certayne time to the Gallies. This makes pilfries common: for they are neuer done to death for the euery. Many extraordinary crimes haue new deuised extraordinary punishments, as after in this history followeth. One had so freely libelled against the Kings tyrannies, that many were cruelly tormented being thereof suspected, and one by torments confessed the fact, and was therefore a diudged to haue 1600. pieces of his flesh cut from him, his head vntouched that his eyes might see this mangling: and lastly, his head cut off, which amongst them is a great abomination. Others accused of treason at Nanquin, were forced to stand in those pillory boords till they rotted, some continuing fifteene dayes in torment. Those which our-liue their beatings, must passe vnder  the Surgeons hands for cure, which ordinarily proue new tormentors, except money make them propitious: and this the Iesuites report of their owne fauours amongst them in all difficulties, money hath bin their best friend; without which is no friendship in China, no Faith, no Loue, no Hope of them. But by following Perera (sometime a prisoner there) into his prison, and others, I find my selfe almost imprisoned, and therfore will flee hence into their Temples, and there take Sanctuary. Here they deale as madly with their gods, as there with their men. Yet first let vs take view of some rare workes of diuine Prouidence in this Countrey.
Ludouicus Georgius in his Map of China,Maginus and Ortelius. describeth a huge Lake in the Prouince of San^ij, made by inundation, in the yeere of our Lord 1557* wherein were swallowed seuen Cities, besides Townes and Villages, and innumerable multitudes of people: one only  Child in a hollow tree escaping so great a destruction. Such as escaped drowning, were, as Boterus addeth, destroyed with fire from heauen. Gasper de Cruz reciteth a Letter of the
 Mandarines to the King 1556. containing newes of a terrible Earth-quake in the Prouinces of Sanxi and Santon; wherein the day waxed d^rke. The earth opened the yeere before in many places, vnder which was heard the noise, as it were, of bells: there followed winde and raine. The winde, which they call Tufan, is so violent, that it driueth ships on the land, ouerthroweth men and houses: it commeth almost euery yeere once, lasteth foure and twentie houres, in which space it compasseth the Compasse. In Vinyanfu the Earth-quake caused a fire to breake out, which consumed all the Citie, and innumerable people. The like happened to another Citie neere it, where none escaped. It caused the Riuer at Leuchimen to encrease and drowne multitudes. At Hien the fall of the houses slue eight thousand. In Puchio  the house of the Kings kinsmen fell, and slue all therein but a child. Cochu with fire from aboue, and waters from beneath, was left desolate. At Enchinoen almost an hundred thousand perished. At Inchumen the Riuer ebbed and flowed ten times in a day and night. This perhaps was the same with that which Georgius and Boterus mention.
Boterus ascribeth vnto China seuentie millions of people, whereas hee alloweth to Italy scarce nine, and to Spaine lesse, to England three, to all Germany, with the Switzers, and Low-Countries, but fifteene, and as many to all France. Lamentable it is that the Deuill should haue so great a tribute in this one Kingdome. Gonsales (in his Discourse of China,I. Gon. de Mendoza. translated by Parkes) reckoneth (I know not how truely) almost seuen millions of Souldiers in continuall pay. Dalmeida numbreth seuentie millions, and two hundred and fiftie  thousand Inhabitants, besides Souldiers, and reckoning but the principall in each Family, often-times not aboue three of ten, as their Bookes testifie.
I thought it not impertinent here to adde the Catalogue of the Kings of this countrey, accordingHistorie of China. to their owne stories, which although it be in part fabulous (as what ancient prophane storie is not?) yet, because I haue done thus in other Nations, and haue so worthy a patterne in this, as the Worthy of our AgeIoseph. Scalig. Canon. Isagogic. lib. 2. Iosephus Scaliger, pardon mee to trouble thee with this Chronicle of their Kings.
The first was Vitey, a Gyant-like man, a great Astrologer and Inuenter of Sciences; hee reigned an hundred yeeres. They name after him an hundred and sixteene Kings, (whose names our Author omitteth) all which reigned two thousand two hundred fiftie and seuen  yeeres: all these were of his linage: and so was Tzintzon, the maker of that huge wall of China, which killed many of the Chinois, of whom hee tooke euery third man to this worke. For which cause they slue him, when he had reigned fortie yeeres, with his sonne Aguizi. They ordained King in his stead Auchosau, who reigned twelue yeeres; his sonne Futey succeeded and reigned seuen yeeres; his wife eighteene; his sonne, three and twentie: then followed Guntey, foure and fiftie; Guntey the second, thirteene: Ochant^y, fiue and twentie: Co^ntey, thirteene: Tzentzey, sixe and twentie, and foure moneths: Anthoy, sixe: Pintatcy, fiue: Tzintzumey, three and seuen moneths: Huy Hannon, sixe: Cuoum, two and thirtie: Bemthey, eighteene: Vnthey, thirteene: Othey, seuenteene: Yanthey, eight moneths: A^tey, nineteene yeeres: Tantey, three moneths: Chitey, one yeere: Linthey, two and twentie  yeeres: Yanthey, one and thirtie yeeres: Laupy, one and fortie yeeres: Cuythey, fiue and twntie yeeres: Fontey, seuenteene yeeres. Fifteene other Kings reigned, in all, one hundred seuentie and sixe yeeres. The last of which was Quioutey, whom Tzobu deposed, who with seuen of his linage reigned threescore and two yeeres: C^tey, foure and twentie yeeres: Dian, sixe and fiftie yeeres: Tym, one and thirtie yeeres: Tzuyn, seuen and thirtie yeeres; Tauco, with his linage (which were one and twentie) reigned two hundred ninetie and foure yeres: Bausa a Nunne, wife of the last of them (whom she slue) one and fortie yeeres: Tautzon slue her, and reigned with his posteritie (which were seuen Kings) one hundred and thirtie yeeres: Dian, eighteene yeeres: Outon, fifteene yeeres: Outzim, nine yeeres and three moneths: Tozon foure yeeres: Auchin, ten yeeres: Zaytzon, and seuenteene of his race, three  hundred and twentie yeeres: Tepyna, the last was dispossessed by Vzon the Tartar, vnder whom, and eight of his Tartarian successours, China endured subiection ninetie and three yeeres: Gombu or Hu^^-vu expelled Tzintzoum, the last of them. He with thirteene successours haue reigned about two hundred and fortie yeeres. There computationScal. Em. T. lib. 1. of times is more prodigious then that of the Chaldaeans, after which this present yeere of our Lord 1614. is in their account from the Creation 884793.




CHAP. XIX. Of the Religion vsed in China.

@. I. Of their Gods and Idols in former times.  
HOw much the greater things are reported of this so large a Countrey, and mightie a Kingdome, so much the more compassion may it prouoke in Christian hearts, that amongst so many people there is scarce a Christian, who amongst so ample reuenues, which that King possesseth, payeth either heart or name, vnto the King of Heauen, till that in so huge a Vintage, the Iesuites of late haue gleaned a few handfulls to this profession. Before wee come to the Narration of their gods, I thinke it fit to deliuer what our ancienter Authors haue obserued of their Religion, and then to come to the Moderne. They were before the Tartarian  ConquestM. Polo. giuen to Astrologie, and obserued Natiuities, and gaue directions in all matters of weight. These Astrologers or Magicians told Farfur the King of China or Mangi, that his Kingdome should neuer be taken from him, but by one which had a hundred eyes. And such in name wasThe name signifieth a hundred eyes. Chinsanbaian the Tartarian Captaine, which dispossessed him of his state, and conquered it to the great Can about 1269. This Farfur liued in great delicacie, nor did euer feare to meet with such an Argus. He brought vp yeerely two hundred thousand Infants, which their Parents could not prouide for: and euery yeere, on certaine of his Idoll-holy-dayes, feasted his principall Magistrates, and all the wealthiest Citizens of Quinsay, ten thousand persons at once, ten or twelue dayes together. There were then some few Nestorian Christians; one Church at Quinsay; two at Cinghianfu, and a few others. They had many Idoll-Monasteries. They burned their dead: the kinsmen of the dead accompanied  the corps, clothed in Canuas, with Musicke and Hymnes to their Idols: and when they came to the fire, they cast therein many papers, wherein they had painted Slaues, Horses, Camels, etc. as of the Cathayans is before reported, to serue him in the next world. They returne, after their Funerall Rites are finished, with like harmony of Instruments and Voyces, in honor of their Idols, which haue receiued the soule of the deceased. They had many Hospitals for the poore, where idle persons were compelled to worke, and poore impotents relieued.
OdoricusOdoricus, Ep. Hak. affirmeth that at Kaitan or Zaiton, hee found two Couents of Minorite-Fryers, and many Monasteries of Idolaters, in one whereof hee was, in which (as it was told him) were three thousand Votaries, and eleuen thousand Idols. One of those Idols (lesse then some others) was as big as the Popish Christopher. These Idols they feed euery day with the  smoake of hot meates set before them: but the meate they eate themselues. At Quinsay a Chinian conuert led him into a certaine Monastery, where hee called to a Religious person, and said, This Raban Francus, that is, this Religious French-man commeth from the Sunne-setting, and is now going to Cambaleth, to pray for the life of the great Can, and therefore you must shew him some strange sight. Then the said Religious person tooke two great baskets full of broken reliques, and led mee into a little walled Parke, and vnlocked the doore. We entred into a faire greene, wherein was a Mount in forme of a steeple, replenished with Hearbs and Trees. Then did hee ring with a Bell, at the sound whereof many Creatures, like Apes, Cats, and Monkeyes, came downe the Mount, and some had faces like men, to the number of some thousand and two hundred, putting themselues in good order, before whom he set a platter, and gaue them those fragments. Which when they had eaten,  he rung the second time, and they all returned to their former places. I wondred at the sight, and demanded what creatures they were. They are (quoth he) the soules of Noble-men, which we here feed for the loue of GOD, who gouerneth the World. And as a man was honourable in his life, so his soule entereth after death into the body of some excellent beast, but the soules of simple and rusticall people, possesse the bodies of more vile and brutish creatures. Neither could I disswade him from the opinion, or perswade him that any soule might remaine without a body.
Nic. di ContiNic. di Conti ap. Ramus. saith, that when they rise in the morning, they turne their faces to the East, and with their hands ioyned, say, God in Trinitie keepe vs in his Law.  



@. II. Of their present Gods and Idols.
THeir Religion at this time is Idolatrous and Pagan, wherin the common people are somewhatGotar. Arthus cap. 52. superstitious, but the King himselfe, and the Mandarines or Magistrates, as seeing the vanitie thereof, and not able to see the truth, are in manner irreligious and profane: the first worship that which is Nothing in the World, and these  find nothing in the World, but the World and these momentany things, to worship.
Ricius reports, that the ancient Chinois worshipped one only great GOD, which they called the King of Heauen, or otherwise, Heauen and Earth: wherby he gathers, that they thought Heauen and Earth to be endued with life, and the Soule thereof to be the greatest GOD. Beneath which they worshipped also diuers Spirits, Tutelares, preseruers of the Mountaines, of Riuers, and of the foure parts of the World. They held that Reason was to be followed in all actions, which light they confessed to receiue from Heauen. They neuer conceiued yet such monstrous absurdities of this god, and these spirits, as the Egyptians, Grecians, and Romanes haue done: whence the Iesuite would haue you thinke (euen in this Idolatry) many of them to be saued, by I know not what congruitie, which merits not the mention. In  succeeding ages, this Idolatry became more manifold in some, whiles other became Atheists, of which their King and Magistrates are blamed. And yet this King, when some f^w yeeres since his Palace was fired with lightning, being guiltie of his owne vnworthinesse, he commanded his sonne to pray to Heauen for reconciliation.
Fryer Gasper de la Crux, being in Canton, entred a certaine Religious house, where he saw a Chappell, hauing therein, besides many other things of great curiositie, the Image of a woman, with a child hanging about her necke, and a Lampe burning before her. The mysterie hereof (so like the Popish mysterie of iniquitie) none of the Chinois could declare. The Sunne, the Moone, Starres, and especially Heauen it selfe, are gods of the first forme in their Idol-schoole. They acknowledge Laocon Tzantey the Gouernour of the great god (so  it signifieth) to be eternall and a spirit. Of like nature they esteeme Causay, vnto whom they ascribe the lower Heauen, and power of Life and Death. They subiect vnto him three other spirits, Tauquam, Teyquam, Tzuiquam: The first, supposed to bee Author of Raine; the second, of humane Natiuitie, Husbandrie, and Warres; the third, is their Sea-Neptune. To these they offer Victualls, Odors, and Alter-clothes; presenting them also with Playes and Comoedies. They haue Images of the Deuil with Serpentine lockes, and as deformed lookes as here he is painted, whom they worship, not to obtaine any good at his hand, but to detaine and hold his hand from doing them euill. They haue many Hee and Shee-Saints, in great veneration, with long Legends of their liues. Amongst the chiefe of them are Sichia, the first inuenter of their religious Votaries of both Sects; Quannia, an Anchoresse; and  Neoma, a great Sorceresse. Frier Martin in one Temple in Vcheo, told a hundred and twelue Idols. They tellRicius. of one Huiunsin, in the Prouince of Cechian, which did much good to the people, both by Alchimy, making true Siluer of Quick-siluer, and by freeing the Metropolitan Citie from a huge Dragon, which hee fastened to an yron pillar, still shewed, and then flew into Heauen with all his House, Mice and all (lye and all) and there they haue built him a Temple; the ministers whereof are of the Sect Thausu. Trigautius writes of certaine Gods, called Foe, which, they say, goe a visiting Cities and Prouinces: and the Iesuites in one Citie were taken for these Idols Foe. At Sciauchin, they in time of drought proclaimed a Fast, euery Idoll was sollicited with Tapers and Odours, for Raine. A peculiar Officer, with the Elders of the people, obserued peculitr Rites to these purpose, the Priests went  on Procession, all in vaine. When the Citie-Gods could doe nothing, they fetched a Country-Idoll, called Locu, which they carrie about, worship, offer to: But LOCV is now growne old; thus they said of his deafenesse. At last they goe to a Witch, who told them, Quonin (a Goddesse) was angry, that her backe was burned; meaning the Conuerts, which burnt their Idols, which insensed them against the Christians. Hoaquam is the name of an Idoll, which hath rule ouer the eyes, which they carry about in Procession, and beg in his name. In time of trouble they haue familiaritie with the Deuill; Pedro de Alfaro obserued, being in a Ship with the Chinois, in this sort. They cause a man to lye on the ground groueling, and then one readeth on a Booke, the rest answering, and some make a sound with Bells and Tabors. The man in short space beginneth to make visages and gestures, whereby they know  the Deuill is entred, and then doe they propound their requests, to which he answereth by word or Letters. And when they cannot extort an answere by word, they spread a red Mantle on the ground, equally dispersing all ouer the same a certaine quantitie of Rice. Then do
 they cause a man that cannot write to stand there, themselues renuing their former inuocation, and the Deuill entring into this man, causeth him to write vpon the Rice. But his answeres are often full of lyes. In the entries of their houses they haue an Idoll-roome, where they incense their Deities morning and euening. They offer to them the sweetest odours, Hennes, Geese, Duckes, Rice, Wine; a Hogs-head boyled is a chiefe offering. But little hereof falleth to Gods share, which is set in a dish apart: as the tippes of the Hogs-eares, the bylls and feet of the Hennes, a few cornes of Rice, three or foure drops of Wine. Their Bookes tell much of Hell; their deuotions little. Their Temples are homely, and filthy: no Oracle is in any of them. They haue fables of men turned into Dogs or Snakes, and againe metamorphosed into men. And they which beleeue the paines of Hell, yet beleeue  after a certaine space, that those damned soules shall passe thence into the bodies of some beasts. But their Idolatries and religious Rites will better appeare, if we take view of their different Religions and Sects.


@. III. Of their three Sects: and first of that of CONFVTIVS.
Ric. l. 1. c. 10.THey reckon in the World, and obserue amongst themselues, three Sects; the first,  of the Learned; the second, Sciequia; the third, Laucu. One of these three, euery Chinois professeth, as doe their Neighbours also, which vse their Characters, the Iapanders, Corians, Lequians, and Cochin-Chinois. The Sect of the Learned is peculiar to the Chinois, very ancient and famous, which they drinke in together with the Studies of Learning, all their Students and Magistrates professing the same, obseruing Confutius, the Author thereof. These worship not Idols, nor haue any. One God they worship, as preseruer of all things; certaine Spirits also, in an inferiour honour. The chiefe of them neither acknowledge, Author, Time, or Manner of the worlds creation. Somewhat they discourse of Rewards, of Good and Euill, but such as are bestowed in this life vpon the Doer or his Posteritie. The Ancients made no question of the Soules immortalitie,  speaking often of the Dead as liuing in Heauen. But of the punishments of wicked men in Hel, not a word. The later Professors teach that the Soule dies with, or soone after the Bodie, and therfore beleeue neither Heauen nor Hel. Some of them hold that good mens soules by the strength of vertue, hold out some longer time, but of bad men to die with the bodie. But the most common opinion, taken from the Sect of Idolaters, and brought in fiue hundred yeeres since, holdeth that the World consisteth of one substance, and that the Maker thereof, together with Heauen and Earth, Men, Beasts, Plants, and the Elements, doe make vp one bodie, of which euery Creature is a distinct member: thence obseruing what loue ought to be amongst all things, and that Men may come to become one with GOD.
Although the learned men acknowledge one supreame Deitie, yet doe they build him no Temple, nor depute any place to his worship, no Priests or Ministers of Religion, no solemne  Rites, no Precepts or Rules, none that hath power to ordaine or explaine their Holies, or to punish the Transgressors. They doe Him no priuate or publike deuotions or seruice, yea, they affirme, that it belongs to the King only to do sacrifice and worship to the King of Heauen; and that it is treason for others to vsurpe it. For this cause the King hath two Temples very magnificent in both the Royall Cities, the one consecrate to Heauen, the other to Earth: in the which hee was wont himselfe to sacrifice, but it is now performed by some principall Magistrates, which slay there many Sheepe and Oxen, and performe other Rites many to Heauen and Earth, in his stead. To the other spirits of Hills, Riuers, and the foure Regions of the World, onely the chiefe Magistrates doe sacrifice, nor is it lawfull to priuate  men. The Precepts of this Law are in their nine Bookes before mentioned.
Nothing in this Sect is moee generall, from the King to the meanest, then their yeerely Obits to their Parents and grand-fathers, which they account obedience to Parents, though dead; of which afterwards. The Temple they haue is that, which in euery Citie is by the Law built to Confutius,The Temple of Confutius. in that place where there Schoole or Commencement house is. This is sumptuous, and hath adioyning the Palace of that Magistracie, which is ouer the Bachellors or Graduates of the first degree. In the chiefe place of this Temple or Chappell is placed his Image, or else his name in golden Cupitall Letters, on a faire Table: besides which stand other Images of his disciples, as inferiour Saints. Into this Temple euery new and full Moone, all the Magistrates of the Citie assemble with the Bachellors, and adore him with  kneelings, wax-lights and incense. They do also yeerely on his birth-day, and other appointed times, offer vnto him meat-offerings or dishes with great prouision, yeelding him thanks
 for the learning they haue found in his Bookes, as the cause of their Degrees and Magistracies. But they pray not to him for any thing, no more then to the dead in their Obits.
There are other Chappels of the same Sect vnto the Tutelare spirits of each Citie, and proper to euery Magistrate of the Court. Therein they binde themselues by solemne oath; to obserue the Lawes in their function, and that at their first entrance: heere they offer meates and burne odours, acknowledging diuine Iustice in punishing periurie. The scope of this Sect of the learned, is the publike peace and well ordering of the priuate and publike state, and framing themselues to Morall vertues, wherein they doe not much disagree from the Christian veritie. They haue fiue concords in their Moralitie, in which as Cardinall vertues,  they comprise all Humanitie, the duties namely of Father and Child, Husband and Wife, Master or Superiour, and those vnder them, Brethren amongst themselues, and lastly, Equals and Companions. They condemne single life, and permit polygamie. This precept of Charitie to doe to others as one would bee done to, is well handled in their Bookes, and especially the pietie and obseruance of Children to their Parents, and Inferiours to their Superiours.
Longobardus saith, that euery new and full Moon-day, a little before Sun-rising,Nic. Longobard, in all the Cities of this Kingdome, and in all the streets, at one and the same houre, they make publication of these sixe Precepts. First, Obey thy Father and Mother. Secondly, Reuerence thy Elders and Superiours. Thirdly, Keepe peace with thy Neighbours. Fourthly, Teach thy  Children. Fiftly, Fulfill thy Calling and Office. The last prohibiteth crimes; Murther, Adulterie, Theft, etc.
Many mixe this first with other Sects: yea, some hold not this a Sect, but an Academie, Schoole, or Profession of Policie, and gouerning the priuate and publike State.


@. IIII. Of the Sect Sciequia.
 THe second Sect is called Sciequia,2. Sciequia* or Omitose, in Iapon pronounced Sciaccu and Amidabu, the characters to both are the same: the Iaponites call it also the Totoqui Law. This was brought into China from the West, out of a Kingdome called Thiencio, or Scinto, now Ind^stan, betweene Indus and Ganges, Anno Dom. 65. I haue read, That the King of China, mooued by a dreame, sent Legates thither, which brought thence Bookes, and Interpreters, which translated those Bookes: from hence it passed into Iapon; and therefore the Iaponders are deceiued, which thinke, that Sciaccu and Amidabu were Siamites, and came into Iapon themselues. Perhaps they then heard of the Apostles preaching in India; and sending for that, had this false doctrine obtruded on them.
These hold, that there are foure Elements (whereas the Chinois foolishly affirme fiue,  Fire, Water, Earth, Metals, and Wood, not mentioning the Aire) of which they compound this Elementary World, with the creatures therein. They multiplie Worlds with Democritus, and with Pythagoras, hold a Metampsychosis, or passage of Soules out of one body into another. They tell of a Trinitie of Gods, which grew into one Deitie. This Sect promiseth rewards to the good in Heauen; to the euill, threatens punishments in Hell; extolleth Single life; seemes to condemne Marriage; bids fare-well to house and houshold; and begs in Pilgrimages to diuers places. Their Rites doe much agree (it is the Iesuites assertion) with the Popish: their Hymnes and Prayers with the Gregorian fashion, Images in their Temples, Priestly Vestments, like to their Pluutalia. In their Mumsimus they often repeate a name, which themselues vnderstand not, Tolome which some thinke may be deriued from  that of Saint Thomas. Neither in Heauen or Hell doe they ascribe eternitie: but after certaine spaces of yeeres, they allow them another birth in some other Earth, there allowing them penance for their passed sinnes. The seuerer sort eate not flesh, or any thing that had life: but if any delinquish, their penance is not heard; the gift of some money, or the mumbling ouer their Orisons, being (they promise) of power to free from Hell. These things made a faire shew; but their corruptions made them distastfull: and this also (which the Learned often obiect to these Sectaries) that the King and Princes, which first gaue way hereto, died violently and miserably, and fell into publike calamities. Yet hath it euen to these times, in diuers vicissitudes, encreased and decreased, and many Bookes haue beene thereof written, which contayne many difficulties, inextricable to themselues.
 Their Temples are many and sumptuous: in which, huge monstrous Idols of Brasse, Marble, Wood, and Earth, are to be seene; with Steeples adioyning, of stone, or timber; and therein exceeding great Bells, and other ornaments, of great price. Their Priests are called
 Osciami: They continually shaue their heads and beards, contrary to the Countrey custome. Some of them goe on Pilgrimages: others liue an austere life, on Hills or in Caues; and the most of them (which amount to two or three millions) liue in Cloysters, of their reuenues and almes, and somewhat also of their owne industrie. These Priests are accounted the most vile and vicious in the Kingdome, being of the baser raskalitie: sold, when they are children, by their parents, to the elder Priests; of slaues, made Disciples, and succeeding their Masters in Sect and Stipend; few voluntarily adioyning themselues to these Cloysterers. Neither doe they affect more liberall learning, nor abstayne (but perforce) from disauowed Luxurie. Their Monasteries are diuided into diuers Stations, according to their greatnesse: in euery Station is one perpetuall Administrator, with his slaue-Disciples, which succeed him therein. Superiour in the Monasterie they acknowledge none, but euery one builds as  many Cells, or Chambers, as he is able, which they let out to strangers for great gaine, that their Monasteries may be esteemed publike Innes, wherein men may quietly lodge or follow their businesse, without any explication of their Sects. They are hired also by many to Funerall Solemnities, and to other Rites, in which wilde Beasts, Birds, or Fishes, are made free and let loose; the seuerer Sectaries buying them to this meritorious purpose. In our times this Sect much flourisheth, and hath many Temples erected and repaired; many Eunuches, women, and of the rude vulgar embracing the same. There are some Professors, called Ciaicum,Fasting. that is, Fasters, which liue in their owne houses, all their life abstayning from Fish and Flesh, and with certaine set prayers, worship a multitude of Idols at home, but  not hard to be hired to these deuotions, at other mens houses. In these Monasteries, women also doe liue separated from men, which shaue their heads, and reiect Marriage. These Nunnes are there called Nicu. But these are but few, in comparison of the men. One of the learned Sect, famous in the Court, relinquished his place in the Colledge, and shaued his haire, wrote many Bookes against the Confutians: but being complayned of, the King commanded hee should be punished; which hee punished further on himselfe, with cutting his owne throat. Whereupon a Libell or Petition was put vp to the King against the Magistrates, which relinquished Confutius, and became of this Sect: the King (notwithstanding all the Queenes, Eunuches, and his Kindred, are of this Sect) made answere, That such should goe into the Desarts, and might bee ashamed of their Robes. Hence followed orders,  That whosoeuer in his Writings mentioned an Idoll, except by way of Confutation, should be vncapable of degrees in Learning; which caused much alteration in Religion: for many of this Sect had preuayled much in Court, and elsewhere. Amongst the rest, one Thacon was so honoured of the chiefe Queene, that shee worshipped daily his garment, because it was not lawfull for himselfe to enter the Palace, but dealt by Eunuches. One libelled to the King against him, but had no answere (which is the Kings fashion, when he denies or disallowes it) which made him more insolent. But being suspected for a Libell made against the King, and some writings, in zeale of his Idols, against the King, being found, he was beaten to death, howling in his torments, which before had vanted a Stoicall Apathie. The other Sect-masters were banished the Court.  


@. V. Of the third Sect Lauzu.
THeir third Sect is named Lauzu,3. Lauzu. of a certaine Philosopher which liued in the same age with Confutius. They fable, that he was fourescore yeeres in his mothers wombe, before his birth, and therefore call him Lauzu, that is, old Philosopher. He left no booke written of his Sect, nor seemes to haue intended any such institution.  But his Sectaries called him after his death Tausa, and haue fathered on him their opinions, whereof they haue written many elegant bookes. These also liue single in their Monasteries, buying Disciples, liuing as vile and vicious as the former. They shaue not their haire, but weare it like the Lay-men, sauing that they haue a Hat or Cap of wood. There are others married, which at their owne houses professe greater austeritie, and recite ouer set prayers. They affirme, That amongst other Idols, they also worship the God of Heauen, but corporeall, and to whom their Legends tell, that many indignities haue happened. The King of Heauen which now raigneth, they call Ciam; he which raigned before was Leu, who on a time came riding to the Earth on a white Dragon. Him did Ciam, who was a Diuinor, giue entertainment, and (whiles Leu was at his good cheere) mounted vp his  Dragon, which carried him to heauen, and there seized on the heauenly Royaltie, and shut out Leu, who yet at last was admitted to the Lordship of a certaine Mountaine in that Kingdom.
 Thus they professe their god to bee a coozener and vsurper. Besides this King of Heauen, they faine another threefold Deitie; one of which they say was the head of their Lauzu sect. They promise to theirs Paradise, which they shall enioy both in bodie and soule, and in their Temples haue pictures of such as haue the Image^ of such Saints. To obtaine this, they prescrib^ certaine e^ercls^s, which consist in diuers postures of sitting, certaine prayers and medicin^^, by which they promise to the obseruers through their gods fauour an immortall life in Heauen, at least a longer mortall in the bodie. The Priests of this Sect haue a peculiar Office of c^sting out Deuils, which they do by two meanes: one is to paint horrible shapes of Deuill in yellow paper with inke, to be fastned on the walls, and then fill the house with  such s^uage clamors, that themselues might be thought to be Deuils: the other is by certaine prayers or coni^tations. They professe also a power of fai^^ weather and soule, and other priuate and publike misfortunes* and some of them seeme to be Witches.
These Priests reside in the Kings Temples of Heauen and Earth, and assist at the Kings sacrifices* whether by himselfe performed, or his Deputie Magistrates, and thereby acquire great authoritie. At these sacrifices, they make musicke of all sorts which China yeeldeth, harshed Europaean eares. They are called likewise to Funeralls, to which they come in precious Vestments, playing on Musical Instruments. They assist also a^ ^he consecrations of new Churches, and in pompous Processions through the streets, which the chiefe Inhabitants at certaine times obserue at the common cost of the Neighbours all about.
 This Sect ha^h a Prelate, called Ciam; which dignitie these thousand yeeres together hath descended by inheritance^, and seemes ^o haue receiued originall from a Southsayer, which liued in a Caue in the Prouince of Qui^msi, where his posteritie still continue, and with them his iuggling sorceries. This their Prelate liue for the most part at Paquin, in estimation with the King; being admitted into the Palace for hallowings, and chasing away ill spirits. Hee is carryed through the Citie in a chayre, otherwise accomplished as the chiefe Magistrates, and receiues a large salarie of the King. I haue heard that in these times the Prelate^ are so ignorant, that they know not their owne Deuillish charmes and rites. This Prelate hath no iurisdiction ouer any but those of his profession. Many of these doe worke by Alchimy to obtaine the Precepts of longer liuing, of both which their Saints (they say)  left certaine rules. There are the three Sects of the Chinois, which are since by their vaine Sectaries so diuersifyed, that they may seeme rather three hundred. Hum-vu that raised his now raigning Family to the Scepter, was himselfe professed Religious in one of these Sects, and authorised all three Sects, admitting onely the first to the Gouernment. Hence it is that One seekes not the ruine of the Other Sect: and the Kings themselues foster all, as they see occasion, building and repairing their Temples. The Queenes are more prone to the Idoll Sects, and bestow much almes on the Priests, maintaining whole Monasteries, to be helped by their prayers. The multitude of Idols is seene not onely in the Temples, but in priuate houses (in a place appointed after the fashion of the Countrey) in the Market-place, in Streets, Ships, publike Palaces: and yet it is certaine that few beleeue their Legends, but  thinke if these things do them no good, they yet will doe them no harme. The wisest in these times thinke, that all these three Sects may concurre and bee all obserued together, and esteeme varietie most acceptable. From this hotchpotch, vniting and separating, perhaps haue risen those confused and various reports of these confusions and varieties of rites: wherin if any haue like pleasure in varietie, and be wearie of hearing Ricius and Trigautius, the latest spectators, I will not defraud them of those things, which out of former Authors I had more confusedly before gathered.
They haue (if Mendoza be not mendar)Discourse of China, lib. 2. many Monasteries of foure differing orders of Religion, distinguished by the seuerall colours of their habit, black, yellow, white, and russet. These foure Orders are said to haue their Generalls (whom they call Tricon) which reside  in Paquin. These ordaine Prouincials, who againe haue subordinated to them the Priors of seuerall Houses or Colledges, in those their houses acknowledged chiefe. The Generall is clothed with silke in his owne colour, and is carryed on mens shoulders in an Iuorie chaire, by foure or six men of his habit. They liue partly of reuenues giuen them by the King, and partly by begging: which when they do, they carry in their hands a certaine thing, wherein are prayers written, whereon the almes are laid, and the giuer thereby cleered (of his money, I should haue said) of his sinne. They areIt seemes that some Romish Fryers haue beene there of old. shauen, vse beades, eate together, and haue their Cells, assist at burialls, arise two houres before day to pray vnto the Heauen and Sinquian, who (they say) was the inuenter of that their manner of life, and became a Saint, in which their deuotion they continue vntill breake of day, singing and ringing  of bells. They may not marry in the time of their Monkish deuotion, but they may (acquainting the Generalls therewith) at there pleasure relinquish their vow. The eldest sonnes may not enter into Religion, because they are bound to sustaine their aged Parents. At the
 admittance of any is a great feast, made by their friends. At the lanching of any ship, they dedicate the same to the Moone, or some Idoll: and besides, there resort thither these Monkes, to make sacrifices in the poope, and reuerence the Deuill, whom they paint in the fore-castle, that he may doe them no harme. Else would shee make an vnfortunate voyage. The people weare long haire, in combing whereof they are womanishly curious, these hoping by their locks to be carryed into Heauen; the other, professing a state of greater perfection, refuse any such helpe. There be of their religious more austere,Iacob. Anton. 1603. Adm. Reg. Sinensis. which liue (in desarts and solitary places) the liues of Hermites, with great abstinence and austeritie of life.
NancanRicius, l. 3. c. 9 Anchorets. is a Citie at the foot of Mount Liu, on which are many Anchorets, which haue each a house by himselfe, and there exercise themselues in voluntary chastisements. There  are said to be as many of those houses on this Hill, as are dayes in the yeere: they obserue it as a prodigie, that when it is elsewhere cleere sun-shine, there it is cloudie and mystie alway, so that the Hill cannot be seene from a Lake neere it, which Lake also deserues mention, being great and as farre as the eye can discerne, crowned with innumerable Townes, Castles, and Habitations.
They haue Hils consecrated to Idols, whither they resort in heapes on pilgrimage; hoping hereby to merit pardon of their sinnes, and that after their death they shall be borne againe more noble and wealthy. Some of these will not kill any liuing creatures, especially such as are tame, in regard of this their Pythagorean opinion of the(...). transanimation or passage of  soules into beasts. The Iesuites conuerted one man neere vnto Nanquin, which had thirtie yeeres together obserued a fast, not strange among the Chinois, neuer eating flesh or fish, and on other things feeding temperately. Vsurers are punished in China, with the losse of that money so imployed. Their fast is not a totall abstinence, but from flesh and fish.
Of their Priests is before shewed, that they haue both secular and regular:Sc^lant. ap. Ortel. the one weareth long hayre and black clothes, and hath priuate habitation; the other liue in Couents and are shauen. Neither may marrie, though both doe (and not here alone) farre worse. They much commend in their bookesNic. Longobac. the consideration and examination of a mans selfe, and therefore doe esteeme highly of them which sequester themselues from humane societie to diuine contemplation, that (as they say) they may restore themselues to themselues,  and to that pristine state, wherein the Heauen created them; And therefore haue not onely Colledges of learned men, who leauing the affaires of state and secular distractions, doe in priuate Villages liue together, obseruing these contemplations with mutuall conferences: but euen women also haue their Nunneries, and liue a Monastical life vnder their Abbesses after their manner: although euen such as are marryed liue closely enough; their feet to this end so straitly swadled in their infancie, that they grow but little (and to haue little feet is with them great commendation) whereby they cannot but lamely walke abroad. And if any widdow refuse a second marriage, shee obtaineth hereby much praise and many priuiledges. Their Bonzij are so little accounted of, that the Iesuites wearing their habit were litle set by, and therefore taking the Mandarine-habit, were exceedingly honoured of all sorts, as professors of learning.  


@. VI. Of their superstitious Diuinations, and curious Arts.
OF their Mechanicall and Liberall Arts wee haue alreadie spoken, the same in this Suruey of their Religion, you may expect of those Arts which are curious and superstitious. None of which is so generall, as their vaine obseruations of luckie and vnluckie dayes and houres, by which they measure the oportunities of all their  actions. To this end they haue Almanacks or Kalenders yeerely set forth by the Kings Astrologers with publike authoritie, in such numbers that no house wants them. Somewhat of these hath beene spoken alreadie.Annuae s^nicae, pag. 159. and D. 1611. Trigautius writeth at large of their mysteries in this kind, comparing the differences thereof with ours in Europe. They follow certaine rules, the first Authors whereof liued 3970. yeeres since in the reigne of Yao (whom they still obserue as a Saint) who set two brethren on worke to finde out the celestiall motions. Their names were Hi and Ho: these wrote certaine rules, which two thousand yeeres after were burned by Xi Hoam, and not a booke left that was knowne, till some Copies were againe discouered in the time of King Vu ti aboue an hundred yeeres after. These rules haue beene fiue and fiftie times examined, and as it were new reuised and allowed, the last of which was three  hundred yeeres since, by Co xeu kim, while the Tartars reigned. As for the Theoricall Astrologie they know it not, and in the practicall they are not so practised, but their rules deceiue
 them. So it hapned about fiue yeeres since, they foretelling an Eclipse falsly, for which One libelled against them to the King, and they confessed the errour, but blamed their grounds: whereupon consultation was had, and the Iesuites employed by publike Commission to ioyne with their Mathematicians in reforming their Kalender: which they intended to doe by bringing in the Europaean. This, and the Kings grant of an Idoll-Temple to them a little before 1610. for the buriall of Ricius, wanne the Iesuites great respect in this Kingdome. Their yeere they reckon by the Moone like the Hebrewes. Their day they account from mid-night to mid-night, diuiding it into twelue equall spaces. But that which I intend, is not to shew their want of Art so much, as their wanton Art, and artlesse trifling in superstitions  without ground. As, such a Day is fit for sacrifice, for bankets, for a iourney,Ric. l. 1. c. 9. a suite to the King, building of a house, or the like, what is to be done or not, wherein they are not more ridiculous prescribers, then the people superstitious obseruers.
There are others also that get their liuing by this profession, appointing daies and houres: many deferring their necessary affaires till the Wizard findes out a luckie houre for the beginning, and then wil he begin, although the blustering windes, lowring skie, and all the elements forbid him, and force him to a present retrait. This hath beene a generall folly in the East,So Haman, Est. 3.7. etc. and thence hath infected the West also, but China runs mad thereof. The like care they vse in calculating Natiuities, an Art professed by many: as is that also by the course of Stars, or certaine superstitious numbers, to foretell things. Physiognomie and Palmistrie, and Diuination by Dreames, by words in communication, by casuall gestures, auguries, sunne-beames,  and innumerable other fancies, haue conspired to this phrensie: wherein it is hard to iudge whether is more absurd, the fraudulent Impostor impudently promising without feare or wit, what the impotent Consultor with a witlesse feare, makes credible by his credulitie: Many of them sickning and sometimes almost dying, vpon meere conceit of sicknesse on such a day, foretold. Many also consult with Deuills and familiar Spirits (of which beforeSup. @. 1. is mentioned) and diuers wayes receiue his Oracles, by the voyces of Infants, of Beasts, of Men distracted, or otherwise. Besides these fooleries, they haue one more peculiar namely, in choosing a plot of ground for priuate or publike buildings; which plot they compare with the head, tayle, feet, of certaine imagined Dragons, which they thinke liue  vnder the earth, from whence all aduerse or prosperous fortunes befall Families, Cities, Prouinces, and the whole Kingdome. And therefore many chiefe men spend their wits in this so profound a science, and are employed, especially in publike structures. As Astrologers view the Heauens, so these the Earth, and by the Mountaines, Riuers, Site, foretell the Fates: and make good or bad fortune to depend on the placing of the doore, window, or other part of the house, on this or that side, or site. It is a world to see what a world of these Impostors their are in this their world (so they call the Kingdome) of China, which gull the learned, the Magistrates, and the King himselfe.
Strange is their Diuination by Idolatrous Lots, which some tell on this manner.Admiranda Reg. Sinensis. Maffaeus lib. 6. Mendoza. They haue their Idols in their houses, with which they consult, sometimes praying, and sometimes  beating them, and then setting them vp againe with renewed incense and flatteries, and with (as they see occasion) redoubled stripes, being cruell or propitious (as Tertullian obiected to the Romanes) to their Gods. And in a word, the Mandarines are the Gods (or Deuils rather) whom the people must feare, as dreading blowes from them, which they themselues at pleasure can and doe inflict on the other. This God-beating they vse with Lots.Lots. Maffaeus l. 6. Disc. of China. For when any is to vndertake a iourney or any matter of weight, as buying, lending, marrying, etc. They haue two stickes flat on the one side, otherwise round, as bigge as a Walnut, tyed together with a small thread, which after many sweet Oraisons they hurle before the Idoll. If one or both of them fall with the flat side vpwards, they reuile the Image with the most opprobrious termes: and then hauing thus disgorged their choller, they againe craue pardon  with many fawning promises. But if at the second cast they find no better fortune, they passe from words to blowes, the deafe God is hurled on the earth into the water or fire, till at last with his vicissitude of sweet and sowre handling, and their importunate reiterations of their casts, he must needs at last relent, and is therefore feasted with Hens, Musicke, and (if it be of very great moment, which they consult about) with a Hogs-head boyled, dressed with Hearbes and Flowers, and a pot of their Wine. They obserue another kind of Lots, with stickes put together in a pot, and drawing out the same, consult, with a certaine booke they haue, of their destinie.
Mongst other their curious Arts, there are two in chiefe request, Alchimie, to bring siluer out of other metalls, and the other to procure a long or endlesse life. They fable that some  of the Ancients, which they hold in estimation of Saints, diuised these Arts, and after ascended bodie and soule into Heauen. Many volumes are written in both these Arts, and many printed. Both seeme to haue like successe, the one lessening their siluer for siluer, the other
 shortning their liues to lengthen them. The Alchymist passeth his dayes, and euaporateth his substance in smoake, either aduanced by great labour and cost to beggerie; or if hee attaine to any siluered siluer-science,Discours. la Now. The Pope the best Alchymist in his leaden bulls. it furthers him in deceiuing himselfe and others. One only Alchymist (said a madde lad of this generation, that had melted a faire house in these furnaces) hath beene in this kind happy, that can turne so little Lead into so much Gold. But these Chinois want such sanctified fires, howsoeuer herein also besides their exceeding diligence, many of them seeke to better their attempt by many yeeres fastings. No people more bewitched with this (though vniuersall) foolery; no harmes, fraudes, losses, teaching them more discretion. And yet greater madnesse may be ascribed to the other, who hauing obtained some prosperous condition of life, thinke nothing wanting to felicitie but continuance.  Few there are in this City Pequin (saith Ricius) of the Magistrates, Eunuchs, and chiefe men, which are not sicke of this disease,A pleasant historie. none being warned by the ordinary deaths of Masters and Schollers in this kinde. I haue read in the Chinese Chronicles of one of their ancient Kings, who by these Impostors helpe had procured a potion, which hee thought would make him immortall. A friend of his sought to disswade him from this vanitie, but in vaine: wherevpon watching opportunitie, he catched the cup and dranke vp the potion. The King in his furie offered to kill him: whereat the other, How canst thou kill mee (said hee) whom this cup hath made immortall? and if thou canst, then haue I freed thee of this error. The King rested satisfied; but not so this people, which though many write against both these professions, doe now more then euer practise them. Trigautius writes of one man which had obtained the second  Degree of learning, which by this profession had gotten much wealth. He had bought many children and killed them secretly, composing his Recipe^ of their bloud, as if hee could adde life to others which he had taken from them. This came to light by one of his Concubines, and he apprehended and thereof conuicted. A new punishment was inuented for this new inuention, that hee should be bound to a stake, and three thousand pieces of his flesh should be cut from him with a Rasor, the vitall parts being spared as much as might be. This sentence being sent to the King, was by him confirmed.
There be which fable themselues to be very old, vnto whom is great recourse of Disciples, as to some heauenly Prophets, to learne lessons of long liuing. They supposed the Iesuites (whom they tooke to be of great learning) did not truely tell them their Age, but suspected,  that they had alreadie liued some Ages, and knew the meanes of liuing euer, and for that cause abstained from marriage.
The Spaniards of the Philippina's being feasted by the Viceroy, two Captaines, appointed Stwards, or Feast-masters, before they sate downe, did take each of them a cup full of liquor in his hand, and went together, whereas they might discouer the Heauen, and offered the same to the Sunne, adding many prayers, that the comming of their guests might bee for good, and then did fill out the wine, making a great curtesie. And then proceeded they to their feast. The ChinoisLinschot. c. 23. in the Eclipse of the Sun and Moone, are afraid that the Prince of Heauen will destroy them, and pacifie him with many sacrifices and prayers; they hold the Sunne and Moone, Man and Wife.  


@. VII. Of the Marriages, Concubines, and other vices and errours of the CHINOIS.
THeir Marriages and Espousals want not many Ceremonies. Both are done in their youth. They like equalitie of age and state betwixt the parties. The Parents make the contracts, not asking their Childrens consent, neither doe they euer refuse. As  for their Concubines, euery one keepes according to his pleasure and abilitie, respecting in them especially their beautie, and buy them for the most part, the price being a hundreth Crownes or lesse. The common people also buy their wiues, and sell them at their pleasure. The Magistrates marry in their owne ranke their legitimate wife. This chiefe wife only sits at table with her husband, the rest (except in the Royall Families) are as seruants, which in the presence of either of the former may not sit, but stand. Their children also call that wife their Mother, not their naturall Parent, and for her Funeralls alone solemnize their three yeeres mourning, or leaue their Office, not for their owne Mother. In their marriages they are very scrupulous that the wife haue not the same surname with her husband, although there be no kindred betwixt them, and the surnames in all China are not a thousand (as before  is said) neither may any deuise new, but must haue one, and that the same which their Ancestors by the fathers side (not the mothers) had, except he be adopted into another Family.

They heed not degrees of affinitie or consanguinitie, so this surname differ, and therefore marry in the Mothers kindred be it almost neuer so neere. The Bride brings no portion to her husband, and yet the first day she comes to his house, she hath to attend abundance of houshold-furniture, euen the streets being therewith filled, all at the husbands cost, who some months before sends her a great summe of mony to this purpose. There are many, which being poore doe for lust make themselues slaues to rich men, that so they may be furnished with a wife amongst his women-slaues, whereby also the children become perpetually bond. Others buy their wiues, but seeing their increasing family grow chargeable beyond their abilitie, sell their young sonnes and daughters at the same price they would sell a swine  or beast, or some two or three duckats more, yea though they bee not by dearth compelled thereto. Thus this Kingdome abounds with seruants, not taken in the warres, but home-bred Citizens.
The Spaniards also and Portugalls carry many of them out of the Countrey into euerlasting seruitude. But this child-sale is the more tolerable, because the estate of seruants is there more easie then in other Nations, and the number of the poore which liue hardly is exceeding, and they may redeeme themselues at the same price if they be able to giue it. And lastly, a greater villiny in some Prouinces vsed, makes this seeme the lesse, which is to murther those their children (especially of the female sexe) which th^y thinke they cannot bring vp: which fact also is with them the lesse heynous,Metempsy-chosis. not by pr^uenting, that sale and transportation of their children (an impious pietie) but by a pious impietie, that opinion of transanimation  or passage of soules into other bodies, thinking that by this vntimely and sudden murther, they may haue more timely and quick passage, and be borne againe in richer Families. And therefore they seeke no corners, but execute their bloudy parricides publikely. Yea, greater abominations then these are here perpetrated vpon as sl^ight grounds, many laying violent hands vpon themselues, both in desperation and impatience, and in malice also, so to hurt their enemies. Thus, they say, many thousands both of men and women euery yeere drowne themselues in Riuers, hang themselues, sometimes at their aduersaries doors, or poyson themselues; whereupon their k^ndred complaine to the Magistrates on those, which gaue cause or occasion to these extremities, which sometimes are seuere in these cases to the accused.  It may be reckoned among their cruelties (which in the Northerne Prouinces is practised) the gelding of their Male-Infants, so to make them capable of the Kings seruice, none other being admitted to attend or speake with Him, and the whole sway of the Kingdome, being in great part in these vn-manly hands, of ten thousand scarce any but Plebeian, illiterate, seruile in condition and conditions, impotent, impudent, of weake both conceit and performance. Neither is this a little crueltie, that the Magistrates are thought to kill as many against the Lawes, as the Lawes themselues by execution of iudiciall sentence, by their custome of beating men with Canes, in manner at their owne lust. This makes men that they are not Masters of their owne, but are in continuall feare to be vndone by calumny and tyranny. The Choinois are also a fraudulent and treacherous people.
 They contemne strangers, scorning to learne any thing out of their bookes, as being vnlearned and rude: yea all the Characters whereby they expresse the name of strangers, are compounded of such as signifie beasts, hauing indeed a bea^tly and diabolicall conceit of them. When Embassadors come to them from Neighbour-Countries to pay their tributes, or for other busines, they are very suspiciously intreated, entertained as captiues all the time of their iourney, not permitting them to see any thing. They shut them vp (like beasts in stables) within their Palaces, neuer admit them the Kings presence, themselues dealing with few of the Magistrates, and all their businesse being ordered by Officers thereto assigned. Nor may any natiue trauell out of the Kingdome without diuers cautelesse. Petreius the Portugall Embassador died in prison at Canton.Osor. lib. 1. They will not suffer strangers which haue staid long in  China (in some places the custome is nine yeeres) to returne from thence. Their Souldiers are base, meere mercinaries, not regarding honor where they are not rewarded with honor, alike vile in estimation and action, the most part slaues, thereto by their owne or parents wickednesse legally condemned; except at times of employment, being Porters, Horse-keepers, or of like seruile drudgerie. Their Capt^ines and Commanders haue some shaddow of dignitie, but the substance we haue before rightly attributed to them, who can punish these as the meanest. Long nayles are (some say) accounted a Gentlemanly signe, as of hands not employed to labour.Pantogia. Their exceeding pride (in which they are not exceeded of any) appeared in this, that they thought the Iesuites must needs attaine the Popedome at th^ir returne into Europe, as hauing so much bettered their learning by the Chinois Authors. But These  haue since euen by the opinion of learning, obtained a better estimation.
It were tedious to tell of their opinions touching the Creation. All being a rude and vnformed Chaos, Tayn (say they) framed and settled the Heauen and Earth. This Tayn created
 Pauzon and Pauzona. Pauzon by power of Tayn created Tanhom, and his thirteene brethren. Tanhom gaue names to all things, and knew their vertues, and with his said brethren multiplied their generations, which continued the space of ninetie thousand yeeres. And then Tayn destroyed the world for their pride, and created another man named Lotzitzam, who had two hornes of sweet sauour, out of which presently did spring forth both men and women. The first of these was Alazan, which liued nine hundred yeeres. Then did the Heauen create another man (Lotzitzam was now vanished) named Atzion, whose Mother Lutim was with child with him only in seeing a Lions head in the ayre. This was done in Truchin, in the Prouince of Santon: he liued eight hundred yeeres. After this, Vsao and Hantzui, and Ocheutey with his sonne Ezonlom, and his nephew Vitei the first King of China (they say) were  the inuenters of their many Arts.
In the laterLitera a Mat. Ri. Epistles from China, dated 1606. and 1607. little is there to further this Historie. As for their tales of Miracles in those and the Iaponian Epistles (bearing the same date) wherein Ignatius Loyolaes picture is made a miracle-worker; I hold them not worth relation. The Chinois beleeue (as is there reported) that there is a certaine spirit which hath power of the life and death of children that are sicke of the measells, and therefore when their children are sicke thereof, they hang a glasse before the dore of the chamber where he lyeth, that the spirit comming to destroy the child, seeing his Image in that glasse, should not dare to approach neerer. Their Baptisme cured the disease: a new remedy for measels, a new vertue of Bap^isme.  
Their order for the Poore may be a patterne vnto Christians: they suffer none to beg, nor to be idle. If any be blinde, yet hee is set to some worke, as grinding in a Querne, or such like; of which sort (afterG. B. B. blind persons in the Citie of Canton, set to g^inde Rice. Boterus account) there are foure thousand blind persons that grinde still in Canton alone. If they be impotent, that they cannot worke, their friends (if they be able) must-prouide for them; if not, they are kept in Hospitalls, out of which they neuer passe, and haue all necessaries prouided them by Officers appointed in euery Citie to this businesse. Common women are confined to certaine places, and may not goe abroad, nor dwell in the Citie, for infecting others, and are accountable to a certaine Officer of their euill earnings, which when they are old, is bestowed on their maintenance. Their dwelling is in the Suburbs of Cities.  
They are great Sodomites, although they haue many Wiues and Concubines, which they buy of their Parents, or in the Markets, in like manner as the Turkes. They are not by Law prescribed to obserue this or that Sect: and therefore they haue many Sects, some worshipping the Sunne, some the Moone, some nothing: and all, what themselues best like, as is in part before shewed. They take their oathes (as here by kissing a booke) with thrice drinking of a certaine liquor. Antony DalmeidaA. Dalmeida* 1586. saith, that in saying Masse, they were so thronged with the people, that they were almost trodden vnder foot. And of a Chinian Priest (contrarie to the zeale elsewhere in any Religion) they were inuited to dinner, and feasted together with many other of their Priests that vsed them kindly.  


@. VIII. Of their Temples.
Trigautius.IT followeth now that we speake of places Religious amongst the Chinois, of which their Temples challenge the first place, their Sepulchres the next. Of their Monasteries we haue already spoken. Their Temples, as their other structures, come short of the Europaean magnificence: yet are they many, and that about Paquin it selfe. For howsoeuer the King hath little deuotion to any Religion at all, yet his Mother is verie  zealous, repaires and builds Temples in diuers places, and in one Monasterie sustaineth aboue a thousand Ministers of her Holies: so that this kind elsewhere contemned, is in the Royall Citie better respected. Hence they haue a Prouerbe, In the Citie Royall, Ho-xam (so they call their Priests) in the Prouinces the Magistrates are worshipped. We haue mentioned the Temples dedicated to men of Merit and publike Benefactors. Such an one is in the confines of the Prouince of Conton erected to the Honor of One, which for the benefit of Trauell^rs made a passage ouer a steepe and vnpassable hill, diuiding the rocks, as Annibal did the Alpes; where are such Precipices, as cannot but strike horror to the passenger: and yet they are safely carried,Colaus signifieth the Fortresse of the Kingdome: a chiefe Office. without descending from their chayres, borne on men shoulders. On the top of this hil is a Temple built to the Colaus, that made this way, with his Image therein  and odours burning perpetually: the walls and floore thereof adorned with many Poems and inscriptions to his praise, cut in Marble. This Mountaine is one daies iourney, standing
 betweene two great Riuers, whereby there is continuall traffique betwixt this of Canton and the other Prouinces, there being aboue three thousand Porters, or bearers of Burthens, which carrie those wares, besides Beasts of carriage, and that with great fidelitie; a rare vertue in other parts of China. When they haue passed out of Canton, ouer this Mountaine, they come into the Riuer, which is called the Sonne of the Sea for the largenesse, but in Winter (which is their driest season) full of shoalds, the cause of much shipwrackes. But lest my Relation stay, or bee wracked in these shoalds: let vs take view of that which the King bestowed on the Iesuites for their Residence, and for the Bariall of Matthaeus Ricius, to whom our China Relations are so much indebted.
 It was aboue a quarter of a myle from one of the Citie gates, built by an Eunuch, who now was condemned for some crime; and lest his Palace which he had here builded,Place assigned to the Iesuites. Spoylers spoyled. with the expence of aboue 14000. duckats (which in China is a great summe, in that cheapenesse of all things, far beyond Europae an computation) should fal into the hands of spoilers (the goods of Eunuchs in this kingdome vsually becomming his, which first can catch them) he consecrated his Palace, and made it a Temple, maintaining therein one Priest. Such Palaces many of the Magistrates haue neere to the Cities, as retyring places and Tusculanes for their Muses. The portraiture of this whole House, with the Garden, and other appurtenances, Trigantius hath set forth in picture; being after the China building, with the doore Southwards, and so running a great length into the North, with foure great Halls one beyond another;  in the middle parts, and on each side, Chambers and other roomes; beyond all the Garden, the pillars of Timber bearing vp the roofe; the walls and pauement of Bricke. The outmost of these Halls was conuerted into a Temple or Idoll-Chappell, in which was a great Altar of Stone and Bricke, cunningly fretted, painted red (a colour forbidden to priuate houses) and vpon the midst thereof fate a huge Monster of Earth, gilded from top to toe, of massie quantitie. The Chinois call it Ti cam, the God (as they fable) of the Earth and Treasures,Chappell of Ti cam the China. Plato his Image or Idoll. as Pluto in the Poets. In his hand was a Scepter, on his head a Crowne, not vnlike those vsed by our Kings. On each side stood foure ministers of the same matter: on both sides of the roome two great Tables, and on each of them fiue Kings, or great Officers of Hell. On both the wals were painted the same Officers, or Iudges, sitting on their seuerall Tribunals, giuing  sentence on wicked men, euery one according to the condition of his Court. Before them stood many Deuils, more terribly formed then with vs.Deuils and Hell. The paines of Hell also were so deciphered, that could not but strike terror to the beholders; some rosted in yron beds, some fried in scalding oyle, some cut in pieces, or diuided in the middle, or torne of dogs,Minos, Aeacus. Rhadamanthus here haue two other assessors. (...). or otherwise tortured. The first of those Iudges examined the faults, which they said hee saw in a certaine glasse. Those which he found guiltie, were sent to the other Iudges, according to the qualitie of the crimes. One of these was Iudge in cases of Transmigration, which sent the soules of cruell men into Tygres; of vncleane persons, into Swine, and the like: or if their crimes were smaller, into the poorer sort. There was a great Ballance; in one of the Scales,Ballances like those in diuers Legends, as of S. Francis in M. Paris, etc. Stix. Elysian fields. a man laden with sinnes; in the other, one of their hypocriticall prayer-bookes, which counterpoysed  the other Scale, and freed the sinner. There ran through the midst of Hell a discoloured Riuer, which carried away many. For ouer it were two Bridges, one of Gold, the other of Siluer; by which, those passed ouer, which had been deuout Idolaters, carrying in their hands ensignes of the same: these were guided by the Priests, which led them through the midst of Hell to faire and pleasant Groues and Gardens. In another part were painted the dungeons of Hell, with horrible Serpents, flames, Deuills. To the brazen gates thereof there comes an Idolatrous Priest, which in despight of all the Deuils deliuers his mother from those flames. There was no infernall punishment painted, but had such an inscription: Hee which shall pray to such an Idoll a thousand times shall be free from this punishment. The Iesuites beat the earthen Idols to dust, and burnt those of wood, wherein the Chinese Conuerts were  the forwarder, because the Countrey custome is to fill the hollow bellies of these Images with deuoted money or iewells. They demolished the Altar and plastred ouer the pictures, and in place thereof erected the Image of Christ. No priuate man may erect a Temple by Law, which yet the mightie Eunuchs transgresse.
A little before this exchange of Idols into Images (after their distinction, and aThe Iesuites say, that the Chinois maintaine their Idolatries, saying they worship not the Idoll, but God thereby repr^sented, etc. silly one it is) some tooke their last leaue of Ti cam: one kneeling and bidding it farewell; another chasing, said; Thou masse of dung and earth, if thou hast no power to maintaine the Temple and thy selfe, what helpe may I looke for at thy hand? neither art thou worthy of any honour at mine. Others said, that this had sometime borne the name of some other Idoll, and therefore was auenged for that change.
 At Xauceum is the Temple of Nanhoa vpon a goodly Hill, and nigh to it a Monasterie, in which are maintained one thousand of their Religious Regulars, the lands adioyning being theirs. They tell that about eight hundred yeeres since liued one Lusu in great austeritie,
 alwayes girded with a chaine next to his flesh, which vsed to grinde as much rice as might serue one thousand of them a day. When the wormes (by reason of that chaine breeding in his flesh) fell off, he would place it there againe, and aske if it had nothing to gnaw. His carkasse is still kept there, to which are pilgrimages out of all the Kingdome, and this Temple built to his honor. The Regulars are diuided into twelue stations, and each hath a Superior, besides One supreme ouer all the rest. They professed chastitie; but their house was both a stewes for whoredome, and a denne of theeues and robbers. Here were many huge Idols of brasse, and other metall, and of wood, gilded, in one station fiue hundred. They had diuers steeples and bells in them, one so great, that they had neuer seene so great a bell in Europe.
The Corpse of Lusu was shewed them, which they worship* (but many doubt whether it  be the true, for could it escape the wormes, which had seised on it aliue?) kept in the midst of the Temple in a high place, where hang fiftie lamps, which burne at appointed times. The Abbot of this Monasterie confessed that in ancient times the Chinois had worshipped no Idols, but that they were politically appointed by Magistrates, lest the vulgar should bee without all Religion. They haue their Chappels in great mens houses. But we will take view onely of the Kings Temple at Nanquin, and so end. This is a Royall one indeed for greatnesse and statelinesse. It is built in a groue of Pine-trees neere the Citie, which is compast with a wall twelue miles in circuit. The Temple after the China manner of building is most of timber, the wals of brick; diuided into fiue Iles with rowes of pillars on both sides, which  are of round timber as big as two men can fathome: the roofe is carued and guilded verie faire, hauing lost nothing of the beautie, though not vsed by the Kings for sacrifice in this their two hundred yeeres absence. In the midst is an eminent place of precious Marble, in which are two Thrones of Marble, one for the King to sacrifice in, the other left emptie for him to whom he doth sacrifice. The Cloisters without the Temple are beautified with elegant turnings, and all the windowes netted with yron to keepe out birds, which is vsed also in all the Palace. All the doores of the Temple are couered with plates of brasse guilded and richly carued: without the Temple are many Altars of red Marble which represented the Sun, Moone, Starres, and China Mountaines; whereby they inferre that the god there worshipped created all things, which are therefore set without the Temple as acknowledged not  to be gods. No man vnder grieuous penalties may cut a bough off any of the trees in that groue, which makes them great and old. About the Temple are many Cels, which were baths in which the Kings and Ministers washed before sacrifice. There Altars are of the Dutch fashion that one may goe round about them.


@. IX. Of their Funeralls.
THe Chinois are very superstitiously conceited of Death, and are exceeding loth to  haue any die in their house. LinschotenLinschot. l. 1. c. 23. writeth, That when a man lies on his deathbed, they present vnto him the picture of the Deuill, with the Sunne in his right hand, and a Poniard in his left, bidding the sicke man looke well on him, that hee may be his friend in the other world. How euer the sicke be visited, let vs now performe our last office to these Chinois, and follow them to their graues.
Pantogia.Many are the Ceremonies which they there obserue in Funerals. As they honor their parents in their life time (being otherwise lyable to grieuous punishmentsSome are hereof by Libell accused to the King, and depriued of all dignitie., yea some of their chiefest Mandarines will sue for the Kings licence, to leaue their publike function, to giue priuat and more diligent attendance to their parents:) so, after their death, they mourne three yeeres in white Hats and Garments, although they beare the highest Magistracies in the  Kingdome, as the Colai, etc. the militarie Magistrates excepted. The first moneths they gird vnto them a rough Vesture with a rope, like the bare-foot Friers. This is not onely obserued of the meaner sort; but the mightiest Mandarines, after newes of their fathers death, leaue their function, and in their priuate houses bewaile their losse. The wealthier sort keepe them aboue ground two or three yeeres,They haue a kind of Pitch, which closeth the Coffin, so that it stinkes not. in a Parlour, fitted for that purpose, whither they daily resort vnto them, to salute them, and to burne Incense, and set meates before them. Sometimes also the Bonzij, or Priests, resort thither with their Dirges and holy things. Their wiues, children, and neighbours come likewise to bewaile them, being admonished of the death by the sonne or neerest of the kindred, in a solemne Libell mournfully composed. The  Hall is spread with white Clothes or Matts: in the midst thereof is an Altar, and thereon the Coffin and Image of the dead. To that Hall, within foure or fiue dayes, all the kindred come in mourning attyre, one after another, euery houre of the day, and burne odours, and set
 two Wax-lights to the dead, making foure bowings and kneelings, after their fashion, before deliuered; the sonne, meane while, standing by, and modestly lamenting. Behind the Coffin are the women of the house hid, behind a curtaine, in mourning weedes, and howling behauiour. They burne Paper and white Silkes, so thinking to minister apparell to the dead. They will not vse their wonted lodging, diet, and delights; but lye on Straw Mattresses, on the bare ground, neere the Coffin; eate no Flesh, or Dainties, drinke no Wine, Bathe not, companie not with their Wiues, come not at Feasts, nor for certaine moneths space, abroad; alwaies remitting more of this austeritie, as the three yeares grow neerer an end. They vse not the same apparell, house-hold furniture, salutations. They colour part of  the Paper in which they write, with another colour. They obserue not their wonted proper names, but call themselues otherwise, as Disobedient, or such like. Musick is banished; their dyet is hard. When the corpes is to bee buried, all the kindred come together, being re-invited with another Libell, in mourning habit. The pompe is in manner of Procession: di^ers Statues of Men and Women, Elephants, Tygres, and Lyons, all of Paper, diuers-coloured, and gilded, goe before, which at the graue are burned. A long rancke of Priests also attend, which performe many Rites by the way, pattering their prayers, and playing on Tymbrels, Pipes, Cymballs, Bells, and other Instruments. Likewise, huge Censers of Bell-metall are carried on mens shoulders. Then followes the Coffin, adorned sumptuously, carried of forty or fifty Bearers, vnder a great Canopie of Silke. The children come after on foot, leaning  on their staues, as fainting: Then then the women, vnseene, vnder a white curtaine; and then other women, further in bloud, carryed in mourning chayres. They assemble as many Priests as they can, which on musicall Instruments, and with their voyces, tune their mournefull Ditties. The place whither the corps is carried, is adorned with diuers Images. The Coffin is very large, the prouiding of which they commit not to their heire, but themselues in their liues take order for the same, bestowing great care and cost for the best wood and workemanship which they are able to procure, therein spending sometime seuenty, eighty, or a hundred ducats. They hold it vnfortunate to die before they haue prouided the same. They are no lesse curious for the place of their buriall, thinking that hereon dependeth the fortune of their posterity, and therefore sometime spend a whole yeare in consultation, whether  it shall bee toward the North, or some other Region. Their Sepulchers are in the fields on some hillocke neere the Cities, each family by themselues where they fortifie them, and oft-times resort thither to performe their obsequies. To bee buried within the walls were a thing most miserable, neuer to bee forgotten. At these Sepulchres they haue their yeerely meetings, where their kindred burne odours and make a Funerall banket. Their Sepulchres are very great of marble, with the images of diuers beasts and men standing by. Their Epitaphs also in marble, magnificent, with elegant inscriptions of their exploits. For some time after they will eate no flesh, in regard of that passage of soules before spoken of. This opinion is of more authoritie and credite with them then that of Hell or Heauen, although (as is said) their Bookes and Pictures depaint horrible things in that kinde. OthersMaff. and Discourse of China. Escala^ta. ca. 15. adde, that as  soone as one is dead, they wash him, and clothing him in his best apparell, all perfumed, set him in his best chaire, and there all his neerest kindred kneeling before him, take their leaue with teares. They Coffin him (as before) and place him in a roome richly furnished, and couer him with a sheet, in which they paint his portraiture. A table standeth by full of Viands, with Candles on it. Thus doe they keepe him fifteene dayes, euery night the Priests executing their superstitious exequies, burning and shaking certaine papers before Him. By the Sepulchre they plant a Pine tree, which is sacred, and may not be cut downe, nor conuerted to any vse, if the weather ouerthrow it. Their funerall pompe is in manner of Procession, with Candles carried in their hand. They burne vpon the graue many papers, painted with men, cattell, and prouision for his vse in the next world. It is now time to leaue them quietly  resting in their graues: onely a word of their Times reputed holy.
The times religious are the new Moones, and full Moones (as yee haue heard) in which they make great banquets, and then also they muster their Souldiers, who alone may weare weapons is China. They solemnizePerera. also their Birth-dayes, whereunto their kindred doe resort of custome with presents, and receiue good cheere. The Kings birth-day is a great festiuall. ButDiscourse of China. New-yeeres day is their principall feast. This is solemnized of all Sects alike the first new Moone, and then againe the first full Moone in the beginning of the yeere: This is their CandlemasseIt agrees in time and lights. feast, euery man deuising artificiall lanterns of paper, glasse, cloth, the Halls seeming to bee on fire with the multitude of lights; some carrying in the night with great reuels, lights and twisted lanthornes Serpentine fashion, and many deuices are practised  of fire-workes with gunpowder. Then they send New-yeeres-gifts to each other, as Mendoza writes. They haue no Sabboth nor weekely solemnity.



@. X. Of Strangers, and Forren Religions in China.
OF the Iewes in China wee haue spoken already: with their Ethnike rites we haue toyled and tyred you. It may haply be some refreshing to looke vpon Sarecenicall or Christian obiects, if it bee but for variety. How inhospitall the Chinois are to strangers wee haue in part heard, neither permitting egresse to the Natiues,Trigaut. nor ingresse to aliens except in three respects. The first, such as come to payeEuen these that are of the next and tributary countries, are asmuch as vnknowne people, forbidden entercourse, as those of Corea: this by custome more then law. Ric. their  annuall tributes. The second, such as pretending honour and tribute come (as wee haue heard) from the West with seeming tribute, a colour to their gaine by Merchandise. The third, such as in admiration of the Chinian vertues and learning, come thither (as the Queene of Sheba to Salomon) to learne the same, which is the Iesuites pretence: but these must here fixe their habitation, nor may bee suffered to returne; such is their iealousie, of discouering their mysteries to others. And this made the Iesuites, after so long stay, free from feare of expulsion, which yet since complayne ofTrigautius hath published one large Booke of Epistles, and since another larger with pictures, of the persecutions of Iesuites. See also Captaine Saris and Captaine Cocke in my Pilgrimes. lib. 4. c. 1. and 3. and extracts of Pinto, To. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2. in which at large are contained many perticulars here omitted. persecution. But it may not bee knowne, that they haue any intelligence or commerce with strangers: and therefore the Iesuites, which haue obtained two so great priuiledges, the Eunuchs Palace for their Residence, and the imployment in correcting the China Kalender, both by Royall approbation; yet could not obtaine  leaue to goe into the Prouince of Canton, though with Mathematicall pretexts for that Kalender-businesse, to obserue Longitudes and Latitudes of Places, because they were said to bee countreymen to those of Macao. Yea, a Colao, or Counsellor of State, was depriued, for sending a message to a bordering King; a tempest of libelling complaints thundering and showring against him therefore. In the bordering Prouinces they set narrow watch at Custome-houses, Bridges, and in the very Riuers, by ships of warre thereto appointed. But if they bee once gotten into the inner parts of the Kingdome, there are no such officers, not Searchers. Neither may any stranger passe out of the Kingdome, after once entring, without the Kings licence. The Iesuites steale their ingresse and egresse by meanes of the Portugalls, which had the Towne of Macao assigned them by the Chinois for traffique. These come  vsually twice a yeare to the chiefe Citie of the Prouince of Canton, which is not called Quantum, or Canton, (the name of the Prouince) but Quam ceu. All theThis is also testified by Mons. de Monfart. Many Mahumetanes in China. day time they haue free entrance into the Citie about their Merchandise, but must lye on shipboord at night. In the midst of the Riuer there is a little Iland, and therein a Temple, in which they are allowed their Catholike deuotions. There by Boat did they prouide to steale in or out of the Countrey. The Mahumetans that come in by land, if they stay nine yeeres (as is obserued) may neuer returne home againe. Of these there are now many thousand Families in China, dispersed into most of the Prouinces and chiefe Cities. They haue there their Temples very sumptuous, and their Circumcision. But as farre as I could euer learne, they neyther teach, nor care to teach others their deuotions, but are vnskilfull of the Saracen Tenets, and are contemned of the Chinois. It seemes, that there comming in was in the time that the  Tartars raigned here, which since haue increased, and after so long continuance, are not held in suspition, as other strangers. Some say, after the fourth generation they are reputed as Natiues: yea, they are admitted to the studies of Learning, Degrees, and Magistracie, as well as the Chinois. But most of these, thus dignified, relinquish their former Superstition, retayning nothing thereof, but abstinence from Swines flesh, which rather by Naturne, then for Religion, they abhorre. They differ in countenance from the Chinois. Perera saith, hee saw at Fuquien certaine Moores, who could say little of their Religion, but, Mahomet was a Moore, my father was a Moore, and I am a Moore, with some other words of their Alcoran, wherewithall, in abstinence from Swines flesh, they liue (saith he) vntill the Diuell take them  all. He reasoned with them, because hee had in many Chinish Cities seene the Reliques of Mahomet kept; and they answered, That they came in great ships fraught with Merchandize from Paquin-ward, to a Port appointed to them by the King, where they conuerted to their Religion the chiefe Mandarine or Loytia; whereupon the people began to turne Mahumetan. They now waxing bolder, prohibited the eating of Swines flesh, the peoples chiefe food: who hereby prouoked, complayned of a conspiracie betwixt these Moores and the Loytia, against their King. Hereupon hee and the chiefe of them were executed, and the rest dispersed into certaine Cities, where they remained slaues to the King.
Touching ChristiansChristians. in China, there is not so great certaintie. Certaine Mogores told Ricius of some in the Xensian Prouince, in the North parts of China, at a place called Xucheo,  which were white, bearded, vsed Bells, worshipped Isa, that is, Iesus, and Mary, and honored the Crucifix; their Priests married, which cured diseases without medicines. A Iew at Paquin
 gaue more full intelligence, that at Caifumfu, and at Lincin, in the Prouince of Sciantum, and in the Prouince of Sciansi, there liued certaine strangers, whose ancesters had come out of forraine parts, which worshipped the Crosse (which the Chinois expresse by the Character of Ten) and made the signe thereof with the finger on their meate and drinke. They also made the same signe with inke on the foreheads of their children, to preserue them from misfortunes. A Iesuite also saw, in the hands of an Antiquary, a Bel, with a Church and Crosse thereon grauen, circumscribed with Greeke letters. The Iew also reported, that those Crosse-worshippers had the same doctrine in their prayers which the Iewes held: this the Iesuites interpreted of the Psalter common to them both. Hee affirmed that there were many  of them in the Northren prouinces, which so flourished in letters and armes, that they grew suspicious to the Chinois, which he thought was caused by the Saracens some sixty yeeres before. The Magistrates were so incensed hereby, that they for feare were dispersed, some turning Iewes, some Saracens, others Idolaters: and their Temples were also conuerted into Idolatrous Temples, one of which he mentioned in his countrey. Euer since they hide their profession, and when the Iesuits sent one of their Conuerts to make enquity, hee could learne of none: which they thought proceeded from their feare, taking him for a Spie sent from the Magistrates.
All these Sects ^he Chinois call Hoei, the Iewes distinguished by their refusing to eate the sinew or leg; the Saracens, Swines flesh; the Christians by refusing to feede on round-hoosed  beasts, Asses, Horses, Mules, which all both Chinois, Saracens and Iewes doe there feed on. The Saracens called the Christians also Isai as before; and Terzai, which is a name giuen in Persia to the Armenian Christians (as an Armenian affirmed to Ricius) whence hee coniectured, that these Christians came out of Armenia. And by the report of Haithon the ArmenianSee sup. c. 9., which saith, their King came to the Great Chan of Cathay (which wee haue before obserued, at least the best parts thereof, to be the North parts of China) to perswade him and his to become Christians; which in great part also he affected, besides other Christians there reported to bee, by Paulus; and those of Sarnau, subiect to the Great Chan, mentioned by Vertomannus, which seeme to be neere these in China. The MalabarVid. Christ. Exped. ap. s^n. l. 1. in fine. Christians haue Chaldee memorialls of China, conuerted by S. Thomas; and their Metropolitan hath his style of  all India and China.
Now, for the later Christianitie there preached by the Iesuites, their owne Commentaries and annuall Epistles are full. XaueriusXauerij vitae l. 5. c. 8. and d. attempted it often and earnestly but could neuer obtaine entrance; which by others of that societie was after affected, and with much trouble effected. When the Portugalls came first into those parts, the Chinois were suspicious of them, their Ordnance and great shippes seeming dreadfull. The Saracens told them, they were called Franks (so they call all the Europaeans, since the Expedition of Godfrey of Bullen) which name the Chinois in Canton still giue them, calling them and their Ordnance Falanks (pronouncing l for r, as th for d, p for b) and by relating the Conquests of Malacca, and other places in India, brought them into greater iealousie. Yet couetousnesse of gaine  opened them a way first to merchandise in a desart Iland, called Sancian, seauenty myles off in the Sea, and after to a habitation assigned them in a Peninsula (part of a greater Iland) neere to China, called of an Idoll Ama, there honored, Amacao, or Amas harbour, shortly M^cao:Macao. which since that time hath beene inhabited by people of diuers Nations, together with the Portugalls, and hath become a Citie, with a Bishops See, and a Colledge of Iesuites, and a famous Mart of Europaean and Indian commodities. After that they admitted them traffique in the chiefe Citie of Canton, two dayes sayling from Macao: whereby they found meanes, by degrees, to bring in first Ruggerus, and after Ricius, with other Iesuites; which insinuating by gifts and obsequiousnesse into the Magistrates affections, furthered the same by reputation of Sanctitie, and especially of Learning. Many yeeres they spent to little purpose,  till Ricius by his Mathematikes, and the Art of Memorie, in both which the Chinois admired him; then by changing his h^b^^ into that of the Learned men in China, professing also a maintenance of the Sect of C^^^^stus; which they professed, and confutation of the Idoll Sects; and lastly, by presents to the King; he made way into the Kings Palace and fauour, who also bestowed an Idoll Temple for (...), and the Residence of his Societie.An. Dom. 1610. Many troubles they encountred meane while, to g^^ (...) ^eepe their Residences; that inhospitall people, sometimes accusing them to the Magist^ats with deuised Calumnies, sometimes tumultuously stoning their houses, sometimes charging them to be the cause of Dearth, or that their Idols sent them not raine; calling them Deuill strangers, fathering on them curious Arts, not only of Alchymie and Long life, which they honour, but others: as that they knew by mens  countenance, that they had a precious stone in their heads, to I know not what purposes; that they plotted deuices against the state; and the Crucifix was accused also, as deuised by inchantments to destroy the King. The Hollanders likewise, among other their infestations of the
 Portugalls in all the parts of India, brought these of Macao into such feare, that they went about to Compasse some part of their Towne with a Wall: which the Chinois there dwelling, thinking to be done against them, caused such an vprore, that they fell together by the eares: and another quarrell happening betweene a Religious and a Secular Priest, the Chinois gaue out, that Cataneus the Iesuite went about to make himselfe King of China (as one that knew the Countrey, and had bin in both the Royall Cities) with the helpe of the Iesuites there residing, Iapanders, and others. This made the Chinois to flye from Macao, and to divulge such rumors in Canton, that there was a sudden muster of souldiers through the Prouince, and one thousand houses of the chiefe Citie without the Walls pulled downe, one of the Iesuites Societie apprehended and beaten with Canes to death,Ep. 1611. and with much adoe, this little  adoe was after pacified. And now the Iesuites thinke themselues in better case then euer, and haue (as they say) conuerted fiue thousand to their Faith in this Kingdome, after thirty yeares labours, hauing foure or fiue places of Residence. And would God, as I professe my selfe indebted to them for this Light of History, so they might haue iust cause of thankefulnesse to God and them, for the Christian Light; and that it were not confused with such Heathenish exchange, of one Image for another, and rather the names, then substance of deuotion, altered; Beads, Tapers, Single Votaries, Processions, Monasteries, Altars, Images, hee and she Saints,1. Cor. 2.5. Heb. 11.1. Vbi vides non est fides: (...). with other Rites, being there alreadie: and the very art of their Images causing an Ethnike adoration (as they tell of a Vice-roy, that would not looke vpon one of them, but in a Chappell, in the higher part of his house, set on an Altar, with Tapers and Odours  dayly burning thereto) and their manner of Preaching being not by Word, so much as by Writing; and that not by Authorities of Scripture, but by Arguments of Reason, furthered by their owne Philosophie, and commended by Mathematicall Sciences: strange Ground-workes to Faith and Theologie.





 OF THE EAST-INDIES, AND OF THE SEAS AND ILANDS ABOVT ASIA, WITH THEIR RELIGIONS. THE FIFTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of India in Generall, and of the Ancient Rites there obserued.

@. I. The Limits, and the ancient People and Inuasions of India.
THe name of India, is now applyed to all farre-distant Countries, not in the extreme limits of Asia alone; but euen to whole America, through the error of Columbus and his fellowes; who at their first arriuall in the Westerne world, thought that they ha^^ met with Ophir, and the Indian Regions of the East. But the Ancients also comprehended vnder this name a huge Tract of Land, no lesse in the iudgement of Alexanders followers in his Eastern Inuasions, then the third part of the Earth; Ctosias accounted it one halfe of Asia. Yea, a great part of Africa also is comprehended vnder that name. So TurnebusTur. Ad. l. 27. cap. 9. Higin. Fab. 275. in his Aduersaria, not onely findeth the Barbarians and Parthians, called by that name in Virgil; but Thebes in the higher Egypt, and Ammone Temple in Higinus; and Aethiopia also, as in our discourseVid. l. 7. c. 3. thereof will further appeare. But taking India more  properly, DionysiusDion. Afer. bounds it betweene Caucasus, and the Red-Sea, Indus and Ganges: Ouid likewise in that Verse,
Decolor extremo qua cingitur India Gange. But PtolemyPtol. lib. 7. and other Geographers, did vsually diuide India by the Riuer Ganges, into two parts, one on this side Ganges, and the other beyond. Although here we finde no lesse difficultie concerning Ganges, which the most, with my selfe, account the same with Guenga, that falleth into the gulfe of Bengala, which they also imagine to be that, which of the Ancients is called Sinus Gangeticus: OthersMercat. Tab. vniuers. Magin. Ge^g. G. Arthus, Hist. Ind. Or. esteeme the Riuer Canton (wh^^eon standeth the supposed Canton, chiefe City of one of the Chinian Prouinces, whereof wee haue  so lately taken our leaue) to be that Ganges: of which minde are Mercator, Maginus, Gotardus Arthus, and their disciples. M. PaulusM. Paulus, lib. 3. diuideth India into three parts, the Lesse, the Greater, which hee calleth Malabar; and Abassia, betwixt them both. Dom. Niger
 reckonethNig. Com. As. x. the same number. The Name of IndiaSteph Byzant. (...), etc. flowed from the Riuer Indus. Semiramis is reported to inuade India with three millions of foot-men, and 500000. horse, besides counterfeit Elephants, made of the hides of 300000. Oxen, stuffed with hay. Yet Staurobates, at that time the Indian Monarch, brake her Forces, and chased her out of the field.
Megasthenes reckoneth one hundred twentie two Indian Nations. Arrianus in his eight booke makes a large description of this Indian world, saying, That they liued like the Scythians, without Houses, Cities, Temples, in a wandring course with their Tents, on the barke of the Tree Tala, and wild Venison, the skins where of were there garments. In all India were no seruants, but all free-men. These things were altred by Bacchus or Dionystus, who made an Expedition hither, not so much with Armes as with Arts. He taught them the vse of Wine,  Oyle, and Sacrificing: in memorie whereof, Posteritie honoured him for a god. Of this the Poets, and Histories of Alexander, and others, make much mention. So doth Suidas tell of one Brachman, that prescribed the Rites and Lawes of the Brachmanes: Solinus of Hydaspes; and others of Ganges, Hercules, and the rest, with much vnce^taintie. PostellusPost. de Originib. c. 13. and 15. strangely conceiteth himselfe, that Abrahams posteritie by Keturah seated themselues in India, and were there knowne by the name o^ Iewes, before the Iewes in Palestina: that they obserued Circumcision, and dispersed it into Syria, Egypt, Armenia, Colchis, Iberia, Paphlagonia, Chaldea, and India, before Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt: and that the Brachmanes were so called, quasi Abrahmanes, as following the instructions of Abraham. Abraham wee beleeue the Father of the faithfull, but cannot father on him such vnfaithfull and degenerate generations,  no more then with the same Postellus wee acknowledge the Turkes the posteritie of the ten Tribes, and the TartarsThis word signifies a Remnant, and Otho Heurnius with like Ca^all-conceit, imagineth the gifts of Abra. to the sonnes of Ketura, to be Magike and Astrologie. to be the remainder of those Turkes, following Cabalisticall coniectures. But that which he speaketh of the name Iewes and Abrachmanes in India, may perhaps arise from a testimony cited out of Megasthenes his Indica, by Clem.Clem. Stromat. lib 1. Alex. That all things obserued by Naturall Phylosophers in Greece bad beene handled before, partly by the Brachmanes amongst the Indians, partly of those which in Syria are called Iewes: in which testimonie he ioyneth Iewes and Brachmanes in Profession of the same learned Science of Naturall Philosophy. ApuleiusApul. Florid. lib. 1. maketh the Brachmans first Founders of the Pythagorean learning: and reporteth further, That at dinner-time the Table was made readie, and the youths from diuers Places and Seruices resorted thither: at which time the Masters questioned with  them what good they had done that day: one answereth, Hee had beene a Peace-maker to reduce such and such which were at oddes, to amitie: another had done this or that for his Parents: another had studied or meditated on such a point. Once, he which could not giue good account of his mornings worke, might not be admitted to receiue any dinner-wages.
Strabo in his fifteenth Booke is large in this Indian subiect. Hee reporteth out of Aristobulus, that the Riuer Indus by force of an Earth-quake, changed his channell, thereby a great part of the neighbour Region being turned into a desart. For in this, Indus is like vnto Nilus, in that, without it, the Countrey would be a Wildernesse, and therefore is also worshipped of the Inhabitants. It receiueth fifteene other Riuers into it. Hee mentioneth the Cathei not farre from thence, which after happily gaue name vnto Cathay.  
The Indians are of seuen sorts:Plin. l. 6. c. 19. Ar. lib. 8. The first in estimation, and sewest in number, were their Philosophers. These kept-publike Acts once a yeere before the King, and he which in his Obseruations was found three times false, was condemned to perpetuall silence. The second sort were Husband-men, which payd the King (the onely owner of all the Land) a fourth part of the increase. The third, was of Shepheards and Huntsmen, which wandred in Tents, The fourth, Artificers. The fifth, Souldiers. The sixth, Magistrates. The seuenth, Courtiers, and those of his Priuie Councell. If any woman killeth the King in his drunkennesse, shee is rewarded with the marriage of his Sonne and Heire. If any depriue another of a member, besides like for like, he loseth his hand; and, if hee bee an Artificer, his life. They strangle their sacrifice, that it may be so offered whole to their Idols.  


@. II. Of their Philosophicall or Religious Sects.
OF their Philosophers, or men Learned and Religious, theBrachmanes, Vid. Strab. Cl. Duret. Heur. etc. Brachmanes obtaine the first place, as being neerest in Sects to the Greekes. These are after their manner Nazarites from the wombe. So soone as their Mother is conceiued of them, there are learned men appointed which come to the Mother, with Songs, containing  Precepts of Chastitie. As they grow in yeeres they change their Masters. They haue their places of Exercise in a Groue nigh to the Citie, where they are busied in graue conferences.
 They eare no liuing Creatures, nor haue vse of women, liue frugally, and lye vpon skinnes. They will instruct such as will heare them, but their Hearers must neither Sneese, nor Spit, nor Speake. When they haue in this strict course spent seuen and thirtie yeeres, they may liue more at Pleasure and Libertie, in Dyet, Habit, proper Habitation, and the vse of Gold, and Marriage. They conceale their mysteries from their Wiues, lest they should blab them abroad. They esteeme this life as mans Conception, but his Death day to bee his Birth-day vnto that true and happy life, to him which hath beene rightly Religious. They hold the World to bee Created, Corruptible, Round, ruled by th^ high GOD. Water they imagine to haue beene the beginning of making the World; and  that besides the foure Elements, there is a fifth Nature, whereof the Heauen and Starres consist. They intreate of the immortalitie of the Soule, and of the torments in Hell, and many such like matters.
TheThe Indian Germanes. Germanes, another Order of Religious or Learned men, are honoured amongst them: especially such of them as liue in the Woods, and of the Woods, both for their dyet of those wilde Fruits, and their habit of the Barkes of Trees, not acquainted with Bacchus or Venus any more then with Ceres. They speake not to the Kings; when they aske counsell of them, but by messengers; and doe pacifie the angrie gods, as is supposed, by their holinesse.
Next in honour to these, are certaine Mendicants, which liue of Rice and Barley, which  any man at the first asking giueth them, together with entertainment into their houses. These professe skill in Physicke, and to remedie Diseases, Wounds, and Sterilitie; very constant in labour and hardship. Others there are, Inchanters and Diuiners, Masters of Ceremonies about the Dead, which wander thorow Townes and Cities. Some there are more Ciuil and Secular, in their life professing like Pietie and Holinesse. Women also are admitted vnto the fellowship of their studies in this Philosophie, not to their beds. Aristobulus writeth, That hee saw two of these Brachmanes, the one an old man shauen, the other young with long haire, which sometimes resorted to the Market-place, and were honoured as Counsellors, and freely tooke what they pleased, of any thing there to be sold, for their sustenance. They were anointed with Sesumine oyle, wherewith, and with hony, they tempered there bread.  They were admitted to Alexanders Table, where they gaue lessons of patiencePractice of pre^cribed patience.: and after going to a place not farre off, the old Man lying downe with his face vpward, sustained the Sun and showers terrible violence. The yonger standing on one foot, held in both his hands a piece of wood of three cubits lifted vp, and shifted feet, as the other was weary: nd so they continued euery day. The young man returned home afterward, but the old man follow^d the King, with whom he changed his Habit and Life, for which, when as he was by some reproued, he answered, That he had fulfilled the fortie ye^res exercise, which he had vowed. Onesicritus saith, that Alexander, hearing of some Religious Obseruants, which went naked, and exercised themselues to much hardship, and wouldTh like st b^o^nn^^ i^ yet in the^ Iogines. not come to others, but would bid Men, if they would haue any thing with them, to come to them; sent him v^to them, who  found fifteene of them twentie furlongs from the City, each of them obseruing his own gesture of sitting, standing, or lying naked, and not stirring til sun-setting, in that vnsupportable heat, at which time they returned into the Citie. Calanus was one of them. He afterward followed Alexander into Persia, where beginning to be sicke, hee caused a great Pile or Frame of wood to be made, wherein he placed himselfe in a golden chayre, and caused fire to be put to, in which he was voluntarily consumed, telling (if they tell tru^) that he would meet Alexander at Babylon, the place fatall to Alexanders death. AelianusA^lian. V^^^ ^i^s^. l. 5 c. 6. saith, That this was done in a suburbe of Babylon, and that the fire was of Cedar, Cypres, Mirtle, Laurell, and other sweet woods: and after he had performed his daily exercise of running, hee placed himselfe in the middest, crowned with the leaues of Reeds, the Sunne shinning on him, which he worshipped.  This adoration was the signe which hee gaue to the Macedonians to k^ndle the fire, in which he abode without any stirring till hee was dead; Alexander himselfe admiring, and preferring this victorie of Calanus before all his owne. This Calanus told Onesicritus of a golden World, where Meale was as plentiful as dust, and Fountaines streamed Milk, Hony, Wine, and Oyle. Which Country, by men turned into wantonnesse, Iupiter altered and detayned, imposing a life of hardnesse and labour, which while men followed, they enioyed abundance; but now that men begin to furfet and grow disobedient, there is danger of vniuersall destruction. When hee had thus spoken, hee bad him, if hee would heare further, strip himselfe, and lie naked vpon these stones. But Mandanis,Art. calleth him Dandanis, lib. 7. another of them, reproued Calanus for his ha^shnesse, and, commending Alexander for his loue to learning, said, that  they inured their bodies to labour, for the confirmation of their mindes against passions. For his nakednesse he alledged, that that was the best house which needed lest furniture of houshold. Hee added, that they searched the secrets of Nature, and that returning into the
 Citie, if they met with any carrying figs or grapes, they receiued of him gratis: if oyle, they powred it on them: and all mens houses and goods were open to them, euen to the Parlors of their wiues. When they were entred, they imparted the wisdome of their sentences, as the other communicated his meats. If they feared any disease, they preuented the same with fire, asQuique suas struxere pyras, viuique calentes Conscendere rogos, etc. Luc. l. 3. was now said of Calanus. Megasthenes reproueth this Calanus, as Alexanders Trencher-Chaplaine, and commendeth Mandanis, saying, That when Alexanders messengers told him that he must come to the sonne of Iupiter, with promise of rewards, if he came, otherwise menacing torture: hee answered, That neither was he Iupiters sonne, nor did possesse any great part of the earth: as for himselfe, he neither respected his gifts, nor feared his threatnings; for while he liued, India yeelded him sufficient; if he dyed, he should be freed from age, and exchange  for a better and purer life. Whereupon, he saith, Alexander both pardoned and praised him. Clitarchus reporteth also, that to the Brachmanes are opposed another sect, called Pramnae, men full of subtiltie and contention, which derided the studies of others in Physiologie and Astronomie. He diuideth the Brachmanes into those of the Mountaines, clothed in Deere skins, which carried scrips, full of roots, and medicines, which they applied with certaine charmes to cure diseases: and the second sort he calleth Gymnetae, those naked ones before mentioned (whereof it seemeth they were called Gymnosophistae) which had women amongst them, but not in carnall knowledge: the third he calleth Ciuill, which liued in Cities and Villages, wearing fine linnen, and apparrelled in skins. ClemensClem. Al. Strom. l. 3. Alexandrinus speakes of their fastings, and other austere courses, out of Alex. Polyhistor, de rebus Indicis. The  Brachmanes (saith he) neither eate any quick thing, nor drinke wine. But some of them eat euery day, as we doe: some onely euery third day. They contemne death, nor much esteeme of life, beleeuing to be borne againe. Some worship Pan and Hercules. But those Indians which are called (...) for their grauitie and austeritie, liue altogether naked. These practise Truth, and foretell things to come, and worship a certaine Pyramis, vnder which they thinke are laid the bones of some god. Neither the Gymnosophists, nor these (...) vse women, but thinke it vnlawfull and against Nature, and therefore obserue chastitie. Likewise there are Virgins, which are called (...) of the female sexe. They seeme to obserue the heauenly bodies, and by their signification to foretell future euents. Thus farre Clemens.
Nicolaus Damascenus saith,Nic. Damasc. Suetonius mentioneth this, in vita Augusti, cap. 21. That at Antiochia hee saw the Indian Embassadors, sent to  Augustus from Porus the King (as his letter contained) of sixe hundred Kings, with presents, among which was a female-Viper of sixteene Cubits (one of the like bignesse Strabo saith, he saw sent out of Egypt) and a Cray-fish of three Cubits, and a Partrich bigger then a Vulture. Zarmanochagas, one of these Indian Philosophers, was one of the Embassadours, who at Athens burned himselfe, not moued thereto by aduersitie, but by prosperitie, which had in all things followed his desires, lest in his succeeding age it might alter: and therefore entered the fire, anointed, naked, laughing. His Epitaph was, Here lyeth Zarmanochagas the Indian, of Bargosa, which according to his Countrey-custome, made himselfe immortall.
But it is not such maruell that their Philosophers thus contemned death, whereas  their Women, the weaker and more fearefull sexe, wherein out-went their sexe and weakenesse. For their custome admitting many wiues, the dearest of which was burned with the deceased husband: Hae igitur contendunt inter se de amore viri (they areHier. Aduers. Iouin. lib. 1. Hieromes words) and ambitio summa certantium est, ac testimonium castitatis, dignam morte decerni. They ambitiously contend amongst themselues, to obtaine this fatall testimonie of their husbands loue, and their owne chastitie; and the conqueresse in her former habit, lyeth downe by the carkasse, embracing and kissing the same, contemning the fire which thus marryeth them againe in despight of deaths diuorce. A thing to this day obserued in many parts of India, as we shall see anon. ArrianusArr. Perip. Mar. Eryth. reporteth of a place called Comar (it seemeth the Cape Comori ouer-against Zeilan) wherein is a Hauen, to which vsed to resort certaine Votaries,  which had deuoted themselues to a single life, to wash themselues in those holy-waters. The like was done by their Nun-like women. They had a tradition of a certaine goddesse, which vsed to wash her selfe there euery moneth.
Suidas telleth of a Nation called Brachmanes, inhabiting an Iland in the Sea, where Alexander erected a pillar, with inscription, that he had passed so farre. They liue an hundred and fiftie yeeres, and haue neither bread, wine, flesh, nor metals, nor houses, but liue of the fruits, and cleere water, and are very religious. Their wiues liue apart on the other side Ganges, to whom they passe in Iuly and August, and after fortie dayes, returne home againe. When the wife hath had two children, shee neither knoweth her husband after, nor any other man; which is obserued also, when in fiue yeeres he can raise no issue of her, hee after abstaineth.  TheseIo. Boem. slay no beasts in sacrifice, but affirme, That GOD better accepteth vnbloudie sacrifices of Prayer, and more delighteth in Man, his owne Image.

In the Hills,Laur. Coruin. called Hemodi, Bacchus is said to haue erected pillars, to witnesse his Conquest, as farre in that Easterne Ocean, as Hercules did in the West. He built the Citie Nysa, where he left his sicke and aged Souldiers, which Alexander spared,Arrian. lib. 5. and suffered to their owne libertie, for Dionysius or Bacchus his sake. And as Bacchus erected Pillars, so did Alexander Altars to the Twelue chiefe gods, as high as Towers, Monuments of his farre trauels, where he obserued solemne games and sacrifices. HeeArrian. lib. 6. sacrificed also, not to his Countrey gods alone, but to Hydaspis, Acesine, and Indus, Indian Riuers, and to other gods, with other Rites and Sacrifices, then he had before vsed: drowning a golden bowle in Indus, and another in the Ocean, in his Ethnicke superstition. To him did the Indian Magi (so doth  ArrianusArrian. lib. 7. call their Brachmanes) say, That hee was but as other men, sauing that hee had lesse rest, and was more troublesome, and being dead, should enioy no more land, then would serue to couer his bodie. And euery man (said they) stamping with their feet on the ground, hath so much as he treadeth on. EusebiusEuseb. de Praep. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. reciteth out of Bardesanes Cyrus, that amongst the Indians, and Bactrians, were many thousand Brachmanes, which as well by Tradition, as Law, worshipped no Image, nor ate any quick Creature, dranke no Wine nor Beere, only attending on Diuine things: whereas the other Indians are very vicious, yea, some hunt Men, sacrifice, and deuoure them, and were as Idolaters.
Plinie, besides his Relations of Monsters in these parts, telleth of their Philosophers (called Gymnosophists) like things to that, which is before mentioned of their beholding the  Sunne from the rising to the setting, with fixed eyes, standing on the hot sands all day long, on one foot by course. Tooth-ache, with other diseases of the head and eyes, spitting, and other sicknesses, are either exiles or strangers to the Indians. Tully saith,Tusc. quaest. lib. 5. That in this naked plight these Philosophers endure the cold of Winter, and Snowes of Caucasus, while they liue, and the burning fire at their end without any playning. The Indian women also striue which shall be marryed to her husbands corps, in a fierie Chariot, riding with him into another World.
Hystaspes,Am. Marcel. lib. 23. the Father of Darius, is reported to haue learned of the Indian Philosophers or Brachmanes, both Astronomie and Rites of Religion, with which hee after instructed the Persian Magi. NoneArrian. lib. 1. might sacrifice without one of these to direct him, who  onely among the Indians had skill of Diuination, and authoritie to sacrifice, and were free from other seruices.


@. III. Many doubtfull and fabulous reports of the Indians.
THe Indians are said to worship Iupiter, Ganges, and other Heroes of their Countrey. Some of the Indian Nations accounted it dishonourable (as they doe also at this  day) for the wiues not to be burned with their deceased husbands. ThomasDorothaeus in vita Barthol. and Thom. the Apostle preached the Gospell to the Indians, and so did Bartholomew also, and destroyed their Idols (which wrought great wonders amongst them) Astaroth, Beirith, and Waldath, as AbdiasPseudo-Abdias. Bab. Episc. reporteth, who euen in this Historie may easily be conuinced to be counterfeit, in ascribing the Names and Religions of the Grecians, Iuno, Neptune, Berecinthia, to the Indians; besides those vnchristian reuenges, in killing so many of their Aduersaries, and old Heathenish, new Popish Ceremonies, fathered on those Apostles.
To let passe that Abdias, a fit Bishop of that mysticall Babylon:Gen. di lib. 6. cap. 26. Alexander ab Alexandro reckoneth among their gods the greatest Trees (to cut which, was with them a capitall crime) and a Dragon, in honor of Liber Pater. Hercules they honored in a Gyant-like statue,  whose daughter Pandaea, the Pandeans say, was their first Queene. These affirme, that in the Hill Meros, which they account sacred to Iupiter, is a Caue wherein Liber or Bacchus was nourished, from whence the fable grew, that hee was borne of Iupiters thigh; for so (...) signifieth. Some of the Indians (saithSolin. cap. 55. Solinus) kill no beasts, nor eate flesh: some liue onely on fish. Some kill their Parents and Kinsfolks, before Age or sicknesse withereth them, and deuoure their flesh: an argument, not of villany, but pietie amongst them. Their GymnosophistsPlin. l. 7. c. 2., from the Sun-rising to the setting, fixe their eyes on the bright Orbe of the sun, thence obseruing certaine secrets. Hereunto he addeth the tales, of Men with dogs-heads; of others with one leg, and yet very swift of foot: of Pigmeis, of such as liue onely by sent: of hoarie Infants; of some like Polyphemus, with one eye in their fore-head; of  others with eares to the ground, wherein many of the old Writers are Poets, and the Moderne, Painters, as in many other Monsters of Men and Beasts. We seeke credit with the wise, and not admiration of fooles.

Ctesias in his Indica (which PhotiusPhot. 72. hath preserued rather as a Monument of Ctesias his lying, then of Indian truth) hath told the like incredible tales; that it neuer rayneth in India, that there is a Fountaine of liquid gold receiued into pitchers of Earth, that the Sea in the top is boyling hot, with the monstrous Martichora, a man-like beast, and other more horrible beast-like men, with tailes and heads of dogs, without speech: the little truth in his little Pigmeis both beasts and men; his great lyes of great Gryphons, Lyon-Eagles, Keepers of golden Mountaines, with other like fables, scarce in one thing agreeing with our Moderne, and more certaine obseruations, and such, as if of purpose he had in challenge of the World cast downe the Gantlet for the Whetstone, which for my part, I thinke he best deserueth. This hath the lyer gotten by lying, that in his Persian storie, which he had better  meanes to know, he is the more doubted: and such relations haue made Indian reportsVelquae loca fabulosus Lambit Hydaspes, Horat. accounted fabulous.
TheAlex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Aelian. Var. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1. Indians neuer sacrificed, or saluted their Idols without dances. They were neuer rewarded with militarie honor or spoile, except they brought into the Campe an enemies head in their hand. They punished periurie with the losse of fingers and toes; and such as deceiued their Clients, with perpetuall silence; and besides, they were disabled vnto any Office. Their Lawes are not written; their Contracts without seales, or witnesses. They vsed no pledges; nor might borrow or lend vpon vsury.
Philostratus in his large Legend of the life of Apollonius Tyanaeus, their Philosophicall Saint, relatethPhil. l. 2. c. 4. his Pilgrimage into India, to the Brachmanes, in which he came to Nysa,  where was a Temple of Bacchus built by himselfe, planted about with Bayes, Vines, and Iuy, whose shadie roofe couered the same. In the middest was an Image: all Instruments belonging to the Vintage were there, some of Gold, others of Siluer hanged vp, sacred to Dionysius. Hee afterCap. 9. came to Taxilla the Citie Royall, where he found the Temple of the Sun, and in it, the yuorie Image of Aiax, with golden statues of Alexander: and ouer-against the same, the brazen Images of Porus. The walls of red Marble shined like fire, interlaid with Gold, resembling lightning. The Mosaicall floore pouldred with Pearles. The King here offered sacrifice to the Sun. For theLib. 3. cap. 1. Pepper-trees, which (he saith) are great, and abound with Apes, who gather the Pepper for the Indians gratis, brought thereunto by a wyle of the Indians, who first gather some, and lay it on heapes, and then go away: at their returne,  finding many the like heapes made by the emulous Apes; I leaue it to the Authors authoritie, and Readers credulitie: as that also which followeth of the Inhabitants of Paraca in these parts, who by eating a Dragons heart and liuer, attaine to vnderstand the Language (if so I may terme it) of Beasts. And if you maruell at this,Cap. 3. that which followes will amaze you: of Men which doe not, as the former, communicate with the nature of Beasts, but of Spirits, making themselues at their pleasure inuisible. Here in a holy Hill was a pit, whereof no man drinketh, by which the Indians bind their faith, as by the most solemne and inuiolable oath. In this pit was a fierie receptacle, where men were purged from their offences; and two tubs (of Whetstones, I should say) of raines and windes, the one being opened yeelding raines, and the other windes. In this place were many Indian, Grecian, and Egyptian statues, with their  Rites obserued accordingly. This Hill was reported the middle of India, and euery noonetide they sing Hymnes to the Sun for that fire, borrowed (they say) from his beames. The Brachmanes sleepe on the ground, on hearbes strewed two cubits thick, that by this eleuation they might more signifie their deuotion to the Sun, whom they laud night and day. Hee foundCap. 4. Iarchas their Principall, with seuen Associats, sitting on Thrones of Brasse. Iarchas could tell Apollonius his Name, Nation, and Aduentures, which had befalne him all his life. They anoint themselues, then wash in a Fountaine, and after this being crowned, enter the Temple in solemne Procession, with Dances, smiting the ground with Rods, wherewith the earth, like vnto waues, did moue and raise it selfe. Iarchas being asked by Apollonius, What he thought of himselfe and his company? answered, That they were Gods; because they  were good men: that hee himselfe had sometime beene Ganges, and Apollonius before had beene an Egyptian Mariner; an Attendant, which there waited on them, had been Palamedes, whose misfortunes wee read of in the warres of Troy, thus in new bodies presenting themselues to the world. The World, he said, was a liuing creature, compounded of fiue Elements, with diuers other things of Pygmies, which liued vnder the earth, of Gryphons, etc. Thus much I thought to adde of Apollonius, because some vaine Philosophers haue impudently compared him to our Sauiour, that the Reader might parallell this Legend with the Gospel; out of this darknesse, the more to admire that more then admirable Light. And thus much out of Philostratus, of the Brachmanes. The Gymnosophists are by him placed, and by that name knowne, in Aegypt and Aethiopia, whither also Apollonius went to visit them, and we in  due place will follow him.




CHAP. II. Of later Indian Discoueries, and an Apologie for the English Trade in the East Indies.

@. I. Of the Portugals and Dutch.
AFter this glut of Fables (which commonly attend whatsoeuer is farre distant in Time or Place) the Indian Truth will be more welcome,Tempus edax Saturni fab. Ver^tas Temp. filia. as the Sun after a storme. And Time, her Father, (which was said before to deuou^e her) hath now brought her out of her obscure Prison, and by Neptunes helpe shipped her into Europe. In this Expedition, the Portugalls were first in Commission, the Hollanders and English since annexed. These are the Triumviri, which of all the Europaean Nations haue subdued those Seas: Happie Three, if they enuied not each others happinesse: a three-fold-cord, by no humane power to be broken. The Portugalls  in the yeere 1498. (hauing about eleuen months before passed from Lisbone, the Cape of Good Hope happily compassed) first entred the Indian Ocean, and came to Calicut, Vasco d^ G^mma being Generall of that Fleet, which King Emanuel set forth. Their Exploits by Sea and Land, as well on the Westerne Coast of Africa, euer since Henry the Infant had begun this Discouerie, vntill this time, as on the Easterne, beyond the Cape: their Conquests by Gamma, Albuquerque, and others, which subdued to the Portugall Scepter so many Territories, peopled so many Ilands, erected so many Forts both on the African and Asian Shoares, made Tributarie so many pettie Kingdomes; their owne Writers, Barrius, Osorius, Maffaus, and others, haue sufficiently recorded. Besides what they held in Barbarie, they reckon theirs the Acores, Madera, the Ilands of Cabo Verde, the Fortresses of Arguin in  Guinea, and of Mina; the Ilands del Principe, S. Thomas, Atubon, with some places in Congo and Angola, and Brasile also, on the American shoare: beyond the Cape, Soffala, Mosambique, Bombassa; the Iland of Ormuz, in the Persian Gulfe; in India, the Castles and Townes of Diu, Daman, Bacayn, Chaul, Goa, Honor, Barcela, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, and Coulan: in Seylan, Columbo; Negapatan and S. Thomas, on Choromandel Coast; Porto Pequene, Porto Grande; Serapure, in Bengala; Serone, Malacca, Molucca Ilands, Malao, and Nangasacke, in Iapan, with other their Conquests; which, besides their Empire ouer these Seas, and Riches by Merchandise, made Portugall the least part of the Portugall Crowne; pars minima est ipsa Puella Sui. And worthy of praise they are, that being so small and poore a Nation, haue thus enla^ged their State and Soueraignetie, which they haue  brauely defended against all the power of the Saracens in those parts, and the mighty Kings of Cambaya, Deccan, and the Great Turkes Forces, in strong Sieges. But whiles they sought a Monopoly of Indian Merchandise, and as Neptunes Minions, would engrosse all Sea-fauors to themselues; not onely (I know not with what right) forbidding the Indians to Trade their owne Seas, but those Europaean Courages, which gloried in as good Neptunian bloud as themselues; the Hollander steps forth, and borrowing his words and rage together, challengeth the Portugall,
Non illi imperium Pelagi saevumque tridentem,Sed mihi sorte datum.Cornel. Houtman Generall.
 And for proofe alledgeth Cannon Law, and Steele Arguments, making Prize of all hee can get from them. And so haue they preuailed within these twentie yeeres (for in the yeere 1595. were their first Ships sent from Amsterdam) that now, besides many mischiefes executed on the Portugalls in Africa and India, by Land and Sea, they had thirtie seuen Factories, and twentie Ports and Castles in the East Indies, long since mentioned in Nicolas Bangams iournall: and since haue furtherSee my Pilgrimes, To. 1. l. 2. 3. 4. 5. Especially pag. 86. and 706. and seq. and generally the fifth booke is of actions of or with the Dutch. preuailed in Iacatra, Banda, and other places, and scarcely could brooke the English their old friends, that new Indian neighbour-hood.



@. II. Of the English Trade there; many arguments in defence of it.
NOw, if that this Collaterall Line of that Sea-Soueraigne may promise thus much of his fauours to themselues, how much more may the English? Hee but kisseth Them in passing by, but euer embraceth in neuer-vnclasped armes this Brittish Nymph, and long since offered all his Shoares in Dowrie. Yea, let this be added to the English glorie, that Prince Henrie, first Founder of the Portugall Discoueries, was of  English bloud, sonne to Philip the daughter of Iohn of Gaunt. And for the Hollanders, I say not their free Nauigation, but that they are a free Nation (I would they did not forget this in the Indies) may be ascribed to English Protection and Assistance. About the beginning of thisAn. Dom. 1600. Secular Account (as in the Ocean Iubilee with largest Indulgence) began the English Societie their Indian Nauigation and Commerce, Sir Iames Lancaster being thither sent, with the Dragon, Hector, Ascention, and Susan: which their Endeuours haue since so well succeeded, that they haue set and sent forth twentie seuerall Fl^ets or Voyages, planting their Fact^ries, and placing a Trade in Surrat, and other places of the Great Mogoll, in M^ssulopa^an, Bantam, Patane, Siam, Sagadan, Macassar, and as farre as Firando in Iapan; endeuouring a mutuall good both to themselues and the Indian, without spoyling Portugall  or Flemming.
True it is, that many open their mouthes wide in traducing this Trade, and detracting out Tra^^^que this way: nor am I entertained, or once inuited, to plead their Case against calumnious Adu^rsaries: nay, they need not such a Defender, nor feare such Quarrellers. But because euen honest Minds are possest with Scruples and Doubts, raysed by Ignorance, or malignant imputations of busie Braines; for their sakes, if I say somewhat, I shall not erre from my Geographicall Historie; this Studie receiuing principall supportation by the aduen uring Souldier and Merchant, Honor and Gaine breaking through all Obstacles, and opening all parts of the World to euery part. As obliged therefore to the Iournalls, which (borrowed of that Societie) haue led mee alongst the Indies; Gratitude thrusteth me forth  an Orator and Patron, not so much for their Persons, or personall Actions, which I know not (and can wee know any, either Men, or Societies, free from personall Euills? or is it so rare, that in Merchants of all sorts, Couetousnesse and priuate Ends should haue place? yet herein I doe not, I cannot accuse, no more then, excuse them:) but for the Societie, and iust Grounds of this Indian Aduenture (which some affirme gainefull to the Aduenturers, but with publike detriment to the State) I haue aduentured on this Stage, and opposed and exposed my selfe to Imputation.
ForThe Indian Societie commend^d by the 1. Equitie. the Generall Equitie thereof, it is consonant to all kindes of Lawes; to the Law  of GOD, who hath giuen the Earth to the Sonnes of Men; each Man being by naturall Inheritance  (...) hauing anSeneca de Benefic. l. 7. c. 4. vniuersall Tenure in the Vniuerse: of Nature; which by   mutuall Offices insinuateth a Generall Good: of Nations; which flourish most in commun^cating their Superfluities, by Exchange for Necessaries: and concurreth with the Lawes of this Kingdome; which being placed in the bosome of the Ocean, hath enacted many Prouisions  for the maintenance of Nauigation, which yeelds vs woodden Walls, and moueable Fortresses, in defending our Selues, or offending the Enemie.
2. Founders. 1. Q. Elizabeth.And particularly, let it be no disparagement vnto this Action, that it was Nobly borne, the Daughter of a famou^ Mother in Israel, Renowmed ELIZABETH, who by her Letters Patents, for the Honour of her Realme of England, for the increase of her Nauigation, for the adua^cement of the Trade of Merchandise, and for other important Causes and Reasons, first conceiued, and gaue first breath to this Societie. Blush Englishman, if thou hast true English  bloud in thee, that darest on rash Surmises, Censure (I had almost said, Examine) the Constitutions of that Cyrus, Arsaces, Augustus, (I want a Name) that more then they All, if not in Founding, yet in Grounding, Establishing, Adorning the English Nation. Happie ELIZABETH, the Virgin-Mother of thy Countries Peace, Religion, Arts, Armes; Mother to thy distressed Neighbors* Mother to so many famous Expeditions in and about the World; and the same the Mother of the Indian Traffique! Happie ELIZABETH, in thy Glorious Successor (that when our Sunne was set,2. K. Iames. no Night ensued) succeeding (if not with Masculine Excellence exceeding) in Fatherly Care, as well as in the Royall Throne. In his dayes our Peace, before, subiect to the infirmities of Conception, Birth, Infancie, hath growne to her Mature and flourishing age: Religion hath not since Salomons dayes, found so  Royall and Learned a Defender of the Faith: Arts elsewhere diffused, combined in that Heroike Center, haue proclaimed Him King of a larger extent of Learning, then the Muses
 professed. Admirable (almost miraculous) are his Armes, who without Armies poyseth and ballanceth the Westerne World in an euen Counter-poyse; like herein to that OMNIPOTENT MAIESTY which being vnmoueable moueth all things. But alas, why doe I eclipse so brightshining Prayses with my interceding intercepting praysings; obscure Candles before This Sunne (long may he shine) in Our, or That Other (descended shall I say to the Lower? no) exalted to the Highest Hemisphere? Pardon Reader, if when I looke vp to the Authors of this Attempt, Two so bright Lights haue dazeled my weaker eyes, and made mee almost lose my selfe in this Maze of more then Humane Worth. Yet this thou seest, Two, propositions beyond Castor and Pollux, are the Badge of our Indian Ship; and the  Glorie of our Nation is the glorie of this Action, Queene ELIZABETH,3. Iustice. and (long and farre may He flourish) the Maiestie of King IAMES.  
Neither can the English bee charged with annoying eyther Christian or Heathen, except  in Necessarie Defence, or Iust Reuenge: Neyther a doe they shut vp the Seas to the Inhabitants:  They plant Factories, not Fortresses, on the Land;4. Comparison with others. whereby Others ouer-awe the Natiues,  proue vnfriendly to their Friends, seeke to eat out other aduenturing Nations, and make  prey of Christians and Ethnikes vnprouoked.
And is it not5. Profit to our selues. a profit to our Nation, to vent Clothes, Iron, Lead, and other Commodities?  To set on worke so many of all Trades and Professions? To employ so many Mariners?  To build so many, so able, so capable Ships? To enrich the Kings Coffers and publike Treasurie, 
 in Customes, Imposts, and other Duties? Yea, that by enriching the priuate Aduenturers,  the State hath so many more seruiceable Members for the good of the whole Bodie?  
And is it not for the Honor of our Nation, that the English Name hath pierced the remotest  Countries, and filled the Indians with admiration of the English?6. Honor to the Nation. That Asia clothes vs with her Silkes, feedes vs with her Spices, cures vs with her Drugges, adornes vs with her  Iewels, and almost adores the English Valour? That Turkie is made so neere, whiles our Indian  Ocean makes our way to the Persian, the Mogoll, the Iapan Monarchs, Awfull Names  of Greatnesse, not heard of by our Ancestors, now delighting in our new Amitie, These and other mightie Easterne Potentates entertaining Commerce of Letters, and Embassies, with Great Britaines Greatest Soueraigne? And is it not for the Honor of our Nation, that the 
 Mariner, Merchant, and Souldior, here together conspire the English Glorie? Euery one in this Action as it were trayned in all three Functions, and becomming at once a Mariner (in so long Nauigation) a Merchant (where a little Stocke promiseth great Gaine) and (in necessarie Defence by Sea and Land) an exercised Souldior? Oh, how doth my Soule honour those glorious Exploits in the Indian Ocean, by those two worthie Generalls, Best and Downton, in the yeares 1612. and 1614. the Sea becomming an Amphitheatre; where the Easterne World might bee Spectators of the Westerne Worth; the Asian Shores filled with Troupes, to behold the Tragicall Euent of those Terrible Fights: which all, with all the Numbers, Gallantrie, Malignitie, Subtletie, Iniquitie, Indignation, Resolution, Preparation, and strength of the Countrey, serued to encrease the english Victory and Glory. TheSee the Stories in their due place. Storie  is fitter in another place: but the Honor which there was gayned by our Nation, hath filled the Mogols huge Dominions with Admiration, pierced to the Persian Court (where our Nation hath since procured Priuiledges) and extended beyond the large Extents of India. Yea, the Persian Gulfe hath beene awed, and the Arabike or Red Sea tamed, in requi^all of the Turkes and Buluches Trecheries; not by inuading Violence, but Christian Iustice. GOD7. Fortunate successe. Himselfe hath honored this Action also with prosperous successe, rewarding the English with Honor and Profit, their Aduersaries with Losse and Confusion: besides, farre  fewer Casualties by shipwrack, or other Disasters, then Other aduenturing Nations haue  sustained. Neither8. Strength added to the Nauie Royall. See the Catalogne of their ships in Sir Dud. Diggs his booke. are we able only with these Nautike long Armes to reach the Worlds  remotest parts; but at home also are more dreadfull to all daring Attempters: where, to the  Nauie Royall, such Succenturiatae Copiae are adioyned; the Ships of the Societie continually encreasing, and being able to furnish a puissant Armada of themselues; which but few (if a few) forraine, of Ships Royall, can equall. I adde, that in the present estate of Things,9. Defect of other Trade. Necessitie may bee alledged for a Vertue. For doe wee not see want of Trade? The Merchant wanting Traffique, and consequently, the Mariner employment, whiles Barbarie is many yeeres together trodden vnder foot by barbarous Ciuill vnciuill Warres; the Straits brought into straits, by loosenesse and abundance of Turkish Robbers, and Christian vnchristian Rouers; the Spaniard and Portugall forbid Trade to both the Indies; the Russian Warres bereaue vs of Russian Wares; should I adde Diuisions of our Merchants at home? Or should I not rather10. Others preuented. fixe mine eyes on Others neere our home; which can preoccupate our Mariner  by cheaper Seruice; haue followed our Trade into Turkie and other places, by vs frequented; take more libertie in remote Seas, making prize and spoyle of Portugalls, and others; by their Trade into the Indies, haue weakened our Turkie, and wakened this Indie
 Trading (selling their Spices at cheaper rates then the Turkie Merchant could affoord:) yea, haue haunted vs euen into Greene-land, and followed English Examples round about the World? Let none traduce me as a deprauer of their Actions, whose Noble Attempts I honour: but I speake in defence of the Indian Traffique; without which, our needie Mariner must haue sued to serue them at Sea, no lesse then our needie voluntary Souldior hath done on Land; which, without the profits now reaped, would haue procured the inconueniences, so much quarrelled.


@. III.  Answer to obiections made against the Indian Trade and Societie, with other Arguments for it.
 FOr must not our Mariner11. Euils else to Mariners. either die at Wapping, or other dismall place of Iustice,  for Iniustice? Or else liue to the Death, or losse of Honest men, thriuing in  vnthriftinesse and Pyracies? Or else (most of them) want employment? Or bee  forced to serue Forreiners? Better a death at Bantam, then in other places more infamously fatall: and better this bad Aduenture there, for Englands Wealth, then Forreiners.  And yet with due sobrietie and temperance (not wracking themselues on theirA Wine made of Rice distilled, as hot as Aquavitae, which they drinke, and cold water after, to coole them. Rack, a very Rock; or on their Quick-sands, filthie diseased Women, extreamely both deare and vile) how many of those dying many, might escape? Better that our Men should carrie forreineBrought out of Spaine, etc. SiluerThe maine obiections of Men and Mony. into Those parts, to bring Money and Wares for the publike benefit, then all this Money to be intercepted by strangers (for it growes not in England) Europe no lesse disfurnished, and we to buy those Wares with more expence of Money at a worse hand. Non est laus ista hominis sed temporum, said TullyCic. Offic. l. 3. of Attilius Regulus, his returning vpon Oath to the Punike Tortures: Non est fraus ista hominum sed temporum. I may answere touching these losses of Men and Money, which in Dutch, or other Employments, and Transporting, would happen, though England held no Commerce with India. And yet if our Mynts lacke worke, let vs examine our store of Plate, encreasing with our Pride, our Clothes of  Siluer, Gold, Tissue, and rich-metalld Stuffes, our Laces and Embroideries, from the Hatband to the Shoo-strings, exhausting so much Siluer and Gold in the Materials, that I speake not of the communicating it to Others, now happily vnited vnto Vs; which all cannot but diuert worke from the Mint, especially finde our Men of Warre haue had so little out of American spoyles. And for Men, how prosperously hath Captain Newport made two Returnes from the Indies? If Mariners are lost, are not Mariners made and bred in this Employment? Must wee not disarme our selues12. Euils to the State. 1. Sam. 13.22. Sir Tho. Smith the present Gouernor of the East Indiae. Companie, 1617. to whom Alderman Holiday hath since succeeded, and now happ^ly gouerneth that Societie. of shipping, and leaue our Ilands waterie Walls destitute of their Mouing Bulwarkes, if our Sea-Trade faile, which without Gaine and Glorie (Honos alit Artes) must faile and fall too? SAVL and IONATHAN onely may bee armed (the Kings Royall Nauie royally furnished) but (for Merchants ships wonted Assistance) not a  Sword nor a Speare found in the hands of any of the people: they might sharpen their Mattockes, Weeding Hookes, and Axes, amongst the Philistinis. But a SMITH in Israel doth far far better, that can fit vs with Weapons of Warre, that wee shall not need borrow of strangers. And long so (and not on other Conditions, but Israels flourishing) may our SMITH flourish in our Israel. If any thinke these feares fantasticall, let him but looke on the face of Things before this Trade was well settled; how many, in little space, of the best Merchantships were alienated into Spaine and Italy: the Alceder, the Beuis, the Royall Merchant, the May-Flower, the Prosperous, the Susan Parnell, the Gold Noble, the Consent, the Concord, I know not with what Concent, nay Discord rather to our Sea-Concent and Harmonie. If Fluxes and Diseases pursue vs in the Indies, haue they not so done (I name not Kentish and Essex Marishes, and other vnwholesome English Habitations) in Ireland? O Ireland, the  Land of ire indeed, in the death of so many Commanders and Souldiers, by Warre and Diseases, in the late Rebellion: yea, euen still, neither salo, solo, doelo, g^nte, nor mente, like our owne Homes, which yet how many are glad to leaue, there to crie their fortunes? There? Where not prodigall13. Compared with other forreine Employments, more dangerous, lesse profitable. of their best bloud, in Dutch, Danish, Sweden, Poland, Russian Warres? For small stipends voluntarily aduenturing more certaine Deaths, then in this Indian Aduenture; no lesse (perhaps more then some of the former) iustifiable to a scrupulous conscience. What should I speak14. Propagation of Religion. of the highest Worke of Conscience, in propagating Christian Religion, and warring vpon the Regions and Legions of Infernall Powers, captiuating silly soules in Ethnicke darkenesse? And O that our Merchants would mind  this Merchandise, the gaine of soules; settling learned Ministers in their Factories, to bee Factors for Christ; then might we looke for a Blessing: Yea, now wee haue great15. Hopes of better bodily estate. Hopes,
 that Iapan may yeeld siluer; and if men proue better in soule, their bodies may lesse miscarry. How euer, my prayers shall be to GOD ALMIGHTIE,See Sir Dud. D^ggs his Defence of Trade against the Increase of Trade, a Booke taxing the Indian Companie: where the Reader may farre better certifie himselfe of the State, and satisfie himselfe in the obiections against it. Since which also M. Munne hath published a treatise of that argument, which I haue added to my Pilgrimes, Tom. 1. lib. 5. cap. vlt. Prou. 26.4. for His Blessing vpon their Endeuours. For my selfe, I haue beene bold to say this in their Defence, as a most indifferent looker on, lesse then others (more able, more interested) haue, or can, and not more then Reason and Religion may admit: which I would haue interpreted with the same Equitie, with which, for which, it is written; not imputed to itching busie fingers, sicke of the Scribling disease; nor to base insinuating Flattery of Ours; nor to malicious Intimations, and barking against Forreiners (whose worthy Exploits I honour:) but let Themselues (the prouoking Portugall, and not-prouoked Flemming) be Iudges, that I call not the Admiring  Ethnike to honour the English Worth, if our Trade hath not beene the farthest from first offering, from suspition of iniurie, and therefore neerest to Innocence and Iustice; the true cause of (that which they need not) this ruder, but iust and true Apologie. As for other Obiections, they are friuolous, and either ridiculous, or meerely accidentall: and it is Puritanisme in Politie, to conceit any great Good, without some Euills attendant, in any Enterprise whatsoeuer; where the Heauens Great Lights are subiect to Eclipses, the longest Day hath a Night, the Summer yeelds vicissitude to Winter, all Bodies are mixed and compounded, and in the greatest Lustre make an apparant Shadow. Apparant Shadowes are, the obiected expence of Victuall (as if these mouthes would not exceed farre more in quantitie and qualitie at home;) of Timber (as if this be not the most honourable vse thereof, though Ireland yeeldes supply in this kind;) of eclipsing or sinking other Trades (sic inter Stellas argentea  Luna minores; will they be angrie, that so few Starres appeare, when Aurora is preparing the Sunnes Chariot?) They adde, Oppressions, and Dealing cru^lly; I know not whether this be a cruell lye: and many other, alledged against these Indian Nauigations, bee but English Knauigations. This I know, that the Wisest hath forbidden, to answere a foole according to his foolishnesse, lest thou also bee like him. Easie it is for fooles, to moue Scruples in the Actions of the Wisest; and not hard for euill mindes, to make that, which they find not, euill. But Christians are to imitate Him rather, which commanded the Light to shine out of Darkenesse; with a candide Mind (the true Image of GOD) al^ay construing doubtfull things to the best; which the best will doe: to whom, and for whom, this is intended. As for Cauillers, they haue their Dos here, according to Salomons Prescipt, Answere a foole  according to his foolishnesse, lest he be wise in his owne conceit.


@. IIII. The Conclusion with commendation of the Mariner, etc.
NOw that I haue after my ability answered the obiections,16 Increase of Arts and Knowledge by farre Discoueries. Higini. fab. 151. and produced so many Arguments (the most of which are Store-houses, and Heads of many) Let this be the last argument, which to me was not the least, and here was placed first, the Increase  of learning and knowledge by these worthy Discoueries of Marine Worthies. How little had we knowne of the World, and the Wonders of God in the World, had not the Sea opened vs a Passage into all Lands. Pegasus the winged Horse, which (the Poets fained) with the stroke of his foot, first made Helicon the Muses Well to spring, was the issue of Neptune, and that snaky-headed Monster Medusa. The Mariner seemes rough-hewen and rude, according to the Ocean that breeds him; but hee that can play with those dangers which would transforme others into stones, and dares dwell within so few inches of death; that calls the most tempestuous Elements his Parents; Hee (I say) is the true Pegasus that with his wing-like Sailes flies ouer the World; which hath helped to deliuer Andromeda (Geography) before chained to the Rockes, and ready to bee deuoured of that  Monster Ignorance; and out of whose salt waters wisely distilled, Clio, Vrania, and the best of the Muses, drinke their sweetest and freshest liquors. Howsoeuer Others, My Selfe must confesse, and this Booke will witnesse, that My Helicon hath in great part flow^e from the footing of this Pegasus. And let it be the Honour of OurSir Thomas Smith Gouernour of the East Indie Companie: at whose House are holden the Consultations for them, And Honourable SMITH, that His hand hath fitted this Foot of Pegasus to this Indian Iourney, whither he is now carrying you: at Whose Forge and Anuill haue beene hammer'd so many irons for Neptune; not like Xerxes his Arrogance, which proudly cast Fetters into the Hellespont, but with true effects of Conquest. Mee thinkes I here see the Sterne that with little locall stirring Stiereth so many  Ships to soFor Virginia, Summers Ilands, Muscouia, North-West Discoueries, etc. I must also acknowledge His fauour to Me, as of Sir Dudly Diggs, M. Abbot Deputy of the East Indie Company, for communicating to me their Iournals. many Ports visited by your Pilgrim.



HONDIVS his Map of the EAST-INDIA.
map of South and Southeast Asia
INDIA Orientalis





CHAP. III. Of the Indian Prouinces next adioyning to China.

@. I. Of Cauchin, China, Camboia and the Laos.
CAuchin-ChinaMaginus. is an I^dian Kingdome, situate betweene the Prouince of Canton on the Nort^, and Camboia on the South, in the bottome of a  great Bay, diuided into three Prouinces, and as many Kings, but one of them is Paramount. ItDiscourse of China, p. 381. aboundeth with Gold, Siluer, Aloes, Porcelane, and Silke. They are Idolaters and Pagans, andGi. Bot. Ben. haue had some deuotion to the Popish Christianity, moued thereto by certaine Pictures of our Lady, of the last Iudgement, and Hell (a new kind of preaching) and haue erected many Crosses amongst them, of which the Friers report (after their fashion) some miracles. Their Religion seemeth little to differ from that of the Chinois, to whom they are also Tributaries, and vse their Characters.
One Richard CockeRichard Cocke. Englishman, in a Letter dated December the tenth, 1614. from Firando in Iapan (where hee was left in Factory by Captaine Saris) writes of an vnhappy accident  which befell Master Tempest Peacocke, who with Walter Caerwarden arriued not long before with our Kings Letter, in Cauchin-China, with a Present also, and goods to the Value
 of seuen hundred and thirty pounds. But whiles hee with some principall Hollanders (who were there likewise entertained) was passing by water, they were set vpon and slaine with harping irons, together with their interpreters and followers, Iapanders: neither had they heard further what became of the rest of the Company. The cause was reported to bee a quarell against the Hollanders for fraud and violence, deceiuing them with false money, and burning a Towne. Here is much of the wood called Palo Daguilla,Linschot. c. 22, and of the most sweet wood Calamba, with other merchandize of China. Betweene this and the Ile Aynao tenne miles from the land is a fishing for Pearles.
To the South of this Kingdome is Champa, the name of a Kingdome, and chiefe Citie  thereof, of great Traffique, especially of Lignum Aloes, which groweth there in the Mountaines, prized at the weight in Siluer, which they vse in Bathes, and in the Funerals of great Princes. In Religion they are as the former. This Tract beares also the name of Camboia.
Camboia on the North abutteth on Cauchin China, on the South the Kingdome of Siam, on the East the Sea. It is a great and populous Countrey, full of Elephants and Abada's (this Beast is the Rhinoceros:) Here also they begin to honour the Crosse, as Frier Siluester (a man, as they say, much reuerenced by the King, and honoured of the people) hath taught them. When the King dieth,Summario a^ pop. Orientali. his women are burned, and his Nobles doe voluntarily sacrifice themselues in the same fire. The women are generally burned with their husbands at their death. The Camboyans dealt treacherouslyNauigatio. Iac. Neccij ^er Cornel. Nicolai. with the Hollanders, Anno 1602.  whom they inuited to the shore, with promise of certaine Buffolos, and then cruelly slew them. They detained the Admirall on shore, to be redeemed with some of their Ordnance. When they intend a iourney, they vse diuination with the feete of a Henne, to know whether it will be luckie, or no; and as the Wizard shall answere, they dispose of themselues, either to goe or stay.
This Land hath much of the sweet Wood Calamba, which being good, is wayed against siluer and gold. Through this Kingdome runneth the Riuer Mecon into the Sea,Linschot. vbi supra. which the Indians name Captaine of all the Riuers: for it hath so much water in the Summer (their Winter) that it drowneth the Countrey as Nilus doth. The people of Camboia beleeue that all Creatures, both Men, and Beasts of all sorts doe here receiue reward for their worke, whether it be good or bad. Vpwards in the Land are the Laos, a great and mighty people,  the Anas and Bramas also, which dwell further vp by the Hills; and the Gueos vpon the Hills, which liue like wilde men, eate mans flesh, marke all their bodies with a hote iron, in gallant brauery.
Gaspar de CruzGasp. de Cruz. mentioneth that People called Laos, Northwards from Camboia, which come thither downeThis seemeth to be Mecon the riuer before mentioned. a Riuer, which hath his beginning in China, and is of eight, fifteene, and twenty fadoms depth: it passeth thorow desarts, where are Elephants and Bados, or Rhinocerotes, the males of which beasts haue a horne arising out of their snowt, accounted good for the Piles. This Riuer comming to Cudurmuch, twelue leagues from the principall Citie of Camboia, makes a passage to another Riuer, which descendeth from a great Lake, in the midst of which one cannot see Land. When the great waters come downe from the  Laos Riuer, they enter that other Riuer with such violence, that it reuerseth and turneth backe the streame, with a swift current, and ouerfloweth all Camboia, leauing no passage for Trauellers, but by Boat, their houses also being in the lower roomes ouerflowen, themselues remaining in the higher roomes, with their houshold. This Riuer runneth vpward from Iuly to September. The Portugals shewed our Author a great Hill, ouer which a ship had sailed, being of sufficient burden to haue passed from India to Portugall. These Laos bring Musk from Camsi, being the flesh and blood (as he saith) of a certaine beast. They goe naked from the waste vpwards, trussing vp their haire like a cappe. Their Priests weare yellow cloaths and yellow Copes, with certaine folds and seames: Their Religion is  as in Siam.
Iarric writes of these Laos or Laios, that they liue about the springs of Mecon, in Cottages of Timber, and in open boats, neere the banks and Lakes of the Riuer,P. Jarric. Thes. rerum Indic. l. 2. tom. 1. c. 25. which is said to extend foure hundred Leagues within the Land, neere the Tartarian and China confines. These Laios about the yeare 1578. descended the Riuer in great multitudes, with an army of two hundred thousand, which all were slaine, drowned, or captiued in fight with the Camboyans. In this battell the King of Camboia was slaine also. He left behind him a yong sonne, which became vassall to the King of Siam. This Kingdome hath great Townes, and many Temples, which haue Bonzij, Priests or Religious Men after the maner of Iapan and China, but lesse superstitious then the Iaponians. As for the Laios, they are rude and barbarous,  but rich in Gold. The King of Camboia in the yeare 1598. sent to the Iesuites for some of their Society, to liue and preach amongst his people, and bestowed vpon Iames Veloso a Portugall which had serued him in the warres against the Siamites, a Peninsula stretching
 three Leagues into the Sea, which hee offered to the Portugall subiection, vpon condition of conuerting the Inhabitants. There are not (as in other Maritime parts of the Indies) any Saracens amongst them, they are courteous and milde people, and haue trade with the Iaponians.


@. II. Of the Kingdome of Siam.
ON this side of Camboia, isMaginus. G. Bot. Ben. Siam, Sion, or Silon, Mother-City of a Kingdome  bearing the same name, in which are reckoned thirty thousand families of Moores, besides the Naturals. In these parts are huge Woods, harbours of Lions, Tigres, Ownces, and (they tell also) Mariches, which haue Maidens faces and Scorpions tailes. Here runneth Menan out of that huge Lake Chiamay, which yeeldeth this and other Riuers of like Nature to Nilus in Egypt.
Gas. B. cap. 35.For this cause, Balbi affirmeth, that they build their houses in Silon (so hee termeth it) very high, and euery house hath a boat belonging thereto for passage and transportation of the familie in that their Winter-time, or annuall deluge. And some poore porsons haue slight houses of Reed, or timber set vpon plankes tied together, or Liters, which they can remooue  whither they please, as moueable shops to buy and sell; which is there done most by the women. This name of Sion, Silon, or Siam, may worthily mooue a Quaere to Geographers, whether this bee not the Sinae mentioned by Ptolemey, Marcianus, and other Ancients: the rather because China is a name vnknowne to the Chinois, and their Countrey abutts on the Sea E stward, and the Cities thereof haue more Northerly Situation, then those by them ascribed to the Sinae; which name is heere little altered, and in other things this seemeth rather to agree thereunto. But let the curious enquire, and the learned iudge.
They haue amongst them many ReligiousDiscourse of China, p. 390. Men, which leade an austere life, and therefore had in great reputation of Holinesse. These liue in common: they may not marrie, nor speake to a Woman (which fault is punished with death) they goe alway bare-foot, in  poore array, eating nothing but Rice and greene herbes, which they begge from doore to doore. They craue it not, nor take it with their hands, but goe with a wallet at their backes alwayes, with their eyes modestly fixed on the ground, and calling or knocking, stand still, till they receiue answere, or some thing be put in their wallets. Many times they set themselues naked in the heate of the Sunne: notwithstanding that himselfe, with such direct beames, together with his frie (whole armies of Gnats) doe their vtmost malice on them. They rise at midnight to pray vnto their Idoles, which they doe in Quires, as the Friers doe. They may not buy, sell, or take any Rents, which, if they should doe, would bring on them the imputation of Heretiques. Some Merchants of Siam being at Canton, and hearing that Frier Martin Ignacio and his companions, were there imprisoned, for entring that Ch^nian Kingdome without License, they visited them, and seeing their poore Friers Weedes, they,  besides other almes, offered to pay their ransome, if money would doe it.
The SiamitesG. Bot. Ben. lib. 2. part. 3. commonly hold, that God created all things, rewardeth the good, punisheth the bad: That Man hath two Spirits; one good, to keepe; and the other euill to tempt, continually attending him. They build many and faire Temples, and place in them many Images of Saints, which sometime liued vertuously, and now are in Heauen. They haue one Statue fifty paces long, which is sacred to the Father of men. For they thinke that he was sent from aboue, and that of him were borne certaine persons that suffered Martyrdome for the loue of God. Their Priests are clothed in yellow long garments. (This colour is esteemed holy: and euery yellow thi^g, for the resemblance which it hath with Gold, and  with the Sunne, is hallowed to God.) Besides that which is before said of their strict orders, they may not nourish Hennes, because of their female Sexe. To drinke Wine, is punished in their Pri^sts with stoning. They haue many Fasts in the yeare, but one especially, in which the people frequent the Temples and their Sermons. They haue their Canonicall houres by day and night for their holy things. They hold, that the World shall last eight thousand yeares, whereof sixe thousand are passed, and then it shall be consumed with fire: at which time shall bee opened in Heauen seuen eyes of the Sunne, which shall drie vp the Waters, and burne vp the Earth. In the ashes shall remaine two Egges, whence shall come foorth one Man and one Woman, which shall renew the World. But there shall be no more Salt, but fresh Riuers and Lakes, which shall cause the Earth, without mans labour, to abound  in plenty of good things. The Siamites are the sinke of the Easterne Superstitions, which they deriue to many Nations.

Gasper de CruzG. de Cruz. See my Pilgrims, To. 1. l. 1. c. 10. testifieth that the Bramenes in Siam are Witches, and are the Kings principall seruants. They worship one god called Probar Missur, which (say they) made Heauen and Earth: and another called Pralocussur, who obtained of a third, named Praissur, that power vnto Probar Missur. Another called Praput Prasur Metrie. Hee thinketh the third part of the Land to be Priests or Religious persons. These Religious are proud, the inferiour worshipping their superiours as gods, with prayer and prostrating. They are reuerenced much of the people, none daring to contradict them: so that when our Frier Gasper preached, if one of those Religious came, and said, This is good, but ours is better, all his Auditors would forsake him. They number in their opinion, seuen and twentie Heauens,  holding that some of them are (like Mahomets Paradise) fraught with faire women, with meates also and drinkes; and that all liuing things which haue soules goe thither, euen Fleas and Lice. And these lousie heauens are allotted to all secular persons which enter not into their rule, and habit of Religion. They haue higher heauens for their Priests which liue in wildernesses, ascribing onely this felicitie to them, there to sit and refresh themselues with winde. And according to the higher merits they assigne other higher heauens among their gods, which haue round bodies like bowles, and so haue these that goe thither. They hold also that there are thirteene Hells, according to the differing demerits of mens sinnes.
Of their Religious men, some are supreme and sit aboue the King, called Massauchaches: a second Order they entitle Nascendeches, which sit with the King, and are as Bishops: a  third and lower ranke sit beneath the King, named Mitires, which are as Priests, and haue the Chapuzes and Sazes, two inferior degrees, vnder them: all reuerenced according to their place. Except the Priests and Religious, all are slaues to the King, and when they die, their whole state deuolueth to him, how hardly soeuer the wife and children shift: which was caused through a rebellion against the brother of the King, which then reigned when the Frier writ this.
In the yeere 1606. Balthasar Sequerius a Iesuite, landing at Tanassary,Balth. Sequer. passed from thence partly by goodly Riuers, partly ouer cragged and rough Hills and Forrests, stored with Rhinocerots, Elephants, and Tigres, (one of which tare in pieces one of their company before his eyes) vnto Odia. Conferring with the Talipoies or Religious men, he learned their conceits; That there was now no God in the world to gouerne it: Three had beene before,  now dead, and a Fourth is expected, which deferreth his comming. In the meane while, lest this huge Frame should want a Ruler, it is ordered by a certaineBulla. Bubble or Brooch which some of the Former Gods had left. The vulgar people heare these bubbles, bables, and fables with great reuerence and silence, holding vp their ioyned hands. They obserue their Festiualls, according to the course of the Moone; and then open their Temples, whither the people resort to doe their deuotions. These are built strong and stately, with Art and Beautie: hauing their Porches, Cloisters, Quires, and lower Iles, great Chappels being annexed on both sides and large Church-yards. In one of these hee saw a Statue of eighteene Cubites length, dedicated to the great God. They are of marueilous abstinence, and thinke it a great sinne to taste wine. In their Quires, they haue singing men, which after the Europaean fashion  sing there, especially in the shutting in of the Euening, and about midnight. Very early in the morning, warning is giuen for them to goe to beg from doore to doore. They haue their funerall Holies and Obits for the dead. The carkasses are burned, being put into painted Coffins, with great solemnitie (if they be great men) with Musicke and dances, and great store of victuals to be bestowed on the Talipoys. Thus farre Sequerius.
The Inhabitants of this Kingdome are much giuen to pleasure and ryot: they refuse the vse of Manuall Arts, but addict themselues to Husbandry. They haueMaginu^ G. Bot. Ben. publike Schooles, where they teach Lawes and Religion in the vulgar Language: other Sciences they learne in a more learned Tongue. They worship innumerable Idols, but especially the foure Elements; according to which his Sect, each man maketh choise of his buriall. They which  worshipped the Earth, are therein buried: the Fire burneth the dead carkasses of them which obserued it: in the Ayre are hanged (to feast the airy-winged people with their flesh) those which adored the Ayre, being aliue. The Water drowneth those which had aliue beene drowned in that Waterie Religion. Euery King, at his first entrance to the Crowne, erecteth a Temple, which hee adorneth with high Steeples, and innumerable Idols. In the Citie of Socotay is one of mettell, fourescore spans high.
The Kingdome of Siam, comprehendeth that Aurea Regio of Ptolemey by Arrianus in his Periplus (the Map whereof Ortelius set forth 1597.) called Aurea Continens; nigh to which is placed that Aurea Chersonesus, then (it seemeth) by a necke of land ioyned to the  Continent; sinceTreatise of the Circumference of the Earth. Osor. Maffaeus. Barrius. supposed to be by force of the Sea separated from the same, and to bee the same which is now called Sumatra: which Tremellius and Iunius iudge to bee Salomons Ophir. The Land trendeth long and narrow, and containeth fiue hundred leagues of Sea-coast,
 compassing from Champa to Tauay. But of this space the Arabians, or Moores, haue vsurped two hundred, with the Townes of Patane, Pahan, Ior, and Malacca (now in possession of the Portugals) and the Kingdomes of Aua, Chencran, Caipumo, and Brema, haue shared also therein. OdiaIoan. Bar. lib. 9. cap. 2. is the chiefe Citie thereof, containing foure hundred thousand housholds, and serueth the King with fiftie thousand Souldiers: and to the Riuer Caipumo (on which it standeth) belong two hundred thousand vessels. This King hath nine Kingdomes subiect to him, and thirtie thousand Elephants, whereof three thousand are trained to the warres: His Nobles hold their Lands in a kinde of Knights-seruice, like the Turkish Timars (yet onely for terme of life) without the Kings pay serue him, whensoeuer hee appointeth, with twentie thousand Horse, and two hundred and fiftie thousand Foot. The Country  is compassed with the high Hills of Iangoma, Brema, or Brama, and Aua, and is it selfe plaine, in situation and fertilitie (caused by inundation) like to Egypt. The Lai are tributaries to Siam, for feare of the Gueoni, Caniballs, and Man-eaters, liuing in the Mountaines adiacent; against whom the Siamite defendeth them, and inuaded those Gueoni one time with twentie thousand Horse, two hundred and fiftie thousand Footmen, and ten thousand Elephants, for Carriages and Warre.
CaesarCaes. Frid.Frederike reporteth, That in the yeere 1567. the King of Pegu besieged the King of Siam his chiefe Citie, with an Armie of one million and foure hundred thousand men, and lay before it one and twentie moneths, and had fiue hundred thousand fresh Souldiers sent him in supply, end yet had not preuailed, if treason had not more furthered his designes  then force. The gates were one night set open, and the Peguans entred; which when the Siamite perceiued, hee poysoned himselfe, leauing his children and Kingdome a prey to the Conquerer: whose triumphall returne, Fredericke (then in Pegu) beheld. Since that time the Kings of Siam haue been tributaries to Pegu. After this Peguan had reigned seuen and thirtie yeeres,Iesuit. Epist. he left his Kingdomes, but not his fortunes, to his sonne: who taking displeasure against the Siamite, his vassall, sent for him to come to him, which hee refused. And therevpon he entred into his Country, with nine hundred thousand men, and besieged him in his c^iefe Citie: which hee, seeking politike delayes, made semblance still to deliuer, vntill in the third moneth after (which was March) the Riuer ouerflowed the Countrey sixe score miles about, after his yeerely custome, and partly drowned partly committed to the Siamites  (attending in Boats for this booty) to be slaughtered, that huge Army; of which, scarce threescore and ten thousand returned to Martavan, and those without Elephants and Horses. And when the King of Pegu proceeded in his attempts with like successe, the Siamite at last besieged him in Pegu, his royall Citie, Ann. 1596. But hearing a rumor of the Portugals comming to helpe him, hee raised his siege. These are the reports of Franciscus Fernandes, a Iesuite. Of th^ Peguan we shall speake more in the next Chapter.
Pet. W. Floris M. S. you haue his Iournall in my Pilgrims, To. 1. li. 3. c. 14.Peter Williamson Floris a Dutchman, which liued long in the East Indies, employed first by his Countrey-men, afterwards by the English; hath giuen vs the latest intelligence of these parts. When Siam (saith he) was tributarie to Pegu, the two brothers sonnes to the King of Siam, brought vp in the Court of Pegu, made an escape home. Where the eldest (called  in the Malaya tongue Raia Api, that is, fierie King, by others, the blacke King) had such successe against Pegu, as yee haue heard: and Pegu falling, raised himselfe to high fortunes, subiecting the Kingdomes of Camboia, Laniangh, Lugor, Patane, Tenesary, and diuers others. This victorious King deceased Ann. 1605. and dying without issue, left the Throne to his brother, which was termed the White King, of peaceable and milde disposition. He lying on his death-bed, Anno 1610. by the instigation of Iockrommeway, one of his principall Lords, (who sought to deriue the succession vpon himselfe) caused his eldest sonne to be slaine, being a young man of great hope. Yet his brother, the second son succeeded, and gaue Iockrommeway his desert. This man had besides other slaues, two hundred and eightie Iapanders, which to reuenge their masters death ran in ioynt furie to the Court, and possessed themselues of  the young King, whom they compelled to commit vnto their massacring hands foure chiefe men, as the authors of their masters death: and after many other abuses, forced Him to subscribe to a composition of their owne making, and to giue them some of the chiefe Palapos or Priests for hostages, and so departed with a great treasure; vsing much violence at their departure, the Siamites as meere spectators daring nothing to the contrary. (The King of Siam sent to the Iapanian Emperour to complaine of this insolence, who promised to send these Iapanians to Him, there to receiue their due punishment. Generall Saris then in Iapan saw the men going to the Court as hee came from thence.)
Vpon this newes the Kingdomes of Camboya and Laniangh rebelled, and also one Banga de laa a Peguer, who in the yeere 1613. reuolted to the King of Aua, and came to him with  fifty thousand of his country-men, before subiect to the King of Siam. The King of Laniangh made also an Expedition into Siam, within three dayes iourney of Oudija, hoping to find the
 Countrey still intangled with the Iaponian slaues; but was met by the King of Siam, and forced to retire. But the report was (saith hee) that the two Kings had combined in league against the Siamite to dispossesse him, being then of two and twentie yeeres, which yet without intestine rebellion, they are not able to effect.
On August the fourth, 1612. the English arriued at Siam, the town being thirty leagues vp the riuer: Septemb. seuenteenth, they had audience of the King, who granted them free trade, and a faire house. The Country at this time of raining was couered with water, October the twentie six, they had such a storme, that old folkes had not seene the like, which besides other harmes, blew downe the Kings fathers faire Monument. Their ship was neere a wrack,  but by great care and paines was saued, fiue of the company being drowned, of which they supposed one to be deuoured of a Whale. The Kings in the Indies are all Merchants: none at Siam might buy any commodities till the King had first serued his owne turne.


@. III. Of the Kingdome of Malacca.
MAlacca is now subiect to the Portugals (if not since our last intelligence taken from  them by the Kings of Achin and Ior, who held it in siege, as the same went, conquered by Alphonsus Albuquerke, orSee Nouus orbis. Albiecher (so King Emanuel in his Letter to Pope Leo, containing all this exploit, termeth him) who was their greatest Conquerour in the Indies, subduing more to that scepter then all before him or since. Iohn de Barros relates at large the founding and proceeding of this City,Bar. dec. 2. l. 6. c. 1. who writes that some two hundred and fiftie yeeres before the Portugals arriuall in the Indies, it was first founded. Anciently Cingapura was the chiefe place of trade and habitation in all that coast, which lies in the most Southerly point of all Asia, about halfe a degree North from the Aequinoctiall; then resorted to by the Merchants of China, Camboia, and the rest of the continent, and many Ilands to the East and West, which they called Dibananguin and Atazanguin, that is Leuant  and Ponent, or, vnder the winds (West) and beyond the winds (East) all the Nauigation in those parts being by the Monsons or certaine winds which obserue their set seasons of the yeere. In those times reigned in Cingapura, one Sangesinga, and in the neighbouring parts of Iaua one Paraerisae, who dying, left to the care of his brother his two sonnes: which slaying the eldest, and making himselfe King, ^y his tyrannies caused diuers of the Iauan Nobilitie to forsake their Country. Amongst the rest Paramisora fled to Cingapura, who with his many followers was entertained kindly by Sangesinga, whom not long after he vngratefully slew, and by the helpe of his Iauans possessed himselfe of the state. The King of Siam (whose tributary and son-in-law Sangesinga had bin) forced him to leaue his ill gotten throne, and to seek new habitation one hundred and fortie miles thence, where he settled himselfe at the riuer Muar  with two thousand followers, some of which were called Cellati, men that liued on the Sea by fishing and pyracie: these he would not receiue into his new fortresse of Pago, as not well trusting them, though before they h^d made him lord of Cingapura. These therefore seated themselues fifteene miles from Muar, in the place neere which Malaca now stand^th, ioyning with the Natiues, halfe Sauages, whose language is called Malayan. The place growing strait, they remoued three miles vp the riuer, where was a Hill called Beitan with a large plaine, the commodiousnesse whereof inuited Paramisora to leaue Pago, and to ioyne with them in this new foundation, which was after called Malaca, signifying a banished man, in remembrance of this Iauans exile. In succeeding times the merchandize and Merchants too remoued from Cingapura to Malaca, Saquem Darsa then succeeding his father Param^sora,  who subiected himselfe as vassal to the King of Siam, which assigned to his obedience all the Country from Cingapura on the East to Pulo Zambilan, which is to the West of Malaca one hundred and twentie miles, all which space of coast is two hundred seuentie miles by Sea. The MonsonsThe Monson^ or winds in these parts continue West and Northwest, from the end of August to the end of October: Nouember begins Northerly winds and Northeasterly, which blow till the beginning of April. From May till the end of August, the South and Southwest beare sway, according to which the Mariner must direct his course, and take his proper season.
The situation of Malaca is vnwholsome, by reason of the marishes and neerenesse to the line (little aboue two degrees to the North) else it would haue bin the most populous Citie in the Indies. The successors of Saquen Darsa by little and little eased their shoulders of  the Siam subiection, especially after the Moores, Persians, and Guzurats had conuerted them to Mahomets sect, and at last vsurped absolute Souereigntie. But the King of Siam nine yeeres before the Portugall conquest, sent a Fleet of two hundred saile, and therein
 sixe thousand men against Mahumet King of Malaca, the General of which Fleet was Poioan his Vice-roy of Lugor, to whom the Gouernours of Patane, Calantan, Pan, and other Coast-cities were to pay their tributes for the King of Siam. From Lugor to Malaca is six hundred miles saile alongst the coast, much subiect to tempestuous weather, which diuided this Fleet; some of which fell into Mahumets hand by treachery, to the ouerthrow of the rest. The Siamite in reuenge prepared a great Armie by Land, and Armada by Sea, foure hundred Elephants, and thirtie thousand men: but without expected euent, by the insolencie of some of his Souldiers in Rapes and Robberies, which raised the Country against them, whiles Poioan was in the siege of Pan or Pam, another Citie in rebellion. The King of Siam further enraged, sent two Armadas, one by the way of Calantan, the other by the way of Tenaz-zary,  one on the East side, the other on the West of this long tract of land, but before Mahumet could be punished by the Siamite, the Portugall had preuailed against him.
King Emanuel had sent Diego Lopes de Sequeira from Lisbone, Anno 1508. who came the next yeere to Malaca, and there vnder faire colours of traffique, Himselfe and his whole Fleet were in danger of betraying and murthering,See this historie in Moffaeus hist. Ind. l. 4. Osorius l. 6. and 7. Barros. As. Dei. 2. l. 4. c. 4. and l. 6. c. 4. and seq. by this perfidious King and his Bendara or chiefe Iustice. This ruled all cases Ciuill, the Lacsamaua or Admirall, all Marine, and the Tamungo or Treasurer all the Reuenue, and these three the whole gouernment; which treachery in the yeere 1511. was requited by Albuquerke, who by his proper valour, and wonted Fortunes, with secret intelligence amongst the Malayans, conquered the Citie, expelled the King (who in few dayes vomited His soule after this pill) and built there a Fortresse and a  Church, establishing the Portugall Lawes, but so as both the Ethnikes and the Moores had their owne Magistrates, appeale reserued to the highest. The most remarkable things in this exploit were, the Chaine which one Naodobeguea (one of the principall conspirers against Sequeira, now encountred in a Sea-fight by Albuquerke in his voyage to Malaca) ware on his arme, with a bone of a Iauan beast called CabalThe bone of he Cabal. therein, by vertue whereof, notwithstanding many and wide wounds, he lost not one drop of blood, till that Chaine being taken off, his veines suddenly and at once emptied themselues of blood and life: the store of artillery of which they tooke three thousand Peeces, of eight thousand, which the Portugals affirmed had beene there: their venomed Arrowes, and Calthrops strowed in the way, the poyson whereof once touching the blood, made them mad, with other symptomes, as in the biting  of a mad dog, which they learned after to heale by chewing the leafe of a certaine hearbe growing in the Countrey: the vndermining the street of the Citie to blow it vp together with the Portugals: the disaduantage of the fight with Elephants, which being here enraged with wounds, would not be ruled, but brake the ranks of their owne side: the treacherie of this people first to the Portugals, then to their King, after that to the Portugals againe: the prey and spolle (besides all that the King and they which fled carried away, and all the Gold, Siluer, prouision of warre and concealements excepted) amounted to two hundred thousand duckets for the Kings due, which was the fifth part.
Alodinus the sonne of King Mahomet busily bestirred himselfe, but in vaine, to recouer his lost Patrimonie neither the Ile Bintam, which he fortified, as he did also Pagus, nor force nor  fraud being able to defend him from his fathers fates and fortunes. The Moores haue enuyed this successe to the Portugals, and often haue attempted to depriue them of Malaca. The Hollanders also vnder Cornelius Mateliuius, Anno 1608. laid siege thereto, whiles the Portugall was seeking new conquests at Achen, who in their returne might easily haue defeated them, had they not beene vnaduised in too long aduising. When the Portugals went to Malaca, the King of Pans marriage with the daughter of Mahomet was to bee solemnized, a banquetting house of timber couered with silke, sumptuously prepared to this purpose on thirtie wheeles, to be drawne with Elephants, the Principals of the Citie being therein. But this Kings aff^ction was soone cooled by these disasters.
From Cingapura to Pulo Cambilan, there is no other habitation of any reckoning, but  a few Puts where Fisher-men dwell, and a few Villages within Land. This is the Centre of the Easterne Traffique.Linschot. R. Fitch. They are proud of their language (which some say was deuised by the founders:) wherein they deuise many Sonnets and amorous Poesies. The Malayos, of Country-people, goe naked, with a cloth about their middle, and a little roll of cloth about their heads. Lodouico Barthema (who was there before the Portugals knew it) supposed, that here arriued more ships then in any Citie in the world. The Riuer Gaza neere thereunto, is more after his reckoning, then fifteene miles ouer. The people in the Countrey lodge in Trees, for feare of Tygres.
It is strange thatBar. dec. 2. l. 6. cap. 1. Barros writes of these Tygres, that in the height of eight yards they will reach and deuoure men: their chiefe preseruatiues against them are their night fires: the  multitude is such that many enter by night into the Citie for prey, of which hee tels that after the Portugals had taken it, that a Tygre leaped ouer a high wall, and carried away three
 slaues tied to a piece of timber, together with the wood, leaping againe vpon the wall with admirable lightnesse. The Countrey being barren, the Citie abounded neuerthelesse with plentie of necessaries, exceeding those places whence they were brought.
After thatIoan. Bar. l. 9. Alphonsus Albuquerke had conquered Malacca; the Moores dispossessed there, seated themselues in diuers places along the coast, and some of them vsurped the title of Kings.


@. IIII.  Of Patane and the neighbouring petie Kingdomes.
PAtaneG. Arthus Dantisc. Hist. Ind. Orient. pag. 333. is a Citie Southwards from Siam, chiefe of that Kingdome, whereto it giueth name, in the height of seuen degrees. The buildings are of Wood and Reed, but artificially wrought. The Mesquit (for many of them are Mahumetanes) is of Bricke. The Chinois are more then the natiue Inhabitants. They are of an Ash-colour. They vseNauig. Iacob Neccij. three languages; the Malayan (which to them is naturall) the Sian, and Chinan. The first is written like the Hebrew, from the right hand; the second, like the Latine from the left, and almost in like Characters; the third, from the right to the left, with a descent from the top to the bottome. The Chinois haue Idolatrous Temples, and so haue the Sians, wherein are many golden statues; the Priests which attend them are clothed in yellow.  They haue sacred youths which are their Oracles. The people when they enquire of them, sit a conuenient distance from the Images, and obserue the young mans gestures (who with his haire disheuelled lyeth prostrate before the Idoll) singing and playing on Instruments, vntill he arise, and standeth vp. For then, as possessed of the Deuil, he runneth vp and downe with a terrible countenance, and maketh a stirre, as if he would kill himselfe, and them that stand by, with a sword which he hath in his hand. Then the people prostrating themselues, request him to declare the Deuils Oracle, and he answereth as pleaseth him; his lies being accounted Oracles. Adulterie is here a capitall offence, the father of the malefactor being the Executioner, or his next kinsman, if he be dead: yet is this vice common (notwithstanding this rigor)  by reason of the womens vnbridled lust.
The Kingdome hath bin gouerned many yeeres by a Queene, who gaue good entertainment to the Hollanders. Iames Neccij and his fellowes, An. 1602. after their double misfortune and madnes, which had befallen them, the one in iest, the other in earnest; this at Macao in China, where they were, and knew it not, and setting twentie men onThe Hollanders saw many men and women of China in their boats, which were Fishers, and dwelt in them: but saw not a Portugall, nor could pro^ure any of the other, at any sum, to deliuer them a letter on shoare. After, 1603. the Hollanders tooke a ri^h ship of the Portugals at Macao, laden for Iapan. Cornel. de Vena. shoare, neuer saw them againe, but heard, that the Portugals had caused fifteen of them to be hanged: the other at Auarella Falca, in 11. degrees and an halfe, where they found the Tract of Carts, and footings of beasts, but could not see a man, nor shoot a beast. They ghessed that the people liued as the Tartars, wandring in Carts and Tents, without any settled dwelling. The place was by them called Sotternym, by reason that many of their company had lost the vse of reason,  and became mad with eating a certaine fruit there growing like to Plums, with a tender stone, which continued till they had slept. Had they knowne then the easinesse of the cure, it had bin better then any Comedie to haue tickled their Splene, and prouokedA merry madnesse of Euery one in his humour. laughter, to see one fighting against the enemies, which assaulted him at his Cabbin: to heare another with piteous shrikes crie out on the multitude of Deuils and Hobgoblins, which affrighted him: a third sees strange sights, and cries out, The ship is full of strangers: and whiles one, in more pleasing distraction, enioyeth (and ioyeth in that distracted pleasure) the sight of God and his Angels, another (transported by this humoured Charon) with dreadfull and gastly lookes, and trembles at his supposed sights of the Deuill, and his hellish associats. It were a madnesse to relate how exceedingly this their madnesse was diuersified, and  how many Acts this Tragicall Commedie had, till sleepe had dispersed those fumes, wherewith that fruit had distracted their braines. From thence (as is said) they came to Patane, where the Queene entertained them in good sort, and to their contentment.
As the difference of their writing, in such neerenesse of dwelling, is very much, so no lesse is found in their Religions. The Pataneans are Mahumetanes. The Chinois and Siamites are Ethniks, in that diuersitie of Rites which you haue heard. Whiles the Hollanders were there, one of those youths, in that Propheticall dictraction before mentioned, warned them to depart from thence; for a great fire would otherwise consume them: whereupon many forsooke their habitation, and yet no fire happened. They also saw the execution of their seuere Law against Adulterie, on two noble Personages, whose lewd familiaritie being detected, shee  chose to bee strangled, and hee to bee stabbed (the Law permitting them their choice of the kindes of death) which by the fathers of the parties was executed on them. In single persons it is accounted no crime. And if a forreine Merchant come to trade there, they vse to
 aske him if he need not a woman: yea, many young women offer their seruice: and the price and time being agreed on, she whom he pleaseth to chuse, goeth with him to his house, and in the day performeth the office of a seruant, in the night of a Concubine; but then neither of them may seeke change of pleasure, without great perill.
The Siamites that liue here, weare two or threeOrbells. balls of Gold or Siluer, as bigge as a Tennis-ball, in their yards, as we shall after obserue in Pegu. The Mahumetans weare them not. The Queene keepes her selfe close at home among her women; of which some may not marry (but yet may doe worse) others may, hauing first obtained the Queenes licence. It is seldome that shee is seene; yet sometimes she rideth on an Elephant in Progresse, for her recreation. And for Elephants, they haue a deuice to take them in this sort. Some ride into theSee the next Chapter of another way to take them. woods on a tame Elephant, and when they espie a wilde one, they prouoke him to fight. Whiles these are fastned in the encounter by the teeth or tuskes, each striuing to ouerthrow the other, some come behinde the wilde Elephant, and fasten his hinder feet, and so either kill him for his teeth, or by famine tame him.
Peter Williamson Floris.Anno 1612. Iune the two and twentieth; Some of the English came to Patane, with a Letter from His Maiestie to the Queene, accompanied with a present from the Merchants, of six hundred Rialls of Eight. This Letter was deliuered in great pompe, being laid in a bason of Gold, carried on an Elephant, furnished with many little Flags, Launces, and Minstrels; The Queenes Court also being sumptuously prepared to this businesse. They obtained grant  of a Trade on like conditions to the Hollanders, who had their Factory their ten yeeres before that time, and their House in that space twice burned.
The Iaponites had twice destroyed Patane by fire in fiue or sixe yeeres space. The Countrey adioyning was also full of warres: the King of Ior ouer-runne, and burned in September that yeere, all the Suburbes of Paan: those of Camboya, Laniam and Iagoman, ioyning their force against the King of Siam. On the one and thirtieth of December, the Queene of Pantanie went to sport Her selfe, accompanied with sixe hundred Prawes, where wee (saith Floris) saluted Her, being a comely old woman, about sixtie, tall and full of Maiestie, such as they had seene few in the Indies. Shee had in company Her sister, which is Heire apparant, commonly called the young Queene, vnmarried and about fortie sixe yeeres of age. The  Queene had not beene forth of her house in seuen yeeres before, and now intended to hunt wild Bulls and Buffes, of which there is great abundance. The waters this yeere were extraordinarily high, carrying away many houses. The Queenes younger sister was married to the King ofPan or Pam, or Pane. This King promised much fauour to the English, if they would resort to his Citie, which is in a little Iland Pahan, whom Shee had not seene in twentie eight yeeres, notwithstanding Her often Embassies to that purpose. At last, prouoked with the Kings dallying and delaying to send Her, Shee sent out a Fleet of seuentie Sayle, with foure thousand men to Pahan, to bring her Sister by force, in April 1613. Hee (being distressed by warres which the King of Ior had made on him, burning his Houses, Barnes and prouisions; and the Queene of Patanie making stay of all Iunkes of Rice laden for Pahan) arriued there, Iuly the twelfth, with the Queenes Sister, and her two sonnes: and all the Dogs were for his sake killed, because he  can indure none. August the second, hee was entertained with a feast, at which the English were inuited guests, where they saw a Comedie played all by women, after the manner of Iaua, with antique apparell, very pleasant to behold. Once before, in the Queenes presence they had seene twelue women and children dance very well, after them the Gentlemen, and last of all the Hollanders and the English were requested to doe it. This Queene is well monyed, both the English and Dutch tooke vp money of Her at vse: this and merchandise, being in the Indies the practice of Kings.
On the first of October, there happened a lamentable Fire on a strange occasion. Two great men, Datoe Besar, and Datoe Laxmanna, dwelling neere together, both rich in Slaues, it fell out that Besar (hearing that his Iauan Slaues had treatned to kill him with Laxmanna  and others) caused two of his most suspected Slaues to be bound: which theGouernor or chiefe ouer them. Ponyonla of the Slaues would not suffer, and thereupon was stabbed by him with his Creese. His Iauan Slaues seeing this, would haue taken him, but by rescue of his other Slaues, hee escaped. They neuerthelesse slew all that came in their way, and presently set the houses on fire. Laxmannas Iauan Slaues could not by any threats be detained from ioyning with them, and set all on fire as they went, so that the whole Town, except the Queenes Court, the Meskit, and some few houses, were burned. The Iauans tooke such Bond-women, as they best liked, away with them, and fled into the Countrey. Few of them could be taken.
Iohor or Ior, in this yeere 1613. was taken by the forces of the King of Achen after twentie nine dayes siege. The Hope (a Holland ship of sixe hundred Tun, which set saile from  Bantam in March, with eightie men, twentie foure Peeces, and seuentie thousand Rials of Eight in Siluer, and the worth of ten or twelue thousand in Cloth) had the ill hap to come to this Riuer of Iohor, and some went vp to the Towne: but before they could returne, the
 Achin Armada came to this Siege, so that twenty three of their men were taken. The rest came October the one and twentieth to Patanie. Master Copland then at Achin with Generall Best, writes, that the Kings Armada returning, arriued Iuly the third, Gallies and Frigats a hundred and twenty, or more, with which Laxaman the Generall had subdued the Kingdomes of Ioar and Siak, bringing with him both the Kings and two of their brethren, which he saith, were honourably sent backe, and remained tributaries to Achin.
TheI. Hermannus Hist. Nau. ab 1602. ad 1604. Hollanders haue had much trading at Patane; and the King of Iohar or Ior moued with their good successe against the Portugals, ioyned his Nauie to theirs, to chase them out of those parts. Yea, they haue braued the Portugals euen before Goa, the Seat of their  Vice-Roy; and in Nouember, 1604. at CalecutStep. ab Hagen. entred into solemne league with the Samaryn, (at least offered it Iarric denies the acceptation) against them: and the next yeere they wonne from the Portugals, the Castles of Amboyne and Tidore, not to mention many other Prizes taken from them by the Hollanders at Macao, one ship worth a Million; at Sincapura, etc. at sundry times. In the yeere 1605. Cornelius Mateliuius was sent to the Indies with twelue Ships; and the next yeare after Paulus a Caerden, with twelue more. And MateliueCornel. Mateliu. Nauig. and pug. Amsteldam. Hist. Io. Isacij Pontaui. besieged Malaca, as before is said. But in this attempt they had not successe answerable to their desire: and yet not so ill as was likely. For theEx relot. Gen. Saris. Portugals vpon this newes returning from Achin, vpon espiall of a Flemish Saile, called a Counsell, and made it the next day before they came vp; in which space the Hollander had leisure to bring all  his Ordnance (then on shore for battery) aboord his Ships, and to prepare himselfe for fight, which he held two dayes with the Portugall with two Ships losse on each side, the Portugall giuing way. So little counsell is sometimes in consultation, and easily is opportunity lost in the very seeking.
Iarric writeth that the Hollanders hauing taken the Fortresses of Amboin and Tidor, entred League with ten neighbour Kings, enemies to the Portugals, and with eleuen Ships, seuenTheir Ship-boats. Barkes, came before Malaca in the end of Aprill 1606. The Kings Confederate had of all sorts of Shipping, three hundred twentie seauen, with foure thousand men. The Iapanders which were then in Malaca vpon affaires of Merchandize, did performe good seruice for the distressed Portugal. The Siege continued almost foure moneths, in which the citie  endured fiftie thousand great shot, before the Vice-Roy Alphonsus Castrius freed the same: He leauing the charge of Goa to the care of Menesius the Arch-Bishop, with a great Armada set forth in the beginning of May, ignorant of this Siege: and set vpon the Acheners by the way, where hee got blowes and shame. Sixe leagues from Malaca the Hollanders fought with him August the eleuenth. The first day was little difference, the next day one Holland Ship was burnt, and the Admirall fired; two Portugall ships burned, one of them the Admirall. On the third and fourth the Portugall had the better: but so as neither part were absolute Conquerours. Hee that will not onely reade, but in manner see, the most of these exploits of the Hollanders, with other rarities of the Indies, may resort to TheodorickeIndiae Orientalis, partes 8. per T. and Is. de Bry. and Israel de Bry, who haue in liuely stamps expressed these Nauigations; with the obseruations  of Linschoten, and others.
Floris their Countrey-man complaynes, that they suffer and assist Moores and Ethnikes in this Indian Trade, which they forbid to their Seruants, Countrey-men and Brethren, vpon paine of Death and losse of Goods. They haue in the Easterne Ilands done much harme to the Portugalls and Spaniards. Captayne Schot tooke the Castle and Iland of Solor, with a great quantitie of Sandelwood, and sent the Portugalls t^ Malacca.
He mentioneth one Fleet of theirs in the Moluccos of two and twentie saile, and that they expected the next yeere (1614.) fourteene saile more.Nic. Bang. Itinerat. Bangam nameth seuen and thirtie Factories, and twentie Forts and Castles of theirs all beyond the Cape Comori. In some places where they haue Castles, hee saith, They threatned to carry such (as Prisoners) to their  Fort, that should sell their commodities to the English. In some places where the People are poore, and haue nothing but their Cloues to liue on, the Hollanders buy it at a cheap rate (as fiftie Ryalls of Eight the Bahar) which they seldome giue in mony, but in Rice, Clothes, and Commodities, so that eight Ryalls of Eight well employed on the Coast of Coromandel, may here yeeld a Bahar, which is sixe hundred twentie fiue pound of Cloues. Hee addeth, That they will not suffer the Malayans and Iauans to haue Cloues but of them, at sixtie sixe Ryals readie money Richard Cock from Iapan writes, That the Spaniards feare the losse of the Philippina's by their force: which is sufficient to do in those Seas what they list. The Spaniards succeeded the Portugals in the Moluccos, which the Hollanders tooke from them: and the Vice-roy of Mexico, with the Gouernor of Manilla, haue ioyned in their endeuors  against them: the Countrey people also better affect the Spaniard, as more Liberall and Bountiful. The Spaniards haue in these Easterne parts besides Manilla, the Castles of Gamalamma in Ternate, of Tidore, Gelola, Battachina, as Bangam obserueth. Thus much haue I
 thought to speake here of the Hollanders, who haue worthily sought and found much Honor, especially by their Marine exploits, round about the world; which if it bee attended with some vnneighbourly quarrels with Ours, and other soyle of couetousnesse, in this humaine frailty, and their proper thriftinesse, is no great wonder.
Balbi mentioneth an Iland on this Coast called Carnalcubar, the Inhabitants whereof goe from one Iland to another (as the Caribes were wont) to hunt men for their cruell diet. For the most part they liue on fish, goe naked, without Law, and had almost seized on him and his company. Dauid MiddletonD. Mid. voyage 1609. M.S. affirmeth the like of another Iland called Seran, which prouoked by wrongs from the Portugals, eate all Christians they can get, rosting them aliue, without regard of any ransome.  



CHAP. IIII. Of the Kingdome of Pegu, or Brama, and the subiect and neighbouring Kingdomes.

@. I.  Of the Greatnesse of the King of Pegu.
OF the Kingdome Brema, or Brama, the Citie Royall isG. Bot. Ben. Pegu, the Nation where began the greatnesse of the late Kings. These Bramans inhabited neere the Lake Chiamay, among whom the King of Pegu had his Lieutenants or Viceroyes: one whereof (the Deputy of Tangu) about threescore and ten yeares since, rebelled against him, and surprised the Kingdomes of Prom, Melintay, Calam, Bacam, Mirandu, Aua, all peopled with the Bramans, trending Northwards a hundred and fiftie leagues. Hee after attempted Siam with  an Armie of three hundred thousand, and spent three moneths in making way through the huge Woods and inaccessible Places, but atchieued not his purpose. After his returne hee assayled Pegu, and conquered it; and then returned the second time 1567. as in the former Chapter is mentioned.N. Pimenta lit. F. Fernandez Hee subiected to his Seignorie twelue Kingdomes, which Fernandes thus rehearseth: The Kingdome of Cauelan, where are the best Rubies and Saphyres. Secondly, that of Aua, the bowels whereof are filled with Mines of Copper, Lead, and Siluer: The third Bacan, enriched with Mines of Gold: Tungran, the fourth aboundeth withA kinde of gum, wrought by Pismires as Bees make waxe, whereof is made our hard waxe, colours, etc. La^ and Lead: such is Prom, the fifth: the sixth is Iangoma, stored with Copper, Muske, Pepper, Silke, Siluer, Gold: Lauran, the seuenth, hath Beioin enough to ladeships: the eight and ninth are the Kingdomes of Trucon, Staples of China-Merchandize: the tenth and eleuenth  are the Diademes of Cublan, betweene Aua and China, powdred with precious stones: Siam, whence wee last came, is the last of the twelue; in the inuasion whereof hee armed a million and threescore thousand men (which number is short ofFredericke saith, he had 26 crowned Kings at command, and that no King in the world was of greater power. Caes. Fred. Fredericks reckoning, except wee ascribe that surplusage to Victualers, Voluntaries, and Seruants and Attendants on the baggage;) which Armie (^ith Fernandes) hee tythed out of his people, taking one only of ten.
Fredericke then in Pegu saith he had fiue hundred thousand, sent him in supply of those which were slaine and lost of the first Armie, which consisted ofBalbi, saith 1500000. foureteene hundred thousand men: after one and twentie moneths siege, hee preuayled by Treason of the Siamites, which opened one of their Gates in the night, and receiued his Forces into the Citie:  whereupon the King of Siam poysoned himselfe, leauing a rich bootie to the Conqueror. Hee saw at the Kings returne the Elephants ordered in a triumphall square, laden with Gold, Siluer, Iewels, and with the Great Prisoners of Siam. This King (saith the same Author) hath no power by Sea, but in the Land, for People, Dominions, Gold and Siluer, hee farre exceeds the Great Turke. He hath diuers Magasons full of Treasure, which is euery day encreased without diminishing, besides that hee is Lord of the Mines of Rubies, and other Iewells. The King in his Feasts vsed to ride on a triumphall Chariot all guilded, drawne by sixteene Horses, it was high with a goodly Canopy ouer it, twentie Lords attended the same, holding in their hands a Rope, fastned to this Chariot, to keepe it vpright. The King sits in the middle, and about him stand foure of his chiefe Fauorites. Before marcheth the  Armie, in the midst, all the Nobilitie, and round about the Chariot, exceeding pompously and orderly. The King hath one principall Wife, three hundred Concubines. The voyage
 from Saint Thomee vsed by the Portugals, is by Negrais, where on the left hand stood a Varella all guilded, seruing for a Sea Marke, the Sunne shining thereon causing it to bee seene farre off: Neere thereto is the Iland of Flies, so called of the store of Flies,G. Balby, cap. 34. R. Fitch. Cities in the way from Negrais to Pegu, caused by the multitude of Fishes there salted. Thence Balby passed to Cosmi, the Territory whereof is full of Woods, and these full of Tygres, wild Swine, Parrats, Apes, and other Creatures. Cosmi is in sixeteene Degrees one third part, the Houses are of Canes, couered with thatch, much annoyed with Tygres, which enter often into the Towne and deuoure Men or Beasts. From hence they passe in Paros or Barkes by diuers Villages alongst the Riuer to Iaccubel a great Citie, and a little beyond to ano^her called Tegiatden. Dian is a great  Towne a little further, where they make Barkes or Vessells as bigge as Galeasses, hauing on both sides quite through, roomes for Merchandize, and in the midst a kinde of dwelling-house, where they trade: they passed further by Bedagiamana, Lagapala, Purdabin, Gungiebin (where they anchored in the midst of the streame, for feare of the Tygres, which in the water sometime assault men.) Coilan a Citie foure square, each square three miles; Tuuagnedan another Citie full of Varellas or Temples and Images; Leuagon a pleasant Citie full of Palme-trees; Siluanpedi, where many victualling Barkes are made, and serue for dwelling and victualling downe to the Sea; Dala, where the Kings stables for his Elephants were; Dogon, the most Religious; Meccao, where they vn-laded their goods to passe by Land to Pegu. All this way is by fresh Riuers with swift Tides, the houses on both sides,  many, built vpon Timbers ascended by Ladders, to preuent Tygres, for which cause also some keepe Buffals in their houses, the sent of whom t^e Tygres cannot endure. All this way they vse Manini in stead of mony, made of glasse. The Varellas or Temples in this way, are innumerable, of diuers fashions. This King held himselfe the grea^est King in the World, and cause himselfe to bee entituled, The liuing God vpon earth: which the LIVING GOD in heauen auenged on him, as you shall heare. Caplan is the place where they find Rubies, Spinels and Saphires, digged out of high Hils, to which none may haue accesse but by leaue. It is six dayes iourney beyond Aua. The Buffals in these parts are of Ash-colour, so great that they are like Elephants. In any great solemnitie the foure white Elephants went before the King with furniture all of gold, their teeth also in a iewelled sheath. Hee hath much artillery, but  wants men to manage them; much materialls for shipping, but wants Shipwrights and Mariners. His iewells are inestimable. Balby saw him weare two Rubies, each as bigge as two Dates, but not so long, of admirable lustre. Hee so abounded with wealth, that a hundred ships, fraughted with Rice, seemed to diminish nothing of the plentie. The fields are said to yeeld, three haruests in a yeere: and of Gems the store i^ beyond estimation, and almost maketh them there short of the estimation of Gems. But this wealth, then wanting no store, had, when Fernandes writ this 1598. a contrary vicissitude, of no store, but of want, euen of those things which Nature exacteth, as necessary props of life. Scarcely of so many millions were left seuen thousand persons, Men, Women, and Children, to participate in the Kings imprisonment, or siege, in his Tower, and those feeding on mans fl^sh, the Parents requiring of the Children that life which before they had giuen, to sustayne their owne, and  now layed them not in their bosome, but in their bowels; the Children became liuing Sepulchres of their scarce-dead Parents. The stronger preyed vpon the weaker: and if their flesh was eaten vp before by their owne hunger, leauing nothing but skin and bones to the hungrie assault of these Raueners, they ripped the belly, and deuoured their inward parts, and breaking the skull, sucked out the braynes raw. Yea, the weaker sexe was by the strength of famine, armed with no lesse butche^ly despight, against whomsoeuer they could meet in the streets of the Citie; with their kniues, which they carryed about them, as Harbengers to their teeth, in these in-hospitall inhumane-humane banquets.
And thus did the besieged Citizens, while the King endured in his Tower no small part of like misery, besides the indignitie, so to bee by his owne Vassals straitned, and after slaughtered.  But such is the iust hand of the King of Kings, who regardeth not persons, but as Hee sheweth Mercy to the Mercifull, so doth He reserue Vengeance for Crueltie and Tyrannie. Pardon me, Reader, if on this spectacle I cause thee, with my selfe, to stay a while and wonder. The Sunne, in his daily iourney round about this vast Globe, saw Few equall (that I say no more to this Peguan Greatnesse, and yet in a small space He that is higher then the highest, hath  abated and abased this Magnificence lower then the lowest of his Princes.



@. II. Of the destruction and desolation of Pegu.
AFter the death of that Braman Conqueror, his sonne, in the second moneth of his succeeding reigne, hearing that the King of Aua, his Tributarie and Vncle, was plotting some Conspiracie, committed to prison fortie of his Nobles, Partners in that new Proiect, and bringing them al, with their Parents, Wiues, Children, Friends, and Acquaintance into a Wood, setThere were destroyed by this flame and ex^cution 4000. persons, Arthus pag. 326. and Gasper Balby, c. 37. hath the same number, saying, That all the Citizens of Pegu were enioyned to be pr^sent at the ex^cution. He cals the place not a Wood, but a Prison He was then at Pegu. fire thereon, commanding to cut them in pieces, whosoeuer  escaped out of the flame. This kindled another fire in the hearts of his discontented Subiects, which was not quenched but with his ouerthrow. Hee warred on his Vncle, the King of Aua, with no great aduantage, till they both agreeing to trie it by single combate on Elephants, Pegu obtained the Conquest. Their fight was first with Harquebusses, after with Darts, lastly with Swords. By the helpe of his Elephant Pegu preuailed, yet so as their perished aboue two hundred thousand of the three hundred thousand hee led forth in this Expedition, and almost as many of the Auan side. Of his Elephants teeth which dyed in this battell, were made little Images or Idols. In the meane time the Siamite with an Army marched to the borders of Pegu, divulging rumors, That he came to succour his Lord against the Auan Rebel. The King enraged hereat, sent presently part of his Forces to take him, and present  him Captiue: but the Souldiers refused to follow the Generall in this enterprise, and returned to their owne houses. The King, after his returne, sent to Siam, by faire speeches to perswade him to come to him: he refused his presence, but denied not his wonted Tributes. Hereupon the King, after two yeres prouision for the war, made that vnhappy Expedition in the former Chapter mentioned. And there the waters taking part with the Siamite, he tried once and againe the like fortunes of warre. He sent his brother the King of Iangoma, and his owne Son, twice; which did much harme to the Siamites, and receiued no little themselues; neuer returning without losse of halfe their Armie, and of his own Son, in the last inuasion slain with a shot. Relentlesse he (inflamed rather with his losses) determined another Expedition in his owne person; and therefore laid vp store of prouision in Barnes at Martauan, Murmulan,  Tauay, and Tanassarin, three yeeres together, purposing then to employ all the Peguans in this enterprise. But they weary of forreine calamities, hid themselues in Woods and Wildernesses, and some turned Talopoyes: so they call their Religious persons. Many sold themselues slaues. The King persisting, in his Person gaue order to his Vncle Ximibogus, to take a muster of all the People, and to entertaine halfe of them for the warres. But he missing so many, which had by those new courses preuented this seruice, acquainted the King therewith; who enioyneth the late professed Talopoyes to resigne their habit, the young-men to be compelled to warfare, the old men to be exiled to the Bramans, where after he caused them to be exchanged for horses. He caused all the Peguans also to bee branded in the right hand, that they might be knowne. This made them entertaine thoughts of Rebellion, which was first  practised by the Cosmians, who set a new King ouer them.
The Peguan sent an Armie against them, with charge to burne or bring away all they could find amongst them, which they did, together with many of the People of both sexes, which he (after his manner) setting wood about them, burned. And when the rest (not able to warre against their King and Famine at once) submitted themselues, with exquisiteThe cruell tyrannie of the King of Pegu. torments he ssue them all. He then sent to his Son, the King of Aua, to transplant those People of euery Age and Sexe, to people these forlorne desolations of Pegu. They, vnacquainted with this ayre, brake forth in diseases, wherwith they infected also the naturall Inhabitants: which plague made such hauoke, that many in impatience cast themselues into the Riuer. The Murmulans with helpe of the Siamites, seised on their Castle, whom the King besieged a  yeere together, and then was forced from thence by the Siamites sudden irruption, with losse of the most of his People, the Horses, Elephants, and Country it selfe remaining their recompence. And the Peguan Captaines also, fearing their Masters tyrannie, became subiects to the Siamite, whos^ whole Families this tyrant with Fire and Water destroyed; so that all the Tract from Pegu to Martaua and Murmulan was made a Wildernesse. These things done, hee sent for his younger Sonne, the King of Prom, and commanded him to the siege of Murmulan; who, vtterly misliking the attempt, conueyed himselfe in the night homewards, with purpose of rebellion.
The King of Siam not ignorant of this Peguan estate, inuaded the country in Haruest-time, and therefore that which they could they conueyed into Barnes, the rest was fired. Hee  proceeded and laid siege to Pegu; in which at that time was a hundred and fiftie thousand Men, and three thousand Peeces of Ordnance, a thousand whereof were Brasse: but
 (as is said) for feare of the Portugalls, which were reported to haue entred into Siam by the way of Camboia, hee departed, leauing Famine behind, as Lieutenant of his Warres, which caused the Forreigners, then in Pegu for the defence thereof, to get them to their owne homes. Those few which remained, liued with prouision from Tangu. The King sent to his Deputie in Tangu, to come to him with all the Inhabitants of the Countrey and their store, leauing his Wife, and some few to guard the Citie. He answered, That he would send halfe, and to demand all were vnreasonable. The King sends foure Noble-men, with Souldiers to force him hereunto. But he slayeth the Leaders, and seizeth on their Followers. Thus the Famine encreasing, and the People eating one another, the King numbreth the Citizens,  among whom hee findeth seuen thousand Siamites, whom he commanded to bee slaine, not leauing aboue thirtie thousand of all sorts in the Citie. His sonne, the King of Prom, which had now stood out three yeeres, began to relent and sue for pardon, with promise to bring the Promans (to the number of fiftie thousand) to the Citie, whereat his Father reioyced, and sealed his pardon, which hee sent him with many gifts.Iudas cannot be secure, till he hang himselfe. But his chiefe Counsellor, Author of this Rebellion, fearing all the blame would be laid on him, poysoned the Prince; himselfe aspiring to the Kingdome, was within one weeke destroyed: and the Nobles, euery man seeking to seize the State to himselfe, caused that of those fiftie thousand, within two moneths space, whiles euery weeke they had a new Prince, scarce remained fiftie men fit for Warre, which departed to Pegu, three or foure in a ship, leauing their Countrey  to the habitation of wild Beasts.
The Natiues of Pegu are not quite extinct, but many of them are fled into other Kingdomes; of whom, and of the Bramans, Iangoma numbreth a hundred and twentie thousand: Oracan, twentie thousand: Siam, a hundred thousand; and the King of Iangoma is able (they say) to arme a million of Men.
The Talapoyes perswaded the Iangoman to depose his brother of Pegu. Hee alledged his Oath vnto his Father, while he liued. They reply, That no Oath might prohibite, if hee placed his brother in a Vahat (or golden Throne) to be adored for a god. And partly with this (I may not call it) Reason: and partly, as Xerxes alledged for himselfe, because that his elder Brother was borne before his Father was King, and because his Mother was the former  King of Pegu's Daughter, hee perswaded himselfe that it was lawfull.
And thus was the State of this mightie Kingdome, in the yeere 1598. brought to one Citie, which also was now become a withered carkasse, and well-neere the Sepulchre of it selfe, and (as mischiefe come not alone) besieged by Mogus, King of Orracan.
AndreasAnd. Bouet.Boues (in his Letters the eight and twentieth of March 1600.) thus finisheth this Tragedie. When the King of Pegu saw himselfe in such straits, besieged by the King of Orracan, or Arracan, and Tangu, in his Castle of Macao, in Decemb. 1599. hee yeelded himselfe to the King of Tangu^* who dealt treacherously with him, and cut off his head, as he did to the Queene likewise, and the Prince. He then hasted to the Tower of Pegu, where he found as much Gold and Iewels as ladedIarric hath 700. Elephants and 700. Horses. six hundred Elephants, and as many Horses,  besides Siluer and other Metalls of smaller price, which he left behinde. The King of Arracan then absent, and angrie that the King of Tangu (contrary to promise) had seized all the treasure to himselfe, purposed to inuade his Kingdome, and to that intent, had the ayde of many Portugalls (amongst whom this Iesuite was one) who saw the wayes and fields, lately so fertile, now full strewed with Dead mens bones and skulls, and in the Riuers all passage of Ships hindered by the carkasses of Men. The King of Arracan found in the Towne aforesaid, three millions of Siluer, with two and thirtie hundred Peeces of Ordnance, and then remained Lord of Pegu. But the Kings of Siam and Iangoma preuented his enterprise for Tangu, which they inuaded, to depriue him of his Treasures. The King of Siam twice assailed Martauan with repulse, whereupon hee caused two of his cowardly CaptainesA cruell punishment of Cowards. to bee  cast into Cauldrons of scalding Oyle: and the third time conquered that Kingdome.
Peter Williamson Floris hath giuen vs later relations. Hee reports that the King of Pegu had in his flourishing greatnesse twentie Kings subiect to him, which fell to the Siamite, Raia Api before mentioned. Hee besieged Vnxa or Pegu two Moneths without effect. Dearth and death made Pegu resigne himselfe to the King of Tangu, that so he might also preuent the King of Arracan, who comming with his power tooke the Citie and the Countrey. The King of Tangu agreed with him to restore certaine Treasures, the white Elephant, and the Kings daughter (both which I saw, saith Floris in Arracan, Anno 1608.) and the King of Pegu, or else that he himselfe would kil him; which he afterwards did with a pilon wherewith they stampe their Rice, as being free (I know not by what Art) against any stabbing.  Thus came this Empire, after the destruction of many millions of Peguans, to desolation, that at this day there is no remembrance of it. The King of Arracan gaue the Towne or Fort of Siriangh on the Riuer of Pegu to the Portugals in keeping, especially to Philip de Britto de
 Nicote, whom hee stiled Xenga, that is, honest: who scarcely so proued: for three or foure yeeres after taking this Kings sonne prisoner,Sirian. hee made him ransome him at 110000. Tangans, and ten Galeas of Rice, after that growing insolent and caring for no bodie. But in March 1613. the King of Aua tooke Siriangh, and slew all the Portugals, and spitted, or otherwise tortured (as the Fame went) this Philip de Britto. This King gaue order for the building vp againe of the old Towne, and called together the Peguers, making them many faire promises, and so went forward to Tenesseryn, where Banya came to him with fiftie thousand Peguans, before subiect to Siam. Thus farre Floris.
Iarric. Thes. Indic. part. 1. l. 2. cap. 24. Equus Seianus Elephas Peguanus.Some tell of this white Elephant, (for so they speake as if there were but one, whereas Fitz Balbi and Frederike saw foure, but it seemes one was of principall estimation) that it was  obserued with no lesse honour then the King, and came not abroad without great pompe. It hath beene a dismall and disastrous Beast to fiue or six Kings, which had the possession thereof, all hauing Tragicall ends. The King of Arracan, Anno 1599. returned home in triumph, this white Elephant richly adorned going before, the Brother and two Sonnes of the King of Pegu following.
P. Iar. Thes. Rer. Ind. l. 6. c. 31.Iarric writes that the King of Pegu yeelded himselfe, his Wife and thirteene children (three other, the King of Arracan had two sonnes in hostage, and a daughter in marriage) to his sisters husband the King of Tangu, trusting the rather to his fidelitie, because when his eldest Sonne had forsaken him,Iar. ex Fernand. lit. and gone to Tangu in hope of the Queene his Aunts fauour, Shee caused his losse of loyaltie to be punished with the losse of his head. Tangu killed  all this royall Family.
Martauan;Martauan. before mentioned, was a goodly Peguan Kingdome, but by wars was brought into like miseries. The Region was so fertile that it yeelded three Haruests in a yeere, and sent yeerely fifteene Ships to Malaca, as many to Cochin, laden with Rice: the Woods abounded with excellent fruits, the Hearbes and shrubs were generally odoriferous or medicinall: diuers kindes there grew of Rices not like to ours: store of Pines and Tecam, a Wood not subiect to rottennesse. A Countrey rich in Mines of Iron, Lead, Steele, Brasse, Siluer, Gold and Rubies, Springs and Riuers, Indian Palmes, and Sugar-Canes. The Forrests had Buffolos, Harts, Boares, wild: the Hauen open at all times of the yeere, and not choaked with sand, as vsually in the Indian Winter. The Citie stands in 16. degrees; of great trading, a  temperate ayre (the Megrim is vnknowne nor Physicions.) The King Bannalaius ninetie nine yeeres of age, who with his Heire apparant were chased out of the Kingdome, and hid themselues in the Forrests, as before that time aboue two hundred thousand of their Subiects had done, onely three thousand staying with the King.
Thus haue you heard of the power and subuersion of this great Monarchie: so much the more lamentable, because their fall was from such a height. The Countrey is so fertile, that at what time soeuer corne be put into the ground, the payment is good with increase. I haue seene with mine eyes (saith Caesar Fredericke) that they haue eaten Serpents, Scorpions, all manner of hearbes and grasse. Such fertility, and such stomackes, as they make credible the reports of their huge Armies, so doe they make more terrible the reports of their desolations.  This that I speake of their dyet, I vnderstand not of their extreamitie and famine, but ordinarily. Master Fitch saith the same, that they eate Roots, Hearbs, Leaues, Dogs, Cats, Rats, and Snakes; they refuse almost nothing.


@. III. Of the Peguan Rites and Customes.
IT is aboue a hundred yeeres since Vertomannus was there, who in company of a  Persian Merchant went to visit the King, who then had wars in Aua. They went in a Boat all of one piece of wood, fifteene or sixteene paces long. The Oares were Canes, and the Mast was one Cane as big as a Herring Barrell. The King wore as many Iewels as were worth a great Citie, which made him in the night time to shine as the Sunne. Hee had a sacrifice to doe to the Deuill, and the next day the Persian presented him with rich Corralls, which hee tooke in so good worth, that he gaue him as many Rubies as were worth a hundred thousand Duckets. Some yeeres1496. before, Hieronymo de Sancto Stephano found him in the same warres with Aua, and saith of him, that hee had ten thousand Elephants, and bred or brought vp euery yeere fiue hundred.
The King, that liued when M. Fitch1588. M.R. Fitch. Caes. Fred. Balby. was there, Sonne to the Conqueror, had one Wife,  and three hundred Concubines: of whom hee was said to haue fourescore and ten Children. He sate in iudgement almost euery day. They vse no speech in their Sutes, but giue vp their
 Supplications, written in the leaues of a tree, with the point of an yron bigger then a bodkin. These leaues are of an Ell long, and two Inches broad; they are also double. Hee which giueth in his Supplication standeth a little off, with a present; which, if the King granteth his request, he accepteth, if not, he returneth with his present.
They kneele downe thrice, lifting vp their hands, and kisse the ground thrice: this they doe foure times before they come where the King sits, who speakes by an Interpreter, and not immediatly to the Suppliant, who with these Rombees (so they call these kneelings) present their gifts ouer their heads: His Guard lies prostrate to the earth.
Pegu is (or at least in a more vnhappy tense, when they were there, was) a Citie great,  strong and very faire, with walls of Stone, and great Ditches round about it, with many Crocodiles in them. There are two Townes; the old, in which the Merchants abide, and the houses are made of Canes, called Bambos: and the new, for the King and his Nobilitie: the Citie is so subiect to fire, that euery day Proclamation is made to take heed to their fire. The Citie is square with faire walls, hauing in each Square fiue Gates, besides many Turrets for Centinels to watch, made of wood, and gilded very faire. The Streets are strait as a line, from one Gate to another; and so broad, that ten or twelue men may ride a-front through them. On both sides at euery mans doore is set a Coco-tree, yeelding a faire shew and comfortable shaddow, that a man might walke in the shade all day. The houses are made of Wood, and couered with Tiles. The Kings house is in the midst, walled  and ditched about: and the houses within of Wood, sumptuously wrought and guilded. And the house wherein his Pagode or Idoll standeth, is couered with Tiles of Siluer, and all the walls are guilded with Gold. Within the first gate of the Kings house was a large roome, on both sides whereof were houses made for the Kings Elephants. Among the rest hee had foure white Elephants, a thing rare in Nature, but more precious in his estimation. For this is part of his Royall Title, The King of the white Elephants. And if any other hath any, he will seeke by fauour or force to haue the same, which (someLinschot. say) was the cause of the quarrell betwixt him and the King of Siam. Great seruice was done vnto them. Euery one of these white Elephants stood in an house guilded with Gold, and were fed in vessels of Siluer gilt. One of them, as hee went euery day to the Riuer to bee washed,  passed vnder a Canopie of Cloth of Gold or Silke, carried by sixe or eight men: as many going before playing on Drums or other Instruments. At his comming out of the Riuer, a Gentleman washed his feet in a Siluer Bason. There were of blacke Elephants nine Cubits high. The King was said to haue aboue fiue thousand Elephants of Warre. There was about a mile from Pegu, a place builded with a faire Court in it,R. Fitch. 28. Gas. Balby, c. 38. Arist. hist. an. l. 9. tels of taking the wilde with fighting on the tame, and wearying them. to take wilde Elephants in a Groue: which they doe by the female Elephants, trained to this purpose, and anointed with a certaine Oyle, which causeth the wilde Elephant to follow her. When the Hunts-men haue brought the Elephant neere to the Citie, they send word thereof, and many Horse-men and Foot-men come out and cause the female to take a streight way, which leadeth to the place where shee entereth, and hee after her: for it is like a Wood.  When they are in, the gate is shut, and they get out the female. The wilde one seeing himselfe alone, weepeth and runneth against the walles, which are made of strong trees: some of them breake their teeth therewith. Then they pricke him with sharpe Canes, and cause him to goe into a strait house, and there fasten him with a rope, and let him fast three or foure dayes, and then bring a femall to him, with meat and drinke, within few dayes taming him. When they goe into the Warres, they set a frame of wood vpon their backes (bound with great Cordes) wherein sit foure or six men, which fight with Guns, Darts, Arrowes, and other weapons. All Authors agree, that no beast commeth so neere the reason of a man as the Elephant, yea they seeme to goe before some men in conceit, haughtinesse, desire of glory, thankefulnesse, etc.
 The Peguans are beardlesse: and carrie pinsers about them to plucke out the hayres if any grow. They blacke their teeth, for they say a Dogge hath white teeth. The men of Pegu, Aua, Iangoma, and Brama weare balls in their yards, which they put in the skinne being cut, and weare for euery childe one, till they haue three, and may take them out at pleasure: the least as bigge as any Wall-nut: the biggest as bigge as a little Hennes Egge. They were inuented to preuent Sodomie, which they vse more then any people in the world: Abusing the Male-Sexe, causeth the women also to weare scant clothes, that as they goe, their thigh is seene bare to prouoke men to lust. Both these were ordained by a certaine Queene for those causes, and are still obserued. If the King giue any one of his Balles, it is a great Iewell accounted: they heale the place in sixe or eight  dayes. The Bramans that are of the Kings bloud, pricke some part of their skinne; and put therein a blacke colour, which lasteth alway. If any Merchant resort thither, hee shall haue many maydes (saithLins. c. 17. Linschoten) offered him by their parents to take his choyse,
 and hauing agreed with their parents, hee may for the time of his abode, vse her as his slaue, or his Concubine, without any discredit to her. Yea, if hee come againe, after shee is mar^yed, hee may, for the time hee stayeth there, demaund her in like sort to his vse. And when a man marrieth, hee will request some of his friends to lye the first night with his Bride. There are also among them that sow vp the priuie part of their Daughters, leauing onely passage for Vrine; which, when they marry, passe vnder the Surgeons hand for remedie. Gasper Balby, and Got. Arthus,Arthus. tell of another custome of their Virgins, if that name may bee giuen them. For, saith hee,Hist. Indiae Orient. p. 313. and Balby c. 37. Virgines in hoc regno omnino nullas reperire licet: Puellae enim omnes statim a pueritia sua medicamentum quoddam vsurpant, quo muliebria distenduntur and aperta continentur: idque propter globulos quos in virgis viri gestant: illis  enim admittendis virgines arctiores nullo modo sufficerunt. Their money is called Ganza, and is made of Copper and Leade, which euery man may stampe that will. Gold and Siluer is merchandise and not money. The tides of the Sea betweene Martauan and Pegu byCaes. Fred. so Balby also. Caesor Fredricke are reputed the greatest wonder which hee saw in his trauels; being so violent, that the ayre is filled with noyse, and the earth quaketh at the approach of this watery element, shooting the Boats that p^sse therewith as arrowes, which at a high water they suffer not to anchor in the Channell, which would betray them to the deuouring iawes of the returning tide, but draw the^ toward some Banke, where they rest in the ebbe on dry land, as high vpon the Channels bottome as any house top. And if they arriue not at their certaine stations, they must backe againe whence they came, no place else being able to secure  them. And when it encreaseth againe, it giueth them their calls or salutations: the first waue washeth ouer the Barke from st^mme to sterne: the second, is not so furious: the third, raiseth the Anchor. In Negrais in PeguR. Fitch. diuers people dwell in Boates, which they call Paroes; the Countrey bei^g full of Riuers, in which they goe to and fro with their Families: as strange is the dwelling here on the Land; their houses being set on high posts, and their going vp on Ladders for feare of Tygres. From hence to Pegu is tenne (as is said before) or eleuen dayes iourney by the Riuers, as before is expressed, where their Mark^ts are (as their dwellings) vpon the water in Boates, with a great Sombrero, like a Cart-wheele,G. Balby. to keepe off the Sunne made of Coco-Leaues. They vse in riding to carry bits in their mouthes, which make them swell: and puffing cheekes. The husbands  buy their wiues, and if they mislike, put them away. And if the wiues Parents will take away their daughters, they must restore that which was giuen in price for her. If a man dies without children, the King is his Heire. And if hee hath children, the King hath a third, they the rest. They vse to carrie men somewhat after the fashion of Congo, in a kind of Couerlet of Cotton, called Delingo of diuers colours, made commodiously to keepe off the Sunne, and Raine, and easie to lie on as a bed, carried by foure men, which alway runne from morning to night, resting onely once in the day. The wife, children and slaues of the Debtor are bound to the Creditor: who may carry the Debtor to his house, and shut him vp, or else sell the wife, children and slaues. The Noble and Ignoble obserue one fashion of attire, differing in the finenesse of the matter, which commonly is bombast. One piece for a shirt, another large and  painted, tied vp betweene the legges; On their heads a kind of Mitre, of the same, and some like a Hiue: they goe bare-foot, but the Nobles vsually are carried in Delingos, or on Horse-backe. The women weare a smocke to the girdle, from thence a strait cloth, of purpose to shew that they are Women, in sort before related. They goe bare-foote, their armes laden with Hoopes of Gold and Iewels, and their fingers full of precious Rings, with their haire rolled vp about their heads. Many weare a cloth about their shoulders in stead of a Cloake. In Pegu they vse much Opium. Aracan is mid-way betweene Bengala and Pegu, on the Coast. Hee is able (saith Fredericke) to arme many Austs by Sea, and by Land hath certaine Sluces, with the which, if the King of Pegu his greatest enemy, assaulted his Countrey, hee could at pleasure couer a great part with waters. In Pegu they haue a custome of  buying and selling by Brokers, which vndertake for the performance on both sides. Also that others standing by may know what is bidden for commodities, they haue their hands vnder a cloth, and by touching the fingers, and nipping the ioynts (each finger and ioynt hauing his proper signification) they make vp their bargaines.  




CHAP. V. Of the Religion in Pegu, and the Countreys sometime subiect thereto.
THeir Varellaes or Idol-Temples in the Kingdome of Pegu are many.R. Fitch. Caes. Frederike. They are made round like a Sugar-Loafe, or a Bell: some are as high as a Church, or a reasonable Steeple, very broad beneath: some a quarter of a mile in  compasse: in the making of them, they consume many Sugar-Canes, with which they couer them from the top to the bottome. Within, they bee all earth, done about with stone. They spend thereon much gold, for they be all gilded aloft, and many of them from the top to the bottome: and euery ten or twelue yeeres, they must bee new gilded, because the Raine consumeth off the gold, for they stand open abroad. Were it not for this vaine custome, gold would there be good cheape. About two dayes iourney from Pegu, there is a Varelle,Gas. Balby saith that many of these Varelles were burned, together with four thousand houses in Pegu, by negligence of a Portugall Mariner. or Pagode, which is the Pilgrimage of the Pegues. It is called Dogonne, and is of wonderfull bignesse, and all gilded from the foot to the top. This house is fifty fiue paces in length, and hath in it three Iles or Walks, and forty great Pillars gilded, which stand betweene them. It is gilded with gold within and without. These  are houses very faire round about for the Pilgrims to lie in; and many goodly houses for the Tallipoys to preach in, which are full of Images, both of men and women all ouer gilded; I suppose it the fairest place in the world. It standeth very high, and there are foure waies to it, which all along are set with Trees of Fruits in such wise, that a man may goe in the shade aboue two miles in length. And when their Feast-day is, a man can hardly passe by Water, or by Land, for the great prease of people, which resort thither from all places of the Kingdome. There are on the shoares of Dogon two Statues, which from the head down-ward represent young men, but haue the faces of Deuils, and two wings on their backes. In Pegu there is Varelle, or Temple, like to this, which the King frequented to doe his Holies therein, mounting vp staires, at the foot whereof were two Tygers, gaping wide, seeming as if they  had beene aliue. Besides the many Magazins (or Treasuries full of Treasure) which the late Braman King had, hee had neere vnto the Palace a Court walled with stone, the gates whereof were open euery day. Within this Court are foure gilded Houses, couered with Lead; and in euery of them certaine Idols of great value. In the first house was a great Statue of Gold, and on his head a Crowne of Gold, beset with rare Rubies and Saphires, and about him foure little children of Gold. In the second House is another of Siluer, as high as an House, set as it were sitting on heapes of money, crowned, his foot is as long as a man. In the third house there is the like Idoll of Brasse: and in the fourth, of Ganza (which is their Mony-mettall, tempered of Lead and Copper.) In another Court, not farre from this, stand foure other Colosses, or huge Images of Copper, in Houses gilded faire, as they are themselues, saue  the head. BalbyBalby, c. 38. tells of fiue made of Ganza, so monstrous, that the toes of their feeet were as big as a man, and sitting crosse-legged, were yet as high as one could hurle a stone, and were all gilded. FernandesFernandes Epist. relateth of threescore and seuen Images of Gold, richly adorned with Iewels, and three hundred threescore and sixe Combalengas, or Gourds of Gold, molten by the Kings Father, each weighing a hundred and fourescore pound, besides his other Treasures; to conceale which, he slew two hundred Eunuchs his attendants.
Their Tallipoys,R* Fitch. before they take Orders, go to Schoole till they be twentie yeeres old, or more: then they come before a Tallipoy, appointed for that purpose, whom they call Rowli. Hee (as chiefe and most learned) examineth them many times, Whether they will leaue their Friends, and the company of all Women, and take vpon them the habite of a Tallipoy.  If hee be content, then hee rideth vpon an Horse about the streets, very richly apparrelled, with Drums and Pipes, to shew, that hee leaueth the riches of the World to bee a Tallipoy. In few dayes after, he is carried vpon a Thing like an Horse-litter, which they call a Serion, vpon ten or twelue mens shoulders, in apparrell of a Tallipoy, with Pipes and Drums, and many Tallipoys with him, and all his friends; which accompany him to his House, standing without the Towne, and there leaue him. Euery one of them hath his House (which is very little) set vpon sixe or eight Posts, to which they ascend on a Ladder, of twelue or fourteene steps. These Houses are commonly by the High-wayes side, and among the Trees, and in the Woods. They goe strangely apparrelled, with one Camboline, or thin Cloth, next to their bodie, of a browne colour; another of yellow, doubled many times vpon their shoulders.  These two bee girded to them with a broad Girdle; and they haue a Skin of Leather hanging on a string about their neckes, whereon they sit, bare-headed and bare-footed, with their right armes bare, and a broad Sombrero, or shadow, in their hands, to defend them in
 Summer from the Sunne, and in Winter from the raine. They are shauen on their heads, beardsBalby c. 37., and all their bodies. They obserue perpetuall Chastitie, and are modest in their going. When one of them dies, his body is kept many dayes with Feasts, and after is set on a high Scaffold, many Tallapoys feasting about it. Thus it is carried to the place of burning, by a great number of people, where it is consumed with sweet Woods to the bones, these buried neere their Houses, and the ashes cast into the water. Balby resembles them in Habite and Ceremonies to their Friers.
They goe with a great Pot made of Wood or fine Earth, and couered, tyed with a broad Girdle vpon their shoulders, which commeth vnder their arme; wherewith they goe to beg their Victuals which they eate, which is Rice, Fish, and Hearbs. They demand nothing;  but come to the doore, and the people presently doe giue them one thing or other: which they put together in their Pot. They keepe their Feasts by the Moone; and at a new Moone is their most solemne Feast: and then the people send Rice and other things to that Kiack, or Church, of which they be: and there all the Tallipoys of that Church meet, and ate that which is sent them. They Preach against all abuses, and many resort vnto them. When they enter into their Kiack, at the doore their is a great Iarre of Water, with a Cocke or a Ladle in it, and there they wash their feet, and then enter in, lifting vp their hands to their heads, first to their Preacher, and then to the Sun, and so sit downe. When the Tallipoys preach, many of the people carry them gifts vnto the Pulpit, where they sit and preach. And there is one that sitteth by them, to take that which the people bring, which is diuided among them.  They haue none other Ceremonies nor Seruice that I could see, but onely Preaching.
G. B.B. l. part. 3. Arthus. p. 319.Bomferrus a Franciscan, and after him Boterus, say, That they hold an innumerable multitude of Worlds, from all eternitie succeeding one after another; and also an innumerable number of Gods, but not all at once. They imagine, that fiue haue gouerned this present World, whereof foure are passed aboue 2090. yeeres agoe. Now they are without a God, and expect the fifth many Ages hereafter: after whose death, they conceiue, that the World shall perish by fire, and then another World shall follow, and others Gods to rule it. They recken likewise in the number of their Gods certaine Men, which yet haue first passed into Fishes, Beasts, and Birds, of all sorts. After death they beleeue three Places; one of Pleasure, Scuum, (like the Mahumetane Paradise;) another of Torment, Naxac; the third of  Annihilation, which they call Niba. The Soules, after their phantasie, abide in the two former places, whence they returne so often in^o this life, till at last they be holden worthy that Niba, Hee addeth, that they haue Couents or Colledges of Priests, which liue three hundred together, or more, in one place, haue no vse of Women, are harbourers of Strangers, and liue some of Almes, some of Rents. They haue like Nunneries also for the Women. There is supposed to be in one Idol-Sanctuary (whereof they haue many) 120000. Idols. They fast thirtie dayes in the yeere; in which they eat nothing till night. They are of opinion, That he which in this world robbeth another man, shall in the next world bee his seruant for recompence. They hold it a sin also to kill a liuing creature, although this be not strictly obserued amongst them. Some Iewes are of opinion, That this people descended of those Israelites which Salomon  sent to Ophir, which they place in this Kingdome.Part. 1. l. 26 But the Peguans themselues ascribe their Religion to a Dog, and a China woman, which escaped shipwracke.
The Deuill is highly worshipped of these Pegusians,Gaspar Balby. Got. Arthus. Hist. Ind. p. 321. to whom they erect a stately Altar, and adorne it with varietie of Flowers, and Meates of all sorts, so to fee and feede him, that hee should not hurt them. This is principally done when they are sicke: for then they make Vowes, and build Altars, which they couer with Clothes and Flowers. They entertaine him also with diuersitie of Musicke, and appoint him a Priest, whom they call the Deuils Father, which procureth his Rites and Musicke. Some, as soone as they rise from their beds, bring a basket of Rice, and meates, and a burning Torch in their hands, running vp and downe in the streets, openly professing to feede the Deuill to preuent harme from them  that day. And if Dogs follow them, they hold them to be sent of the Deuill, to deuoure those meates in his name. Some will not eate till they haue first cast something behinde their backes to the Deuill. And in the Country Villages some of the richer inhabitants leaue their houses furnished with store of food three moneths space to bee inhabited of him, keeping meane while in the fields: that so the other nine moneths they may bee out of his danger. And howsoeuer the Tallipoys preach against this deuillish deuotion, yet they cannot reclaim the people. The Tallipoys euery Munday, arise early, and by the ringing of a Bason call together the people to their Sermons, which are of Iustice to man, but nothing of Religion to God. They wash themselues once a yeere,G. Balby, c. 37. and the water wherewith they are washed, the people account holy, and reserue it for their drinke, as a holy potion. They hold that all  which doe well, of whatsoeuer Religion, shall be saued, and therefore care not, as Balby affirmeth, if any of their Nation turne Christian.

They haue many Feasts very solemnly obserued.Sapan Giachie. One Feast (call^d Sapan Giachie) is kept twelue leagues from the Citie; whither the King rides in a triumphall Chariot, with his Queene in exceeding pompe (so adorned with Iewels, that the eye cannot endure their shining) his Nobles attending. AnotherSapan Catena. is kept in Pegu, against which day all the Courtiers prouide them certaine Pillars or Images of diuers formes, kept closely, that none may see what others haue prouided, till the Day. These are made of Indian Reedes, carued and gilded, and on the Festiuall presented to the King, who praiseth the most artificiall of them. All that night huge lights of Waxe are burnt in honor of their Idoll, whose Feast it is, that all may see to haue accesse to him; to which end the Citie gates are lest open. But none may  approach vnto him emptie-handed. They haueSapan Daich. a Feast of Watering celebrated in the old Citie, where the King, Queene, and his Children, with Rose-water sprinkle one another. And all the Captaines likewise besprinkle each other, that they seeme as wet as if they came out of a Riuer. It is said of the last Kings Father, that when the people were thus washing, he would send amongst them an Elephant, which slew many of them, whereat he laughed; the people lamented. Another FeastSapan Donan. they haue, wherein they haue a triall of their Ships, which can saile best: this Feast lasteth a moneth. A fifth FeastSapan Gi^imos^gienon. is called Giaitnosegienon, in honor of a certaine Idoll. They haue many other Feasts, but these the most solemne. Antony Correa a Portugall, concluding a league with the King of Pegu, the Kings Deputie, caused the Articles of accord, written in Portugall and Pegu-languages with golden Letters, to bee read  aloud, and then rent the scrole, and with a few leaues of an odoriferous tree, caused the same to bee burned to ashes, vpon which hee laid both hands of the Priest, who in the Name of the King, sware to those Articles. These things being done with great attention and silence, Correa, loth in a superstitious fancie, to defile Holy Writ, with confirmation of an Oath to a Gentile, sware on a Booke of amarous Sonnets to keepe inuiolable the said Articles.
In the yeere of our Lord 1585. the King of Aua rebelling (as is before shewed) the King of Pegu, by single combate, slew the Traytor. The fight was on Elephants: in which, the Pegusians Elephant, and the Auan Prince, died. The liuing Elephant was preferred to the place of the former; but in fifteene dayes space (let the beastlinesse of Men imitate the humanitie of a beast) hee sorrowed soGasper Balby was there with other Merchants, which saw him weeping. for his Master, that nothing might comfort him. And  although hee had continually two seruants attending him, and telling him of his amended estate vnder a mightier Master, yet would he scarce cease to weepe, or begin to eate, till his fifteene dayes exequies were finished.
Bomferrus, a Franciscan, spent three yeeres in learning the Pegu's Language, and Mysteries, that hee might preach the Christian Religion amongst them; but was soone forced to giue ouer, and returne into India: For they could not endure to heare any better Knowledge then they had. This was Anno 1557.
Crocodiles and ApesG. Balby. are accounted holy and sacred creatures: for which cause, Apes multiply exceedingly; none taking them, except for the vse of their Varelles, or Temples, where they tye them, and keepe them with diligent respect. And though the Crocodiles in  the Town-ditch deuoure men daily, yet in a blind zeale they will drinke no other water, accounting this holy, and account their soules certainly saued, whose bodies are thus certainly lost and deuoured of those Beasts, which sometimes are thirtie foot in length; one of which, Balby saw draw in a woman: and not a day, but some were said to be deuoured, till the King caused one of those, which was obserued to be most manslaying, to be slaine.
The Kings, subiect to the King of Pegu, did their homage, and presented themselues before him, kneeling; yea, they not only kneeled to him, but to his white Elephants also. When the King dyeth, they make two Ships, with golden couers, and betwixt them erect a golden Theatre; in which they place the corpes, applying thereto Musk, and the most sweet Woods, with other things; and so set forth the same to Sea, setting that Theatre or Pageant on fire.  In one of the Ships or Tallapois, which sing till they thinke the bodie to bee consumed to ashes. Then doe they make a masse or lumpe of these ashes and milke, and commit the same to Sea in the Hauen of Sirian, at an ebbing water: The bones which remaine, they carrie to another place, and there erecting a Chappell, doe burie the same therein. After this, they returne to the Palace, and, according to the accustomed Rites, inaugurate the new King. The father of that King (whose Tragedie yee haue heard) had his bones buried in Dogon.
In Iamahey, or Iangoma, (fiue and twentie dayes iourney from Pegu) when the people be sicke, they make a vow, to offer meat vnto the Deuil, if they escape: and when they be recouered, they make a Banquet, with many Pipes and Drummes, and many other Instruments, and dancing all the night. Their friends bring them presents, Cocos, Figges, Arreoues, and  other Fruits; and with great dancing and reioycing, they offer to the Deuill, and say, They giue the Deuill to eate, and driue him out: and to this end, in their dancing, they crie and hallow very loud. Likewise, when they be sicke, a Tallipoy, or two, euery night doth sit by
 them, and sing, to please the Deuill, that hee should not hurt them. When one is dead, hee is carryed vpon a great Frame (as is said before of the Tallipoys) made like a Tower, with a couering all gilded, made of Canes, carried by fourteene or sixteene men, with great Minstrelsie, to a place out of the Towne, and there is burned. He is accompanied with all his friends and neighbours, all Men: and they giue to the Tallipoys, or Priests, many Matts and Cloth; and then returne to the house, where they feast it two dayes: which being expired, the Women accompanie the wife to the place where hee was burned, and there spend a while in mourning: Then doe they gather the pieces of bones, which bee left vnburned, and burie them, and then returne to their houses. The neere of kindred doe also shaue their heads, both men and women.  


CHAP. VI. Of Bengala, and the parts adioyning: and of the holy Riuer Ganges.

@. I. Of Bengala.
THe Kingdome of BengalaMagin. Gio. Bot. Ben. Got. Arthus hist. Ind. Orient. pag. 282. is very large, and hath of Coast one hundred and twentie leagues, and as much within Land. Francis Fernandes measureth it from the Confines of the Kingdome of Ramu or Porto Grande to Palmerine, ninetie miles beyond Porto Pequene, in all six hundred miles long. The Riuer Chaberis (which some call Guenga, and thinke to bee the ancient Ganges) watereth it: it is plentifull in Rice, Wheat, Sugar, Ginger, Long-pepper, Cotton and Silke; and enioyeth a very wholsome ayre. The Inhabitants neere the shoare, are (for the most part) Mahumetans, and so also was the King, before the Great Magore  (one likewise of his owne Sect) conquered Him. Gouro the seat Royall, and Bengala are faire Cities. Of this, the Gulfe, sometimes called Gangeticus, now beareth name Golfo di Bengala. Chatigan is also reckoned amongst their Cities. They areLinschot. c. 16 a most subtile and wicked people, and are esteemed the worst slaues of all India: for that they are all Theeues; and the Women, Whores; although this fault is common through all India, no place excepted. They haue a custome, neuer to dresse or see^h meat twice in one pot, but haue euerie time a new one. Whensoeuer they are found in Adulterie, they haue theirAdulterie punished. Noses cut off, and are thence forwards narrowly looked to, that they keepe not each others company. The Portugalls haue here Porto Grande, and Porto Pequino, but without Forts and Gouernment; euery man liuing after his owne lust: and for the most part, they are such as dare not stay in  their places of better Gouernment, for some wickednesse by them committed.
In Bengala are found great numbers of Abdas or Rhinocerotes, whose horne (growing vp from his snowt) Teeth, Flesh, Blood, Clawes, and whatsoeuer he hath without and within his bodie, is good against poyson, and is much accounted of throughout all India. The skinne vponLinschot. c. 47 the vpper part of this Beast, is all wrinkled, as if hee were armed with shields. It is a great enemy of the Elephant. Some thinke that this is the right Vnicorne, because as yet there is no other by late Trauellers found, but onely by heare-say. Onely Lodouicus VertomannusLud. Vert. lib. 1. cap. 19. saith, he saw a couple of those other Vnicornes at Mecca; one whereof had a horne of three Cubits, being of the bignesse of a Colt of two yeeres and a halfe old; the other was much lesse:Gesnerus de Quadrup. Scal. Exerc. 205. both sent to the Sultan of Mecca, for a rare present out of Aethiopia. Gesner in his  Booke of Foure-footed Beasts, citeth this testimony, and some others, whereby he perswadeth, that there are diuers sorts of these Vnicornes: but it cannot seeme otherwise then strange, that in this last hundred of yeeres, wherein the World hath vn-veyled her face more then euer before; none of credit (that I haue heard) hath affirmed himselfe to haue seene this Vnicorne, but in picture. And in picture they haue lately abused M.T. Coryate, who writing that he saw Vnicornes at the Mogors or Mogols Court (which, as some that were there, told me, were Rhinocerotes) they haue published the same with picture of the Painters Vnicorne, with a long horne out of his forehead, whereas this groweth out of the middle of the Nose and is but short, the length of a mans hand being a large Hornes measure. That which is reported of their vertue against poyson, proceedeth from the hearbs which Bengala yeeldeth:  for in other places they are not neer the price of these. There are here also certain wild goats, whose hornes are in account against venome: as I my selfe (saith Linschoten) haue proued.

The KingsG. Bot. Ben. of Bengala, in times past, were chosen of the Abassine or Aethiopian slaues, as the Soldans of Cairo were sometime of the Circassian Mamalukes. Northward from Bengala lyeth the Kingdome of Arracan, before mentioned. The great Can subdued these parts and the Kingdome of Mien, about the yere 1272. while Marcus Paulus liued there. Arracan, Chandican, and Siripur are by Fernandez placed in Bengala, as so many Kingdomes: Patane or Patenau by Fredericke and Fitch reckoned to another Bengalau Kingdome: which our Country-man Master Fitch, calleth the Kingdome of Gouren: so that vnder this name, Bengala, are comprehended many Seigniories; all, or the most part now subiect to the Mogor.


 @. II. Of Ganges, and the Superstitions there obserued.
OVr Maps seeme not to describe the Riuer Ganges (so will wee here terme it with Ortelius, Castaldus, Barrius, and all our later Trauellers, both Merchants and Iesuites) according to the due course thereof. For Chaberis they bring from the North, enclining to the East, Guenga from the West; but Master Fitch, which continued fiue months in passing downe first in Iamena from Agra, which falleth into Ganges,  and then in Ganges it selfe to Bengala (although he confesseth it may be done in shorter time) saith, it commeth from the North-west, and runneth East into the Sea. Some call Chaberis, Ganges; and some hold Guenga to be Ganges; and some make but one Riuer of them both: and hence may happily arise in part, that seeking of Ganges so farre off. Both Ganga and Ganges are in sacred account (saithBar. Dec. 1. l. 9. c. 1. Barros) and therefore the Mahometan Kings, will not suffer the superstitious washing of the Ethnikes therein without a Custome or Imposition.
There is in GangesBalby, cap. 42. a place called Gongasagie, that is, the entrie of the Sea, in which are many Fishes called Sea-Dogs. They which are weary of this World, and desire to haue a quicke passage to Paradise, cast in themselues here to bee deuoured of these Fishes; perswading  themselues, that the next and readiest way thither, is by their jawes.
GangesR. Fitch. ouerflowing his bankes, in times past drowned many Villages, which so remaine; and hath changed his wonted channell: the cause that Tanda (a Citie of trafficke, where the people goe naked to the waste) stande^h now a league from the Riuer. It watereth a fruitfull Countrey and populous, and (as the Oceans high Collector) receiueth into him many Riuers by the way, some no lesse then it selfe, so that in the time of raine, you cannot see from the one side of Ganges to the other. The superstitious opinion conceiued, in those parts, of this Riuer, appeareth by the reports of all.Hier. Xau. Eman. Pin. Emanuel Pinner at Cambaia obserued many to resort thither on Pilgrimage, sometime out of that Citie foure thousand; and was told by the Gouernour of Bengala, vnder the Mogor then at Lahor, that there came  thither sometime three hundred thousand, or foure hundred thousand Pilgrims. And addeth, That not long before his comming to Cambaia there assembled there, to this deuout iourney, fiftie thousand people. Happy they esteeme that man which washeth himselfe therein, and secure of saluation, if at the point of death hee may drinke of this water. Hee conferred with one Gedacham, a great man, which had been on this holy voyage, and had there weighed his Mother three times; first, by her weight in Siluer; secondly, in Gold; thirdly, in Pearles, all which he gaue to the poore. A brother of his, called Rau, being to goe to the great Mogor, offered one hundred and fiftie thousandPardaw is three Testons Portugall. Pardaws, that hisN. Pimentae. Pagods or Idols should send him good successe. They make an Image also to this Riuer, whereunto they doe diuine honor. The King of Calecut, and the other Kings of Malabar keepe a solemne feast euery  twelue yeeres, in honor of this Riuer; because that long since a certaine Brachmane (falsly accused) fled vnto Ganges, and there led an austere life twelue yeeres, worshipping that Streame and his Idoll, to whom, when hee purposed to returne home, after those twelue yeeres expired, that Image of Ganges appeared, and said, That on the last day of February he would appeare in a Riuer of his owne Countrey, and cause the Waters thereof to arise, and run backward in witnesse of his innocencie, and bade him assemble all the Lords of Malabar to the sight, which accordingly came to passe, and the memorie thereof is by this Feast solemnized.
BannarasR. Fitch. is a great Towne on Ganges, to which the Gentiles out of farre Countries come on Pilgrimage. The men are shauen all but the crowne. Alongst the water-side are many faire Houses, in which stand Images of euill fauor, made of stone, and wood, like Leopards,  Lyons, Monkeys, Men, Women, Peacocks, and Deuils, with foure armes and hands, sitting close-legged, and holding somewhat in their hands. There are diuers old men, which on places of earth, made for that purpose, sit praying, and they giue the people (which by
 breake of day, and before, come out of the Towne, to wash themselues in Ganges) three or foure strawes which they take, and hold them between their fingers where they wash themselues: and some sit to marke them in the foreheads, and they haue in a cloth a little Rice, Barley, or Money, which they giue to these old men. After that, they goe to diuers of their Images, and giue them of their sacrifices, those old men in the meane while praying, which maketh all holy. They haue one Idoll called Ada, with foure hands and clawes. On certaine great carued stones also they powre Water, Rice, Wheat, etc. They haue a great place like a Well, with steps to goe downe, wherein the water standeth foule, and stinketh, by reason of those many flowers, which they continually throw there into. Many people are alwayes therein, with imagination of pardon for their sinnes, because GOD (as they blaspheme) washed himselfe therein. They gather vp the Sand in the bottome, as a holy Relike. They pray not but in the water, and wash themselues ouer-head, lading vp water with both their hands, and turne themselues about, and then drinke a little of the water three times, after which they go to their gods in their houses. Some of them will wash a place which is their length, and then pray vpon the earth, with their armes and legs at length out, and will rise vp and lye downe, and kisse the ground twentie or thirtie times, but wil not stirre their right foot. Some vse fifteene or sixteene Pots, little and great, ringing a Bell, while they make their mixtures, ten or twelue times; and make a circle of water about their Pots, and pray: others sitting by, one of which reacheth them their Pots. They say ouer these Pots diuers things  many times, which done, they goe to their gods and strew their Sacrifices, which they thinke are very holy, and marke many of them, which sit by, in their foreheads, esteemed as a great gift. There come fiftie, and sometime a^ hundred together, to this Well, and to these Idols.
About their Idols, in some houses, sitteth one in warme weather, to blow the winde with a Fan vpon them. And when they see any company comming, they ring a little Bell, and many giue them their almes. None of these Idols haue a good face. Some are blacke, and haue clawes of brasse; and some ride on Peacocks or other Fowles. One there is alwayes attended with his Fan, to make winde, which (they say) giueth them all things, both food and rayment. Here some are burned to ashes, some scorched in the fire, and throwne into the water, when they are dead: the Foxes presently eat them. The Wiues doe burne with their  Husband when they dye: if they will not, their heads are shauen, and neuer any account is made of them after. If a Man or Woman be sicke, and like to die, they will lay him before their Idols all night: and that shall mend or end him. And if hee doe not mend, that night his friends will come and sit a little with him, and crie, and after will carrie him to the water side, and set him vpon a little raft made of reeds, and so let him goe downe the Riuer. The chiefe Idols are very euill-fauoured, their mouthes monstrous, their eares gilded, and full of Iewels their teeth and eyes of gold, siluer, glasse, coloured blacke, with Lampes continually burning before them. Into their Houses or Temples you may not enter, with your shooes on. When the scorched Indians are throwne into Ganges, the Men swim with their faces downwards, the Women with their faces vpwards; which I had thought they had by some meanes  caused but they denied it. The people goe all naked, with a little cloth about their middle. Their Women are exceedingly on their necks, armes, and eares, decked with Rings of Siluer, Copper, Tinne, and Iuorie hoopes: they are marked with a great spot of red in their foreheads, and a stroke of red vp to the crowne, and so it runneth three wayes. Their marriages are in this sort:The manner of their Marriages. The Man and the Woman come to the water-side, where standeth a Bramane or Priest, with a Cow and a Calfe, or a Cow with Calfe: these all goe into the Water together, the Bramane holding a white cloth of foure yards long, and a basket crosse bound with diuers things in it. This cloth he layeth vpon the backe of the Cow. And then he taketh the Cow by the tayle, and saith certaine words. Shee hath a Copper or a Brasse pot-full of water. The man holdeth his hand by the Bramans hand, and the wiues hand by her husbands,  and all haue the Cow by the tayle. Then they powre water out of the pot vpon the Cowes taile, which runneth thorow all their hands, and they lade vp water with their hands, and then the Brachmane tyeth their clothes together. After this, they goe round about the Cow and Calfe, and giue some what to the poore there attending, leauing the Cow and Calfe for the Bramans vse, and offer to diuers of their Idols mony: then lying downe vpon the ground, they kisse it diners times, and go their way. Betweene this and Patanaw are diuers Theeues, like the Arabians, without certaine abode.



@. III. Of Patane, Couche, Orixa, Botanter, Candecan.
PAtane or Patanaw is a great Towne and long, with large streets, simple houses of earth, couered with thatch, the people tall and slender, many old; sometimes a Kingdome, now subiect to the Mogor. They haue gold, which (as in America) they dig out of the Pits, and wash the Earth in great Bolls. The Women here are  so decked with Siluer and Copper, that it is strange to see, and by reason of such Rings vpon their Toes, they can weare no shooes. Here I saw a dissembling Prophet, which sate vpon an Horse in the Market-place, and made as though hee slept, and many of the people came and touched his feet with their hands, and then kissed their hands. They tooke him for a Great Man, but I saw he was a lazie Lubber: and there I left him sleeping. The people here, are great Praters and Dissemblers. As I came from Agra downe the Riuer Iemena, I saw also many naked Beggars, of which the people make great account; they call them Schesche. Here I saw one, which was a monster among the rest, wearing nothing on him, with a long beard, the hayre of his head couering his priuities. The nayles of some of his fingers were two Inches long: for he would cut nothing from himA right niggard.. Neither would he speake, but was accompanied  with eight or ten which spake for him. When any man spake to him, hee would lay his hand vpon his brest, and bow himselfe, but speake he would not to the King. The King of Patanaw was Lord of the greatest part of Bengala, vntill the Mogoll slue their last King. After which twelue of them ioyned in a kinde of Aristocratie and vanquished the Mogolls (it seemes this was in the time of Emmaupaxda) and still notwithstanding the Mogolls Greatnesse, are great Lords; specially he of Siripur, and of Ciandecan, and aboue all Maafudalim. Nine of them are Mahumetans. Thus Fernandes. These Pataneans seeme by the Iesuites report to come of the Tartars.
In those parts they had many strange Ceremonies. Their Bramans or Priests come to the Water, and haue a string about their necks made with great Ceremonies, and lade vp Water  with both their hands, and turne the string first with their armes within, and then one arme after the other out. Here also about Iemena, the Gentiles will eate no flesh, nor kill any thing. They pray in the Water naked, and dresse their meate and eate it naked: and for their penance they lye flat vpon the earth, and rise vp and turne themselues about thirtie or fortie times, and vse to heaue vp their hands to the Sunne, and to kisse the earth, with their armes and legs stretched out along, their right leg being alwayes before the left. Euery time they lye downe, they score it with their fingers, to know when their stint is ended. The Bramans marke themselues in their foreheads, eares, and throats, with a kinde of yellow geare which they grinde; euery morning they doe it. And they haue some old men which goe in the streets with a boxe of yellow powder, and marke them which they meet on their heads  and necks. And their Wiues doe come, ten, twentie, and thirtie together to the water-side, singing, and there doe wash themselues, and vse their ceremonies, and marke themselues on the fore-heads and faces, and carry some with them, and so depart singing. Their Daughters bee marryed, at, or before the age of ten yeeres. The men may haue seuen wiues. They are a craftie People, worse then the Iewes. The way from Bannaras to Patanaw is a faire and fertile Countrey, beautified with many faire Townes.
I wentR. Fitch. from Bengala into the Countrey of Couche, which lieth fiue and twentie dayes iourney Northwards from Tanda. The King was a Gentile, named Suckel Counse: his Countrey is great, and lyeth not farre from Cauchin-China. All the Countrey is set with Canes made sharpe at both ends, and driuen into the Earth; and they can let in the water, and  drowne the Countrey knee-deepe. In time of Warre they poyson all the waters. The people haue eares which be maruellous great, of a span long, which they draw out in length by deuices when they bee young. They are all Gentiles, and will kill nothing. They haue Hospitalls for Sheepe, Dogs, Goats, Cats, Birds, and all other liuing Creatures. When they be old and lame, they keepe them till they dye. If a man catch or buy any quick thing in other places, and bring it thither, they will giue him mony for it, or other victuals, and keepe it in their Hospitals, or let it go. They will giue meat to the Ants. Their small money is Almonds, which oftentimes they eat. We passed thorow the Country of Gouren, where we found but few villages, and almost all Wildernesse (for wee chose this Desart way for feare of theeues) and saw many Buffes, Swine, and Deere: grasse longer then a man, and very many Tygres.
 Orixa is the next Countrey, which hath beene a Kingdome, but conquered by the King of Patanaw, and both since, by Echebar. Orixa stands sixe dayes Southwest from Satagan. There is much Rice, cloth of Cotton, and cloth made of grasse, called Yerua like silke. (They
 speake of the like in Virginia.) Through this Kingdome (Fredericke writes) a man might haue gone with Gold in his hand without danger, while the old King reigned, who so befriended Merchants that he tooke no custome of them. And there were laden in the Port of Orisa yeerely, fiue and twentie or thirtie Ships, with Rice, Lacca, long Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolins, and the Yerua aforesaid, made of an herbe growing in the Woods wild, then gathered when the boll is growne round, as bigge as an Orange. In the Hauen of Angeli are yeerely many Ships laden with many kindes of commodities. Satagam is a faire Citie (for a Citie of Moores) and very plentifull, sometime subiect to Patanaw. In Bengala such is the estimation of Ganges, that they will fetch of it a great way off, though they haue good water neere: and if they haue not sufficient to drinke, they will sprinkle a little on them, and then they are  well. From Satagam I trauelled by the Countrey of the King of Tippara, with whom the Mogor hath continuall warre. The Mogores, which be of the Kingdome of Recon and Rame, be stronger then this King of Tippara. Foure dayes iourney from Couche is Botanter, and the Citie Bottia: the King is called Dermaine: the People are tall and strong: the Countrey great, three moneths iourney, and hath in it high Mountaines, one of which a man may see, sixe dayes iourney off: Vpon these Mountaines are people with eares of a span long; otherwise they account them Apes. Hither resort many Merchants out of China, and Tartaria. From Chatigan in Bengala, I went to Bacola, the King whereof is a Gentile; thence to Senepare, and after, to Simergan, where they will eate no flesh, nor kill no beast; and thence to Negrais in Pegu and Cosmin. Thus farre hath our Countrey-man led vs in the view of so  many superstitions of these Bengalans, and their Northerly Neighbours.
In that part of Botanter, which is next to Lahor, and the Mogor, the PeopleHistor. Relatio de Kege Mogor. are white, and Gentiles. Their garments are close girt to them, that a wrinkle or pleit is not to be seene, which they neuer put off, no not when they sleepe, as long as they are able to hang on: their head attyre is like a Sugar-loafe, sharpe at the top. They neuer wash their hands, lest, say they, so pure a Creature, as the Water, should be defiled. They haue but one Wife; and when they haue two or three children, they liue as brother and sister. Widdowers and widdowes may not marry a second time. They haue no Idols, nor Townes, nor King, in those parts of Bata^ter. They haue their Sooth-sayers, which they aske counsell of. When any is dead, they resort vnto these Wisards, to know what is to be done with their dead. They search their Bookes;  and as they say the word, they burne them, or bury them, or eate them, although they vsually feed not on mans flesh. They also vse dead mens skulls in stead of dishes, as in Thebet, wee haue obserued the like custome. They are liberall Almes-giuers. They liue on Weauing and making Clothes, which they sell at Calamur and Negariot in Summer, for in their Winter they cannot passe for Snowes. They are like in colour and haire to men of these parts.
The BengalansLinschot. haue a Tradition or Fable amongst them, That this Riuer commeth out of Paradise, which was proued by one of their Kings, who sent men vp the streame, till they came to a pleasant Ayre, still Water, and fragrant Earth, and could row no further. Hence happily grew this conceit, That this Water should wash away sinne, and that without it they cannot be saued. This Riuer hath in it Crocodiles, which by water are no lesse dangerous then  the Tygres by land, and both will assault men in their Ships. There is also a little small Beast, which by his barking maketh the Tyger to run away.
The King of Candecan (which lyeth at the mouth of Ganges)N. Pimenta. caused a Iesuite to rehearse the Decalogue: who when he reproued the Indians for their polytheisme, worshipping so many Pagodes: Hee said, That they obserued them but as, among them, their Saints were worshipped: to whom how sauoury the Iesuites distinction of (...) and (...) was for his satisfaction, I leaue to the Readers iudgement. This King, and the others of Bacala and Arracan, haue admitted the Iesuites into their Countries, and most of these Indian Nations.  


@. IIII. Of Arracan, and the Warres betwixt them and the Portugals.
BEtwixt the King of Arracan and the Portugals haue beene late warres, not vnworthy Relation, because they serue for better knowledge of all the Countries adiacent. The King of Arracan or Rachim (so Fredericke cals it) had giuen to Philip de Britto the keeping of Syrian, as before is expressed, which he fortifying, became suspicious to the King: this was one cause of war; and another the Portugals surprisall of the Ile Sundiua,Sundiua. sixe leagues distant from the Continent of Bengala, ouer-against Siripur. This  Iland, Fredericke admires for the cheapnesse and plentie of necessaries, where he bought two salted Kine for a Larine,Caes. Frederike. which is twelue shillings and sixe pence, very good and fat; foure
 wilde Hogs readie dressed at the same price; a fat Hen for a peny (and yet the People said they paid twice the worth) and other commodities at like price.Porto Grande. It belonged to the Kingdome of Bengala; distant a hundred and twentie miles from Chatigan, the people Moores. It is thirtie leagues in compasse, so strong by Nature, that they may hinder any from landing.
Two hundreth Ships are yeerely laden from hence with salt. The Mogols with the Conquest of Bengala had possessed Sundiua, Cada-ragi still continuing his Title, vnder colour whereof Carualius and Matus, two Portugals conquered it, An. 1602. Heereat the King of Arachan was angry, that without his leaue they had made themselues Lords of that which hee challenged to belong to his protection; fearing that by this meanes, and the fort^fication  of Sirian, he should finde the Portugals vn-neighbourly Neighbours. Hee sent therefore a Fleet of a hundred and fiftie Frigats or littleIa^eae. Galleys, with fifteene Oares on a side, and otherCa^u^es, greater furnished with Ordnance: and Cadaray (which they say was true Lord of it) sent a hundred Cossi from Siripur to helpe Him. The Portugals preuailed and became Masters of a hundred and nine and fortie of the Enemies Vessels.
In this time Britto had built his Fort at Sirian, and founded a Towne for the dispersed Peguans, which had here assembled to the number of 15000. The Saracens enuying herear, proferred the King of Arracan a great reuenue to commit this Hauen to them; Britto obiected, That so the Mogol would swallow all (Manasingua the Gouernour of Bengala hauing promised to King Achebar to bring Him the White Elephant in Arracan) adding great  gifts to the King and his Councellors. At the same time a Peguan Bagna (that is, a Great Man or Ruler) by the Kings Command and Letters commendatorie to Britto kept in Pegu; But Britto fearing the Peguans would cleaue to their Countrey-man, An. 1603. besiegeth and taketh his Fortresse, slayeth three hundred of his Companie, Captiuing nine hundred. Whereupon the Peguans which had followed him reuolted to Britto, viz. two hundred ShipsIndian ships are generally smal, and of no great force for warre, especially with such souldiers* you may call them Boats. twentie Horses, and great store of prouision, with the Haruest which the Bagua had sowne, then on the ground. Hee with fifteene of his Company escaped: perhaps the same which before out of Floris wee haueSup. c. 3. @. 2. mentioned. Britto now grew great, and in the Portugall name made League with the Kings of Tangu, Iangoma, Siam, and Prom, for their ioynt ayde against Arra^an, if he should be besieged. He went also to Goa to acknowledge  fealtie to the Crowne of Portugall for the Kingdome of Pegu, whence he brought with him sixteen Gallies, and three hundred Portugals, to the defence of Sirian, with which and a hundred others of the Portugals (threescore at Sundiua, thirtie at Arracan, and ten at Chatigan) he easily thought to become Master of those Seas. A matter of great consequence, where they might haue all matter for shipping (which caused the Great Turke once to prouide here, at an easier charge carried from hence toSues in the bottome of the Red Sea. Sues, then from Alexandria) and here they might both build their Fleets, and be furnished of sustenance, might send at any time to all places in the South (which from Goa cannot be done but with the Monsons) and might cause that no Ship of Moores should lade Pepper, Cinamon, or other commodities at Martauan, Reitau, Iuncalao, Tanassarin, and Queda, for Surat or Mecca, but with custome to them and passe  from them.
The King of Arracan foreseeing such astorme, prouided a Nauie of a thousand saile,Ialeae. Iarric. l. 6. c. 33 the most Frigats, some Greater, Catures and Cosses, and assailed the Portugal Fleet at Sundiua vnder Carualius, who had but sixteene of diuers sorts of shipping which staid by him, and yet got the victorie, neere two thousand of the Enemies being slaine, a hundred and thirtie of their Vessels burnt, with the losse but of six Portugals. Which so vexed the King of Arracan, that he put many of the Captaines in Womens habit, vpbraiding their effeminate courages, which had not brought one Portugall with them aliue or dead. Yet were the Portugall Ships so torne, that they were forced for feare of another tempest, to forsake the Iland, and to transport that which there they had to Siripur, Bacala, and Chandecan in the Continent,  and thus Sundiua became subiect to Arracan: Carualius staid at Suripur (where he had thirtie Fusts or Frigates) with Cadary Lord of the place, where he was suddenly assaulted with one hundred Cosses, sent by Manasinga, Gouernor vnder the Mogol, who hauing subiected that Tract to his Master, sent forth this Nauie against Cadaray, Mandaray a man famous in those parts being Admiral: where after a bloudie fight Mandaray was slain, and Carualius carried away the honor. From thence, recouering of a wound in the late fight, He went to Golin or Gullum, a Portugall Colony vp the streame from Porto Pequino, where hee won a Castle of the Mogors kept by foure hundred men, one of that company onely escaping. These exploits made Carualius his Name terrible to the Bengalans, insomuch that one of the Arracans, Commander of fiftie Arracan Ships, dreaming in the night that hee was assaulted by  Carualius, terrified his fellowes, and made them flie into the Riuer; which when the King heard, cost him his head.
But this Day had an end, and this Sun was set in a Cloud. For whiles the King of Arracan
 hauing lately atchieued so great matters in Pegu, and added Sundiua, and the Kingdome of Baccala, intended to annexe Chandecan to the rest of his Conquests: the King of Chandecan thought to purchase his peace with Carualius his head; which hee treacherously accomplished, sending for Him, that they might ioyne together against Arracan, and watching his oportunitie, tooke Him in his Palace with others of his companie, after that inuading and spoyling his ship.
Britto remayned in his Fort at Sirian, against whom in the yeere 1604. the King of Arracan sent a fleete of fiue hundred Frigats, and fortie Caturs, vnder the conduct of his eldest sonne, with fifteene thousand men. The Portugals had eight ships well prouided, and one hundred and eightie Souldiers in the Fort. Neere to Negrais the Armadas met, the Portugall  obtayning the victorie, slaying and drowning almost one thousand of the enemies. This at Sea; and waiting a better oportunitie in the Riuer, they left not one Vessell to carrie newes thereof to Arracan. The Prince with his Souldiers sought to returne by land, but Penurie pursued him, separated his companie, and betrayed Him to two hundred and fiftie Portugals and Peguans, which to these straights had added the locall straights of a certaine passage, where the Prince with some of the chiefe yeelded; redeemed at a great summe,Sup. cap. 3. @ 2. (as before is mentioned) and couenants of Peace on both sides ratified by Oath. One of the Articles was the deliuerie of Sundiua, for the performance of which Britto sent his sonne Marke with two Captaines to take possession, which all were treacherously dispossessed of their liues, and three thousand Portugals captiued. Hee prepares for a new  siege, but in the midst of these designes, that part of his Palace where the white Elephant stood, and his chiefe Oratorie were fired with lightning: which some Talipois interpreting of Diuine vengeance for breach of Oath, went to the King, and told him these things presaged further disasters. It so presaged indeed to Them, who for this presage were presently, to the number of thirtie of the chiefe of them slaine. Twelue hundred ships (so wee call them all by a generall name, though not comparable, for the most part, to our Europaean) the King of Arracan set forth in this new expedition; of which seuentie fiue were of greater burthen, each hauing twelue Peeces of Ordnance, and well furnished; the rest Fusts, or Frigats. In this Fleete were thirtie thousand Souldiers and Sea-men, Pataneans, Persians, and Malabars; of them eight thousand with Hand-gunnes, and three  thousand fiue hundred greater Peeces of diuers sorts. The King himselfe, his sonne, and best Souldiers, were therein, accompanied with the King of Chocor. Britto sent forth that Nauie which hee had (but twelue ships in all) vnder the command of Paulus Regius, a famous Sea-Captaine; which meeting them at the Cape of Negrais, the Admirall of Arracan, Marucha, was with his Fust, taken and slaine: and the Night parted the Fight, or rather renewed the Fight; many of the Arracan ships mistaking and warring vpon their fellowes, to the losse of diuers ships, and (in the whole fight) of almost two thousand men.1607. Foure dayes after, the fourth of Aprill, they encountred the second time, and the Portugall Admirall runne her selfe vpon pyles vnder the water; whence shee could not bee freed: and when another Portugall ship came to relieue them, Rhogius would not bee  perswaded to stirre, till fire entring the Gunners roome, blew vp him and his companie, and the other Captaine, which moued him to remoue. The Portugall ships betooke them to their Fort: whither the King of Tangu had sent his sonne, with sixe hundred Horse, eighteene Elephants, and sixteene thousand Men, to besiege it. But both these and the Arracan forces doing their vtmost, in May following were forced to depart without effect, leauing the Towne and Fort in a deformed case, and most of the people wounded. Yet greater was Arracans losse: onely twelue greater, and two hundred and fiftie lesser of those twelue hundred ships remayning, the rest drowned, forsaken, or burnt, partly by the Portugals, partly by themselues wanting men to guide them. Most of the Ordnance they buried in the Sands. Ten thousand men they lost in the siege. The Portugals  lost of their Nation (besides helpes) eightie sixe, ten Captaines, and the Admirall. The next yeere their Fort was fired, and their dwelling Houses, Temple, Household, and Prouision.1608. Britto himselfe escaped hardly with his wife. His courage yet remayned, and resolued to build it in an higher and stronger place. Easily had Arracan with this aduantage effected his designes, had not the Portugals elsewhere molested him, and taken Dianga. And thus farre haue wee followed the Iesuite Iarric, in these Arracan affaires: If with iarring from truth in any place, I haue named my Author, nor can accuse, or excuse him. Further he cannot guide vs.
1613. Britto empaled, and cruelly slaine.But where his Intelligence failes, Floris helpes. The last Act of this Tragedie was reserued to the King of Aua, who tooke Sirian (as before Master Floris hath told vs) slue all  the Portugals, and was reported to spit this Philip de Britto. He settled the affaires of Pegu, and sought what hee could, to reduce them from their dispersions to their natiue Habitations.
 But you are wearie of warre and bloud, in which you see all these Kings embrued: it is time to entertaine you elsewhere, and though as tragically, yet with differing Obiects pleasing at the least with varietie.



CHAP. VII. Of the Great Mogor, or Mogoll.

@. I. Of the Mogors Countries; and MELABDIM ECHEBAR.
THe Great Mogor (according to Boterus) hath vnder his subiection seuen and fortie Kingdomes, which lie b^tweene Indus and Ganges on the East and West, and betwixtOr Cumaus on which dwel Gentils, called Cumai. This mountaine seperates the Mogols and Tartars. Imaus and the Ocean, contayning all that which the Ancients called India intra Gangem, or India Citenor. Hee is called of the people the Great Mogor, for the same cause that the Ottoman-Turkes are  called Great. The style of him that was King1495. and 1599., when the Iesuites imparted to vs these Relations, was Mahumeth Zel^bdim Echebar, King Mogor, or Mogoll; for so they call him in the Countrey, and not Mogor, as the Iesuites. This Mogoll seemes to argue their Tartarian Originall from the Moai Tartars; of which, see our Tartarian Relations. The true Mogors, or Mogols, liue on the hither side of Indus, in the Kingdome of Quabul, or Cabul, which is vnder the brother of Echebar; against whom, Anno 1582. hee led a strong Armie, in which the Iesuites say, were fiue thousand Elephants armed. These weare plates of Iron on their foreheads, carrie foure Archers, or else foure Gunners, with great Peeces; and goe not before the Armie, lest they should hinder their sight, or (being hurt) disturbe the rankes; and therefore are set in the Rere, a Sword bound to their trunke,  and Daggers fastened to their great teeth. King Echebar was borne in the Prouince of Chaquata, which hath Indostan on the South, Persia on the West, the Tartars East. Their Language is Turkish; but the Courtiers to this day speake Persian. Baburxa his grand-father chased the Parthians vnto Bengala, before possessors of the Region of the Mogors; after whose death, the Parthians, or (as they are now called Pataneans, of Patanau before mentioned) recouered themselues, and warred on his sonne. Their descent is fromVid. sup. c. 8. @. 2. Tamerlan; whose third sonne was Miromcha, grandfather to Abusayd, who slue Abdula; successor to Abdelatife which had slaine Oleghbek, the sonne and successor of Mirzah Charrok, the fourth sonne and first successor of Tamerlan. Sultan Hamed, sonne of Abusayd, obtayned Maurenahar, and after him Babor his sonne, which in the yeere 1500. was dispossessed by  the Vsbechs, yet still possessed Gaznehen, and some parts of India; succeeded by his sonne Homayen, the father of this Achabar. Thus Mirkand. The Iesuites say, they are Parthians, descended of Cingis (therefore rather to be called Tartars;) Achabars grandfather they call Baburxa, which by his sword entred Industan, and chased those Tartars into Bengala. But they againe preuailed after his death: insomuch, that Achabars father Emmaupaxda (as the Iesuites report) being driuen to great straights by the Parthians, Tartars, or Pataneans, was driuen to aske aide of the Sophi, or Persian King; which he obtained, with condition of submitting himselfe to the Persian Religion. The Mogors speake the Turkish language. The Empire of this Mogor is exceeding great, contayning the Countries of Bengala, Cambaya, Mendao, and others, comprehended by some vnder the name of Industan.  This Mendao is said to be ten leagues in circuit, and that itR. Fitch. cost the Mogor twelue yeeres siege. Agra and Fatipore are two Cities in his Dominion, great, and full of people, much exceeding London; and the whole space betweene, is as a continuall populous Market. Many Kings he hath conquered, and many haue submitted themselues and their States voluntarily to his subiection. Twentie Gentile Kings are numbredRelat. de. Reg. Mog. in his Court, which attend him, equalling the King of Calecut in power. Many others pay him tribute. In his Countries are many Spices, Pepper, Ginger, Cassia, and others: many precious Stones, Pearles, Metals of all sorts, Silkes, Cotton, Horse, and other Commodities, which yeeld him many millions yeerely beyond his expences. About the yeere 1582. the Iesuites first entred there; after whose report, his Dominions were then as followeth since much more  enlarged. Eleuen great Riuers run through his Dominions: Taphi, Haruada, Chambel, Iamena, Ganges: the other sixe, are Indus, or Schind (as they call it) and Catamul, Cebcha, Ray, Chenao, Rebeth, tributaries to Indus. The whole Monarchie enuironeth nine
 hundred leagues. King Echebar hath many Lords; each of which is to maintayne eight, ten, twelue, or fourteene thousand Horse in readinesse for the warre, besides Elephants; of which, in the whole Kingdome are said to bee fiftie thousand. Himselfe can further bring of his owne into the Field fiftie thousand Horse, and Foot-men innumerable. To those Lordes hee alloweth certaine Prouinces, for such Militarie seruice; for hee is Lord of all: nor hath any else possession of any thing, but at the will of the King. Once a yeere they appeare before the King, where they present a view of those their enioyned Forces. Many millions of Reuenue doe besides accrew vnto his Coffers: yet his Port and Magnificence is not so great, as of many other Princes, eyther for Apparell, Diet, or the Maiestie of his Court-seruice. Hee cannot write or reade, but heareth often the Disputations of others,  and Histories read before him, being of deepe iudgement, piercing wit, and wise fore-cast. In execution of Iustice hee is very diligent; insomuch, that in the Citie where hee resideth, he heareth all Causes himselfe: neither is any malefactor punished without his knowledge; himselfe giuing publike Audience twice euery day: For which purpose, he hath two wide Halls, or rather open Courts, and in them Royall Thrones, where hee is attended with eight Councellors, besides Notaries. Yet doth hee stand, and not sit: and at other times sit on Carpets, after the Turkish manner, notwithstanding his Chayre of Estate standing by. He hath twelue Learned men alway about him, which ordinarily reason and dispute in his presence, or relate Histories. Hee is a curious discourser of all Sects. Hee is both Affable, and Maiesticall, Mercifull, and Seuere; delights himselfe in diuers Games, as fights  of Buffals, Cockes, Harts, Rammes, Elephants; Wrestlers, Fencers, Dances, Comedies, and in the Dances of Elephants and Camels, thereto instructed. In the midst of these Spectacles he dispatcheth serious affaires. He delights in Hunting, vsing the Panther to take wild Beasts. Hunting Dogs hee had none. They vse tame Harts to take the wild, with Nets fastened to their hornes; wherewith they intangle the other. When hee goes to warre, hee will cause a whole Wood to bee round beset with men, hand in hand; sending others in, which raise the Beasts, and driue them into the others armes; which, if they let them goe, are punished, to make sport that way. He was skilfull in diuers Mechanicall Trades; as, making of Gunnes, casting of Ordnance, hauing his Worke-house in the Palace for that purpose. But we haue obserued, that this is common to all Mahumetan Priests and Princes, the  Great Turke, yea, the Great Challfa himselfe (as Tudelensis writes of his Times) practising some Mechanicall Mysterie. Theeues and Pyrates He punished with losse of the hand; Murtherers, Adulterers, Robbers by the high way, with empaling, hanging, or other doaths; not executed, till the Sentence had beene thrice pronounced: Loued and feared of his Owne; Terrible to his Enemies; Affable to the Vulgar; seeming to grace them and their Presents, with more respectiue Ceremonies then the Grandes; of sparing Dyet, scarce eating Flesh aboue foure times in the yeere, but feeding by Rice, Whit-meats, and Electuaries; sleeping but three houres in the night; curiously industrious.
This King detesteth the Mahumetan Sect, which, as you heard, his Father embraced for his aduantage; and therefore hath ouerthrowne their Moschees in his Kingdome, razing the  Steeples, and conuerting the rest to Stables, and more trusteth and employeth the Gentiles in his affaires then the Moores: whereupon many of them rebelled against him, and stirred vp the Prince of Quabul, his Brother, to take Armes: against whom Echebar opposed himselfe (as is said) and caused him to retire into his owne Countrey. It is vncertaineThe vncertaintie of his Religion. Balby tels of reports amongst the Portugals, of the conuersion of this King, and of the Kingdome of China also to Christianitie: both with like truth, and fitting Popish reporters. what Religion hee is of, some affirming him to bee a Moore, some a Gentile, some a Christian, some of a fourth Sect, and of none of the former. Indeed it appeareth that he wauereth, vncertaine which way of many to take, able to see the absurdities of the Arabian and Gentile professions, and not able to beleeue the high mysteries of the Christian Faith, especially the Trinitie and Incarnation. Hee hath addmitted the Iesuites there to preach, and would haue had them by miracle to haue proued those things to him, which they (elswhere so much  boasting of Miracles) wisely refused. For hee demanded that the Mulla's, or Priests of the Mogores, and they, should by passing thorow the fire, make tryall of their Faith. Hee hath many Bookes and Images, which the Christians there doe vse, and seemeth to haue great liking to them, vsing the same with great reuerence. But his Religion is the same (it seemeth) with that of Tamerlane his predecessor, to acknowledge One God, whom varietie of Sects and Worshippings should best content. Hee causedIoan. Oranus. thirtie Infants to bee kept (like that which is said of Psammetichus, King of Egypt) setting certaine to watch and obserue, that neither their Nurses, nor any else, should speake vnto them, purposing to addict himselfe to that Religion which they should embrace, whose Language these Infants should speake; which accordingly came to passe. For as they spake no certaine Languge, so  is not hee setled in any certaine Religion. Hee hath diuers Idols sometime brought before him: among which, is one of the Sunne; which early euery morning, and three other times a
 day, at noone, euening, and in the night, he worshippeth. He worshipped also the Image of CHRIST, and our LADY, which hee set on the crowne of his head, and wore Relikes about him. He is addicted to a new Sect, as is said, wherein he hath his followers, which hold him for a Prophet. The profit which they haue by his gold, addicteth them to this new Prophet.Hier. Xauier. Hee professeth to worke Miracles; by the water of his feet curing diseases. Many Women make Vowes vnto him, either to obtaine children, or to recouer the health of their children; which if they attaine, they bring him their vowed Deuotions, willingly of him receiued: yea, euery morning, as he worshipped the Sunne, so he delighted to be worshipped himselfe of the people: to whom hee made shew of himselfe at a window; and they  kneeling, performed like Ceremonie to him, as to their Idols: and he was thought to entertaine men skilfull in diuers Sects and Religions, that of euery one he might take somewhat to the constitution of a new one. He hath three sonnes; Sciec the eldest, which is honoured with the title Gio, and called Sciecigio, that is, the Soule, or Person, of Sciec; he much fauoureth the Iesuites: the second, Pahari: Dan, or Daniel, is the youngest.Some call the second sonne, Sultan Horat: some, Morad, the first Selim, etc. Some call them by other names. His Presents are exceeding, besides his Tributes and Customes.Eman. Pinner. Hee mentions One, which in their presence offered his Vassalage, and withall a Present, valued at two hundred thousand crownes and more; a Horse with furniture of Gold and Iewels; two Swords, and the Girdles of like worke; Camels, Carpets, etc. taking himselfe dignified in the acceptation of his Present. Himselfe after often bowings, and touching the ground  with his head, comming neerer, was searched, whether hee had any weapons, and then was admitted to touch his foot, Echebar laying his hand on his necke, and allowing him to stand with his other Nobles. The Kings sonne, Sultan Morad, at the same time offered a Present of fiftie Elephants, worth a hundred and fiftie thousand Duckats; one Chariot of Gold, another of Siluer, others of Mother of Pearle, with other things of great value. The Vice-Roy, or Gouernour of Bengala, followed with another Present, esteemed worth eight hundred thousand Duckats, viz. three hundred Elephants. Almost dayly hee receiueth such Presents, especially at a certaine Feast, called Nerosa; in which, one Great Man was thought to present him with neere the worth of one Million of Gold.


 @. II. Of the Conquests and death of ECHEBAR, and of his Sonne and Successour SELIM, now reigning.
OVr Relations of Echebar or Achebar, his Rites Humane and Diuine,Iarric. Thes. rer. Indicarum, l. 4. and 5. as also of his Possessions and Greatnesse, wee haue alreadie seemed long; yet cannot be so satisfied, without further satisfaction to the Reader, if he be (such as he of whom wee write) curious and desirous to know remote Affaires and farre  distant Occurrences. Great Echebar added vnto that Greatnesse which his Father left him, the Kingdome of Caxemir, of Sinda, of Guzzarat, of Xischandadan, and a great part of Decan, with all the Tract of Bengala. Such was his felicitie, that it grew into a Prouerbe, As happie as ECHEBAR; seldome attempting any thing, without prosperous successe: I speake of worldly happinesse. Euen in Natures treasures hee was rich, both Wit and Memorie: this so happie, that of many thousands of Elephants which hee had, hee knew the names; yea, of his Horses (to each of which hee gaue names) of his wilde Beasts and Harts, that hee kept in a place appointed; and euen of his Pigeons, which hee kept for sport. Yet, was not this happinesse so perpetuall, but that he had some, especially domesticke, Crosses. His second sonne, Sultan Morad, being sent into Guzzarat, against Melic King of Decan  (sometime Lord of Chaul) was slaine, with many other Commanders: which newes was then brought to Echebar, when hee was celebrating their New-yeeres Festiuall (the day that the Sunne enters into Aries) whereupon hee sent thither another of his sonnes. Another time, when hee was solemnizing the Sunnes Festiuall, on Easter day, 1597. (about which time the King of China sustained the like Casualtie) Fire fell from Heauen vpon his Tent, richly adorned with Gold and Iewels, and consumed it to ashes, with all the Tents adioyning, together with his Throne of solide Gold, valued at 100000. Duckats, consumed or melted: from whence it proceeded to the Palace; which being of Timber, was for the most part brought into ashes. Some millions of Treasure there reserued, could not bee there preserued from this flame; which made a Streame of Gold and Siluer, mixed with other  Metalls, runne alongst the streets. For this cause hee forsooke Lahor (where hee had built the Iesuites a Church, and where hee kept his Court, as hee did before at Fatepore, and sometimes at Agra) and went to Caximir,Caximir. or Cascimir, a Kingdome which a little before
 he had subdued. This yeelds not to any Indian Region, in goodlinesse and wholesomenesse, being encompassed with very high Mountaines, couered most part of the yeere with Snow: the rest a delicate Playne, diuersified with Pastures, Fields, Woods, Gardens, Parkes, Springs, Riuers, euen to admiration. It is coole, and more temperate then the Kingdome of Reba^, which adioyneth to it on the East. Three leagues from Caximir is a Lake, deepe, and beset round with Trees, in the midst thereof an Iland, and thereon hee built a Palace. The Countrey hath store of Rice, Wheat, and Vines, which they plant at the foot of the Mulburie, the same Tree seeming to beare two Fruits. Had they not beene at Contentions amongst themselues, hee could neuer haue conquered so strong a Kingdome. In times past they were all Gentiles; but three hundred yeeres before this, the most of them became Mahumetane.Elephants trunke as a staffe to them. I haue obserued of this yong Elephant now in London, sent out of Spaine to his Mai^stie, that in rising vp when he is laid on the ground, hee raiseth himselfe on his two great teeth This Countrey he left when Summer was past, and returned to Lahor, losing many  Elephants and Horses in the way, both by Famine then oppressing the Countrey, and the difficultie of the Passages; the Elephants sometimes, in the ascent of Hils, helping themselues with their Trunkes, leaning and staying themselues, being burthened, thereon, as on a staffe. The Prince, which is now King, was assaulted by a fierce Lionesse, as he rode on a Female Elephant, which yet hee wounded first with a Dart, then with a Shot, and lastly, smote her with the hand-Gun it selfe; wherewith being ouerthrowne, a Souldier came in and slew her, but with losse of his owne life.
The next yeere, 1598. Echebar went to Agra, chiefe Citie of a Kingdome, which hee had also conquered, a hundred leagues from Lahor towards the South, passing that way to Decan. Hee had eight hundred Elephants, and seuen thousand Camels, to carrie his Tents  and Prouisions: yea, his Secretarie had at the same time seuen hundred Camels, and seuentie Elephants for his owne furniture; and therefore it is lesse maruaile of the Kings. The King conducted in this Expedition aboue a thousand Elephants, instructed to fight, and a hundred thousand Soldiers. Hee passed the Mountaines of Gate, by almost impassable Passages, spending sometimes a whole day, in passing the space of a Musket-shot. One of his Captaines went before with fiftie thousand, who tooke one of the Decans strongest Holds, and made easie way to the Conquest of the rest of Melics Dominions, which hee left in the Gouernment of his sonne. BramporeBrampore. fell into his hands, being destitute of defence. This was Anno 1600. Miram the King thereof had forsaken it, and betaken himselfe  to Syra,Syra an admirable fortresse. a strong Hold both by Nature and Art. It was seated on the top of a Hill, which reacheth fiue leagues, enuironed with a triple Wall, so built, that one might bee defended from the next. Within, was a Well of running Water, and all necessarie Prouisions for threescore thousand persons, for many yeeres. It had three thousand great Peeces of Ordnance. In this Castle (according to the Countrey custome) the next of the Bloud Royall were kept, with their Families; nor might depart, except (the Throne emptie) the next Heire was hence deliuered, much after that which is written of Amara, in the Abassens Countrey, and it seemes borrowed from thence; so many slaues of those parts being here entertained, and some in the highest Employments. At this time, besides King Miram, there were seuen of these Princes. The Gouernour was an Abassine, with  seuen other Vnder-Commanders, all renegado Mahumetanes. The Mogoll layde siege thereto, with almost two hundred thousand men: but more preuailed (as before in Melic^ Countrey) with Bribes and Promises, then Force. Thus inuiting Miram to a Conference, swearing, By the Kings head (accounted an inuiolable Oath, as is that, By their Fathers head) that hee should bee permitted safe returne: Some of his Councellours perswaded him to goe; hee went, with a kinde of Stole on his necke, hanging to his knees, in token of subiection: And comming before the Mogoll, bowed himselfe, but was cast to the ground by some of his Captaines, and forceably detained. The Abassine Gouernour sent his sonne to demand performance of Achebar his promise, who being questioned of his Father the Abassen, and the hopes to obtaine the Castle, freely answered for his Fathers fidelitie,  and that if Miram were not restored, they should not want a Successour; with which libertie he prouoked the Mogol to cause him to be slaine: which his Father hearing, strangled himselfe. And the wals were soone after battered (at least entred, and a breach made through the open gates) by golden shot; none of these seuen for feare of treason, daring to take the Royall Soueraigntie. These with the King, were dispersed into diuers parts of his Kingdome and maintenance allowed them. Thus remained Echebar Lord of these parts, and longed to adde the rest of India, whatsoeuer is betwixt Indus and GangesGoa, Idalcans countrey, Malabar, etc. euen to the Cape Comori, to his Dominion.
He writ a Letter about this time to the Vice-Roy of Goa, beginning thus (I mention it to shew you his Titles which he arrogated) The Great and Mightie Lord of the Law of MAHOMET,  The Renowmed and Great King, Vanquisher of the Kings, his Enemies, Obserued and Honoured of Great Men, Exalted aboue other Kings in ample Honour and Dignitie, The onely
 Man for Gouernment amongst all the Princes of the World, His Ambassage to ARIAS DE SALDAGNA, etc. The ninth day of Frauard (the first moneth of the yeere beginning at the Aequinoctiall Vernall) in the fortie sixe yeere, viz. of His Reigne.
At this time dyed the Gouernour or Vice-Roy of Lahor, which left to the King (who is Heire Generall, and Successour of euery mans wealth) three millions of Gold coyned, besides other Gold, Siluer, Iewels, Horses, Elephants, furniture and goods almost inualuable. This also for a taste of the meanes accrewing to this Kings Treasure. Echebar returning to Agra, gaue libertie to the Iesuites to conuert as many as would to Christianitie.
The King of Candacar or Candahar, not able to defend himselfe against Abduxa King of  theVsbechs neer the Persians. Vsbechs, surrendred himselfe and his Kingdome to Echebar. The particulars of his other Conquests I cannot relate: His last victory I know not whether to impute to his happinesse or not. It was against his Sonne, in which the griefe to haue such an enemy could not but be more then the glory of the exploit. This happened, Anno 1602. Echebar, being forced to giue ouer his Decan Conquest, by his Sonnes vntimely challenge of the Scepter, who weary of his Fathers long life, stiled himselfe King, and his Father the Great King. Armies were gathered on both sides; on both sides were sent Letters and Messengers. The Mother of Echebar, being nintie yeeres old, laboured a peace, but not preuailing, fell sicke, which caused him to returne from this expedition against his Sonne. But her body not able to ouercome the disease, yeelded to death. Her Sonne shaued his head, beard, and eye-browes, and  mourned after the Country fashion in blue, his Nobles doing the like three dayes.Blue, a mourning colour. Her huge Treasure which shee had bequeathed to her children and Nephewes, the King seized on. The Prince was perswaded to come to his Father without an Army, which he did, and after some rebuke, was reconciled, and remained content with the Kingdome of Cambaia or Guzzerat. He seemed much addicted to the Iesuites, and obtained his Fathers Licence for a Temple at Agra, to the building whereof hee gaue a thousand pieces of Gold.
On the twentie seuen of October, Anno 1605. Echebar dyed in the Climactericall yeere (63.) of his age, and fiftie of his reigne. In his sicknesse,Selim poysoned Baiazet. Selim the Prince (whom some suspected of dealing as the Turkish Selim had done with his Father Baiazet) came not into the Presence; and much consultation was amongst the Great ones to conferre the Succession vpon  Cussero his sonne. But the issue was, that vpon his Oath to maintaine the Law of Mahomet, and of full pardon to his Sonne and all his Partakers, hee was brought into his Fathers presence. Echebar was past speech, but made signes that hee should take the Royall Diademe, and gird himselfe with the sword hanging at his beds head. The Prince performed the solemne Iordam, or Rite of Adoration, with the head bowed to the Earth, and, his Father signing with his hand that hee should depart, did so; as did his Father presently after out of the world. His body was carried on the shoulders of his Son and Nephew out of the towre where he lay, the wall being broken (after the fashion) for passage, and a new gate there erected: and being brought into his Garden a league from thence, was interred with small attendance, neither the King, nor his Nobles (except Cossero and a few others) wearing mourning  habite. So little was He in his West, a little before the great Terrour of the East.
Eight dayes after Echebars death, the Prince entred the Palace, and seated himselfe in the Throne, the people crying Pad iausa, or Padasha lamat, GOD saue the King. His first endeauours were to giue contentment to the Mahumetans; causing their Moschees to bee purged, and their Rites to bee established: yea, hee tooke a new Name, NVRDIN MOHAMAD, IAHANVIR, that is, the Splendour of MAHOMETS Law, Subduer of the World. And by this Name IAHANVIR, or (as our Countrey-men,M. Clarke, and M. Withington. lately come from thence, pronounce it) IAHANGERE, hee is vsually called, and not by his ancient Name SELIM.
In Aprill after, his sonne rebelled, and (taking the Title of SVLTAN IA, that is, Sultan  the King) brought into his partie two Great Men, and so went to Lahor, which (not being admitted entrance) hee besieged eight dayes; or (as others say) presented himselfe with his Forces (about twelue thousand) before it, without any great hostilitie offered him. His Father in person pursued him, which being rumor'd, so dismayed the sonne that he fled, hauing euen then put some of the Kings men to rout. For by a notable stratageme hee lost the day, the aduerse Generall sending many with flying tales into the Princes Armie, buzzing the neerenesse and Greatnesse of the Kings power, and seconding the same (like GIDEONS Policie) with multitude of Trumpets and Drummes, scarred them, and notwithstanding the Princes gaine-saying, hee was by his owne almost compelled to flight. Hee tooke his way towards Cabul, and being to passe a Riuer, the Captaine of the place  caused all Boats to be taken away, and commanded the rowers, that if the Prince came, they should fasten the Boat (as by mischance) on a Shelfe or Iland of sand in the middle of the Riuer, which being done, they should seeme to call for helpe, and so giue notice.

This was done, and the Gouernour came, and after due reuerence (promising all fidelitie and securitie, wherein hee was vnfaithfully faithfull) brought Him into the Castle, and sent the King word thereof, who sent presently and brought Him in fetters, together with his company. The King bitterly checked him, committed him to prison. Some adde, that hee sealed vp his eyes: Others say, that his eyes were put out. But their eyes were not put in (onely cares put on) that say so; for hee hath lately beene freed, and hath the vse also of his eyes, as I haue beene tolde from the eyes of diuers. His two great Captaines had a strange punishment, the one sowed vp close in an Oxe-skinne, the other in an Asse-skinne, both new flayed, that drying they might withall straightly pinch in their Prisoners in a close and narrow Little-ease. The next day they were carried through the Citie on Asses, their  faces to the taile-wards, the one conspicuous with his Oxe-hornes, the other with his Asses-eares: The shame and ignominy so pierced one of them, that hee fell downe dead; his head was cut off, and the pieces of his dismembred bodie were set vp in diuers places. The other by way of fauour, was permitted to haue water powred on his hide, which brought a worse euill, by the heate of so neere a Sunne, causing a filthy stinke, and multiplication of Vermine, till at last his pardon was procured. Two hundreth of the Princes Souldiers were set on both sides the way, as hee should passe to be executed. He caused his second Sonne to be proclaimed Prince, as his Father had before transferred the Title from him to This his Son.
There was a famous Prophet of the Ethnikes, named Goru, esteemed there of his Sectaries as the Romish Pope is of the Popish Romanists: with him, as a man famous for Sanctimony  did the Prince consult, who in adulation adorned his head with a Diadem, which in an Ethnike to a Mahumetan was strange: but hee coloured it with the Gentilisme of the Princes Mother. Vpon this Goru was committed, but vpon promise by an Ethnike of 100000. pieces of Gold to bee payd to the King, hee was pardoned. Hee that vndertooke this, hoped on the Kings pardon, or that Goru would procure this summe, which failing, hee seized, on all hee had, not sparing his wife and children: adding tortures also to extort money from him, and taking away his meate, thinking him rather a miser then a begger. Thus in varietie of misery the flattering Prophet lost his life: and his Suretie also thinking to escape by flight, was taken and slaine, his goods all confiscate.
This King at first made great shew of zeale to Mahomet, which since is cooled, and his  Religion seemes to bee the same with Echebars. Contrary to the Mahumetan practice, hee delighteth much in Images, as of CHRIST, the Virgin, and other Saints, with which his chambers and publike roomes are stored: and to all his Letters and Charters, besides the Kings Seale, addes the Images of CHRIST, and the Holy Virgin, engrauen in a paire of tongs (as it were) of Emeralds, with which hee seales his Letters on both sides the pendent waxe.They say hee presented the King with the worth of 25000 crownes, one iewell being worth 20000. The last newes that wee haue from the Iesuites (of whom wee haue borrowed almost all the former Relations) is of Captaine Hawkins comming to the Court, and kind entertainment of the King, who made him (say they) a Gentleman of foure hundred Horse, and assigned him thirtie thousand Rupies stipend: adding other reports of his pride, obstinate heresie, and supplantation by the Portugals; with other things of Him, and those  of the Ascension were wracked, partly true, partly false. I haue thought good to set before you in the next seruice, some of Captaine Hawkins obseruations whiles hee staied there, and after of other our Countrey-men, which now haue a settled trade in these vast Dominions. Obserue by the way that the Iesuites to the last, doe accuse Captaine Hawkins of his obdurate heresie, contrarie to the calumnies of some that say hee became deuoutly Popish at their perswasion.


@. III.  The Relations of Captaine HAWKINS, Embassador there.
MAster William HawkinsHis booke or large iournall, written by himselfe, was communicated to me, by the right worshipfull Sir Tho. Smith. being Captaine in the Ship called the Hector, after a long and tedious voyage (from March 1607. to the foure and twentieth of August 1608.) arriued at Surat, subiect to the Mogor or Mogol (so he calleth him) and after much kindnesse offered, and indignities suffered, by reason and treason of the Portugals (who had by bribes and slanders wrought the Vice-Roy or Deputie, called Mocreb Chan against him) passed thence to Agra, to the Court, as Embassadour, with a Letter from the King of England. Peniero a Iesuite, before in this Booke mentioned (obserue the Conuersions and conuersations of that Societie in those parts) like a wothy Factor for his  Nation,Emmanuel Pinnerus. had proferred to Mocreb-Chan fortie thousand Rials of Eight, to send them to Daman, that so hee might become their prisoner, and the English negotiation might bee
 hindered: and now, when the name of an Embassadour had protected him from such courses, plotted with him to ouerthrow his iourney, both by detraction of necessarie forces to assist him in a way so full of Out-lawes and Rebels, and suborning his Trudge-man and Coach-man, to poyson or murder him by the way; which was not farre from effecting. The Portugals had also dealt with the Lord of Cruly, to bee readie with two hundred Horsemen to assault him in the way: so that hee was forced to hire a strong conuoy for the securitie of his person. Being come to Agra, hee was brought with great State to the King, who kindly entertained him, and sware by God, and by his Fathers soule, to performe the Kings Maiesties request, in the Letter contained, notwithstanding the deprauation thereof by the  Iesuite, to whom the King had giuen it to reade. He promised also to allow him three thousand and two hundred pound a yeere, or foure hundred Horse (for so they reckon all their fees, much like the Turkish Timariots) and caused him to take a wife of the Countrey, the daughter of an Armenian Christian, called Mubarikesha, sometimes a Commander in the warres of Ekbar Padasha,Padasha is a Persian word, and signifieth King. Father to this present Mogor, or Mogol, whose name is Selim. This King is so fickle and inconstant, that what hee had solemnly promised for an English Factory, was by the Portugals meanes reuersed, and againe promised, and againe suspended, and a third time both graunted and disanulled: so that the second of Nouember, 1611. Captaine Hawkins departed from Agra, and the last of December came to Cambaya, where hee heard of English shipping, in which hee passed first to the Red Sea, after to Sumatra and  Bantam,Dec. 21. 1612. and dyed on the Irish shoare in his returne homewards. Whiles he kept at Agra, his liuing assigned him by the King was much impaired by the Officers, who appointed to him such places where Out-lawes and Rebels liued, so that hee neuer receiued aboue three hundred pound. His attendance whiles hee was in fauour, was honourable and neere the King; so that the Mahumetans enuying a Christian such dignitie, became his priuie enemies, and assistants to the Portugals: which was increased by a Present the King sent him publikely, being a wilde Boare, killed in his hunting-Progresse, and by him and his eaten. The insolencies of the Guzarates, if they may bee suffered, and as much basenesse of their deiected cowardly courages, being kept in awe (which is also the disposition of all the Indian Ethnikes, both white and blacke) the Portugals pride and treachery: the fittest places  for our Indian traffique, whether wee follow the colours of Mars or Mercury: and other his diligent obseruations I omit. But so I cannot, the rarities of the Mogols Court, customes, puissances, wealth, and gouernment (notwithstanding our former Discourse) hauing met with so rare a guide. For the greatnesse of his State; hee reporteth that his Empire is diuided intoO^hers say, that his proper title is King of Delly: all Indostan is his patrimony and his countrey diuided by three famous high wayes, Porrab, Pach^n, Dekan. W. Clarke. fiue great Kingdomes, the first named Pengab, the chiefe Citie whereof is Lahor: the second, Bengala, and Sonargham the mother Citie: the third, Malua, the chiefe Seat Vagain: the fourth Deckan, in which Bramport is principall: and so is Amadauer in the fifth Kingdome, which is Cambaya. Hee hath sixe principall Castles for the keeping of his treasure, at Agra (which is in the heart of all his Kingdomes) Guallier, Neruir, Ratamboore, Hassier, Boughtaz. There are three Arch-Rebels, which with his forces hee cannot call in,  AmberAllahoban. Chapu in Deckan; in Guzerat, the sonne of Muzafer, sometime their King, called Bahador; and Raga Rahana in Malua. Hee hath fiue sonnes, Sultan Cussero, Sultan Peruis, Sultan Chorem, Sultan Sharier, Sultan Bath; two young daughters, and three hundred wiues, of which foure are principall. None hath the title of Sultan, but his sonnes. Mirza is also ascribed to his brother and children; Chan, as a Duke. Their degrees and titles are according to their proportion of Horses allowed them: foure are of the fame of twelue thousand, the King, his mother, eldestSultan Peruis. sonne, and one of the blood Royall, called Cham Azam. Of the fame of nine thousand Horse are three; these are as Dukes; Marquesses of fiue thousand, of which are eighteene; Earles of three thousand; Vicounts (so may wee paralell them with our titles of honour) two thousand; Barons of one thousand Horse: Knights, foure hundred;  others fewer, to twentie: all which are called Mansibdars, men of liuing or Lordship, of which are three thousand. Of Haddies, which receiue monethly pay, from sixe Horse to one, areM. Clarke (whi^h diuers yeeres serued the Mogol in his warres, and was one of these Haddies) saith 30000. fiue thousand. Officers of Court and Campe, sixe and thirtie thousand, as Gunners, Porters, Water-men, Cookes, Gardiners, keepers of Horses, Elephants, etc. whose wages are payed them monethly, from ten to three Rupias. A Rupia is two shillingsOthers say, 2. s. 6. d. others 2. s. 3. d. of our coyne. His Captaines or Mansibdars are to maintaine vpon their allowance, and haue in readinesse at a seuen nights warning, three hundred thousand Horse.
The Kings reuenue of his Crown-land, is fiftie Crou of Rupias: euery Crou is one hundred Leckes, and euery Lecke a hundred thousand Rupias: all which in our money is fiftie millions of pounds: a summe incredible, and exceeding that which is said of150. millions of crownes. China. His daily  expences are fiftie thousand Rupias, for his owne person, as apparell, victuals, and other houshold expences, with the feeding of sundry sorts of beasts, and of some few Elephants: his expences on his women by the day amount to thirtie thousand Rupias.

In his Treasurie ofM. Withington (which liued a Factor diuers yeeres in the Countrey) receiued of the Iesuites, which reside there, this same story of the Mogols treasures. Agra are in Gold, of Seraffins Ecberi (which are ten Rupias a piece) threescore Leckes. Of another sort, which are one thousand Rupias, each twentie thousand pieces: and ten thousand of another sort, halfe the value. Of Toles (euery Tole is a Rupia of Siluer, and ten of those Toles is the value of one of Gold) thirtie thousand. Of another sort of ten Toles, fiue and twentie thousand. Of another sort of fiue Toles, fiftie thousand.
In Siluer, of Rupias Ecberi thirteene Crou. Of a kinde of coyne worth a hundred Toles a piece, fiftie thousand. Of another halfe as much, one Lecke. Of thirtie Toles a piece, fortie thousand pieces. Of twentie Toles a piece, thirtie thousand pieces. Of ten Toles a piece, twentie thousand pieces. Of fiue Toles a piece, fiue and twentie thousand. Of Sauoys (each of which is a Tole and a quarter) two Leckes. Of Iagaries (whereof fiue make sixe  Toles) one Lecke.
In Iewels of Diamants one Batman and a halfe: a Batman is fiue and fiftie pound weight English: these are rough, and of all sorts and sizes, but none lesse then two Carrets and an halfe. Of Ballase Rubies, two thousand. Of Pearles, twelue Batmans. Of Rubies of all sorts, two Batmans. Of Emeralds of all sorts, fiue Batmans. Of Eshime, which stone comes from Cataya, one Batman. Of stones of Emen, a kinde of red stone, fiue thousand. Of all other sorts, as Corall, Topazes, etc. the number is innumerable.
Of Iewels wrought in Gold, two thousand and two hundred Swords, the Hilts and Scabberds set with rich stones: two thousand Ponyards. Of Saddle Drums of Gold, set with stones, vsed in Hawking fiue hundred. Of rich brooches for their heads, in which their feathers  are set, two thousand. Of Saddles of Gold and Siluer, set with stones, one thousand. Of Tuikes, fiue and twentie. This is a great Launce couered with gold, and the fluke set with stones: and are carried when the King goeth to warres in stead of colours. Of Kitta-soles of State to shadow him, twentie. None else in his Empire may haue any of any sort carried for his shadow. Of Chaires of State, fiue, and of other sorts which are of siluer and gold, one hundred. Of rich glasses, two hundred. Of Vases for Wine set with Iewels, one hundred. Of drinking Cups, fiue hundred, of which are fiftie very rich, as of one stone, etc. Of Chaines of Pearle, and other Chaines, of Rings with Iewels, etc. are infinite, which the Keeper onely knowes. Of all sorts of Plate wrought, as Dishes, Cups, Basons, etc. Two thousand Batmans. Of gold wrought, a thousand Batmans.  
Of Beasts: twelue thousand Horses: as many Elephants, fiue thousand with teeth, the rest female and young. Camels, twentie thousand: of Oxen for seruice, ten thousand. Of Moyles, a thousand. Of Deere for game, three thousand. Ounces for game, foure hundred. Hunting-Dogs, foure hundred. Lyons tame, an hundred. Buffles, fiue hundred. Hawkes, foure thousand. Pigeons for sport, ten thousand. Singing-Birds, foure thousand. Hee hath also Armour to arme fiue and twentie thousand men at an houres warning.
All this concerning his Treasure, expences, and monethly pay, is in his Court or Castle of Agra: and euery one of the Castles, aboue named, hath a seuerall treasure: and so hath Lahor also, which was not mentioned. And if any censure this Story for want of truth, and Mee for want of iudgement, in relating such fulnesse so fully: for it, I must leaue it to the Authors  credit; for my selfe, I was induced by the raritie of the subiect (not easie in this distance to be knowne, nor by Trauellers, except such as this Author, whose Embassage, and exceeding grace with the King, for the greatest part of his residence, might further his Intelligence herein) besides the rarenesse of the Copie, whereof I know but one, and that written by himselfe. Time may make fur^her triall. Nor may any measure those parts of the Indies for wealth in these kindes, with our Eur^paean, or any other: and that which so many Kings and States had in many ages stored together, by the euent of warre became Ecbars, the father of this Selim: of which you haue heard of the incredible wealth of the King of CambaiaSee Chap. 7. alone. Besides, if you obserue his customes, it makes it so much neerer credite. For when any Noble-man dies, all deuolueth to him: and well is it with the wife and children,  if he bestoweth the Land, and what he pleaseth, on them, and the fathers Title on the eldest sonne. One dyed in my time (saith our Author) named Raga Gaginat, on whose goods the King seized, which besides Iewels and other treasure, amounted to threescore Maunes in gold, euery Maune is fiue and fiftie pound weight. None likewise may come before the King with any Petition emptie-handed: and on certaine Festiuall dayes they bring him rich Presents, as before is said. India, besides Mines, must needes be rich in money, for all Nations bring it, and carrie commodities for it: so that once in twentie yeeres it commeth to the King. All Lands in his Monarchy are his, giuen and taken at his pleasure. Escheats are many by reason of his seueritie. And of those lands which hee giueth in Fee, the third part still remaines to the King; and of the Crowne Lands two thirds, the rest to the Occupiers. For Presents and Mortuaries, wee haue before giuen diuers instances. And  my iealousie hath made mee verie inquisitiue of such as haue liued there in the Ministerie,
 Factorie, Souldiorie, all which affirme that Captaine Hawkins hath written with the least.
Of all sorts of his wealth (except Coyne) is brought daily a certaine quantitie before him, for which purpose his Beasts, and all things of value, are diuided into three hundred and threescore parts: so that the same things come but once in the yeere to his view. Hee hath three hundred Elephants royall for himselfe to ride on, which are brought with pompe, richly couered; twentie or thirtie men going before with Streamers, his female with her yongling or yonglings following, besides foure or fiue other yong ones attending as Pages. These are dispersed amongst the great ones to ouer-see them, the King allowing them for it,  but scarcely sufficient, and they dare not make shew of them in euill plight. One of them eats ten Ropias euery day in Butter, Graine, Sugar, Sugar-canes, etc. they are very tame. I saw one take vp the Kings owne son by his appointment, being a child of seuen yeeres. There are thought to be in this Empire fortie thousand Elephants,M. Clarke saith 50000. of his, and his Nobles; of which, twentie thousand are trained for warre.
When the King rides in progresse, his Tents are in compasse about as large as London, two hundred thousand people vsually following his Campe. This King is esteemed the greatest Emperour in the East. Hee hath many Dromedaries, whose swiftnesse auailed his Father much in his sudden Expedition of warre. Those valiant Captaines which Ecbar had, Selim hath by tyranny much diminished. Fiue times a weeke hee commands his Elephants to fight  before him, which often in their comming in, or going out, kill many: and if any be but wounded, and might escape, yet hee commands him to bee cast into the Riuer, saying, Hee will curse him as long as he liues, and therefore best to dispatch him: Hee delights to see men executed, and torne with Elephants. Of these tyrannies he reckons many particulars which he saw: and some for no fault, but for his lust set to fight with the Lyon, and one valiant man to buffet with a very fierce Lyon, without any weapon offensiue or defensiue. If any of his subiects haue any precious stone of value, and make not him the offer of it, it is death to him: hee must haue the refusall of all, and yet giues not the worth by a third part. That Iewell hee weareth this day, is not worne againe till that day twelue-month: all his Iewels being proportioned to such a course. All his seueritie and tyranny cannot cleere (perhaps  this causeth them) his Countrey of Out-lawes. There is one betweene Agra and Amadauar, which commands as much Land as a good Kingdome; he is strong, twentie thousand Horse, and fiftie thousand Foot, and keepes on the Mountaines. Men can scarcely trauell for Out-lawes. The often shifting of men from their lands, makes them exact more cruelly in the time they hold them, grinding the face of their poore Tenants in ruefull manner. If they continue but sixe yeeres, they raise a great state; sometimes they hold not halfe a yeere: If any be employed in warres or businesses in another place, he must forgoe his land here, and be assigned it there. The Kings allowance otherwise is exceeding, as for euery Horse twentie Ropias a moneth for the warres, and for so many more which hee hath of Fame, hee is allowed two Ropias a moneth for the maintenance of his Table.
 Concerning the Kings Religion and behauiour, it is thus.Selims Religion and Customes. In the morning about breake of day, hee is at his Beades, his face to the Westwards, in a priuate faire roome, vpon a faire Iet-stone, hauing onely a Persian Lambe-skinne vnder him. Hee hath eight Chaines of Beades, euery of which containeth foure hundred: they are of Pearle, Diamants, Rubies, Emeralds, Lignum aloes, Eshen and Corall. At the vpper end of this Iet-stone, are placed the Images of Christ and our Lady, grauen in stone. Hee turneth ouer his Beades, and saith so many words, to wit, three thousand and two hundred, and then presenteth himselfe to the people to receiue their Salames or good morrow, for which purpose multitudes resort thither euery morning. This done, hee sleepeth two houres more, then dineth and passeth his time with his women: at noone, he sheweth himselfe again to the people,  sitting till three or foure a clocke to view his pastimes, by Men and Beasts, euery day sundry kindes. At three all the Nobles in Agra, whom sicknesse detaineth not, resort to the Court: and the King comes forth in open audience, sitting in his Seat-Royall, euery man standing in his degree before him; the chiefe within a Red raile (which was allowed to our Author, hauing but fiue before him) the rest without. This Red raile is three steps higher then the place where the rest stand. Men are placed by Officers: there are others to keepe men in order. In the middest, right before the King, standeth an Officer, with his master Hang-man, accompanied with fortie others of the same profession, with hatches on their shoulders, and others with whips. Here the King heareth causes some houresThe Kings of India sit daily in Iustice themselues, and on the Tuesdayes do^ execution. euery day: and then departs to his house of prayer; which ended, foure or fiue sorts of well dressed  meates are brought him, whereof hee eateth what hee likes, to stay his stomacke, drinking once of his strong drinke. After this he comes forth into a priuate roome, where none may come, but such as himselfe nominates. Two yeeres together our Author was one of the Attendants.
 In this place he drinkes other fiue cups, which is the portion that the Physicians allow him, after which he eateth Opium, and then layes him downe to sleep, euery man departing home. When he hath slept two houres, they awake him, and bring his supper to him, thrusting it in his mouth, not being able to feed himselfe. This is about one of the clocke at night; and so hee sleepeth the rest of the night. In this cup-space he doth many idle things: but nothing without writing, be he drunken or sober. For he hath writers by course, which write all, not omitting his going to the stoole, or how ought he lieth with his women, and with whom: to the end, that when he dieth, those writings may be brought forth, and thence what is thought fit may be inserted in their Chronicles.
When any poore men come to demaund Iustice of the King, they goe to a certaine rope  fastened to two pillars, neere where the King sits: this rope is full of Bels, plated with gold, and with shaking the rope, the King hearing the sound, sends to know the cause, and doth Iustice accordingly.
While our Author was with him, hee made his brothers children Christians, not for zeale (as the Iesuites thought) but in policie (to disappoint a Prophecie of certaine learned Gentiles, which fore-told their succession in the Kingdome) to make them odious to the Moores. God take the wise in his craftinesse, and conuert this peruerse policie to their true Conuersion.
One of his sonnes, Sultan Sharier, of seuen yeeres, could not by diuers cruelties purposely inflicted on him by his father, be forced to cry, pretending his Nurses instructions to  the contrary.
Hee keepes many FeastsFeasts. in the yeere, but some principall: one called Nourous, or New-yeeres day. Then hath he a rich Tent pitched, curiously and costly wrought, two acres of ground in compasse, so richly spread with silke and gold Carpets, and preciously hanged, as is more admirable then credible. There are roomes also for his Queenes to see vnseene, round about, so that in all it may bee fiue acres. Euery Noble-man makes his roome, each striuing to excell other in cost. The King will come, to which of them he effects, and is sumptuously feasted and presented: But because hee will not receiue any thing as a Present, he allowes as much as the Treasurer values it, which is halfe the worth: Thus all prouide and present. At this Feast commonly euery mans state is augmented: it beginneth at the beginning  of the Moone in March. Some foure months after is the Feast of his Birth-day, which euery one striueth to honor with his richest Apparel and Iewels: after many Palace-pastimes, hee goeth with the greatest pompe to his Mothers, to whom euery Noble-man presents a Iewell. After banket ended, hee weigheth in a ballance of gold against himselfe in one scale, other things of diuers sorts to the worth of ten thousand pound, which is giuen to the poore:Mogols Sepulcher. Couert saith, the matter is fine Marble, the forme nine square, the compasse two English miles about, and nine stories high, and that the King protested he would bestow thereon one hundred millions. but his richer Subiects present him that day tenne times as much. On his Fathers Funerall-day is solemnized a Feast at his Sepulchre, where himselfe meaneth to bee buried with all his posteritie: at which time much meate and money is giuen to the poore. It hath beene fourteene yeeres in building, and is thought will not bee finished in seuen yeeres more; notwithstanding three thousand at least be daily at worke thereon. But one of our  workemen will dispatch more then three of them. It is by his description three quarters of a mile about, made square, hath seuen heights each narrower then other, till the top, where his Hearse is. At the vtmost gate before you come to the Sepulchre is a stately Palace in building; the compasse of the wals ioyning to the gate, etc. may be at least three miles: it is foure miles from Agra.
The Kings custome is euery yeere to make a hunting progresse of two moneths: but when hee comes forth of his Palace, if he mounts on a horse, it is a signe of his going to the war: if on an Elephant or Palamkin, it is but a hunting iourney.


@. IIII.  Of the setling of the English Trade in these parts, and of the two Sea-fights betwixt ours, and the Portugals.
Iarric. Thes. rer. Indic. l. 5. c. 23.WE haue heard how by the Portugals working the English trade was disanulled in the Mogols Dominion, Captaine Hawkins despairing of any good that way, and leauing the Countrey. The Iesuites had closely wrought Mocrab Chan against him, with other great men; and one of them (Pinnerus) was employed in publike Embassage betwixt the Vice-Roy of Goa and the Mogoll, to the same effect: The Portugals  alledged the league was broken, because the English were entertained; Neither could the Mogol easily lose their friendship, because they were then Masters at Sea: and
 could haue hindered him and his from all Marine trades. Andreas Hurtadus de Mendosa, the Vice-Roy had forbidden the Merchants their Cambayan trade, and alreadie hostilitie had begun on both sides: both ceasing with the departure of the English. Sir Henry Middleton came to Surrat, after his Red-Sea-disasters in expectation of trade, but found nothing but dissembling, so that after much losse of time, he was driuen with his Ships to seeke new aduentures, to repaire the losses which by Turkish treachery, and the Mogols inconstancie and falsehood he had sustained. Hereupon he returned to the Strait of Aden,An. 1612. and intercepted the Ships that came from the Mogols Country to this Turkish Trade, easily stopping the mouth of the Turke, and cutting off the Mogols Nautike hands in hindring the mutuall Traffike of  their Subiects: so weake in those Seas are these Two, iustly called GREAT, the Greatest indeed, and most puissant Princes (all things considered) in the Vniuerse. Yet did not the English make prize of them, only they set prices to them of their English commodities, and exchanging them at their prices for such Indian goods as they had brought thither (both estimated as they were worth in India)Nic Bangam. They had money of these Ship^, some 32000. rials of eight, wherof the Rehemee payd 15000. M. Downton saith, They had goods for goods to a halfe-penny. Nic. Withington. making them further allowance of two in the hundreth. One Ship of this company, called the Rehemee, had one thousand fiue hundred persons in her. Many haue cauilled this forced trade, not considering that they had first found both fraude and force at the Turkes handes, and at the Mogols much expence and losse of time and goods contrary to Couenant, which I see not how the Law of Nature and Nations might not warrant them to make good; the King himselfe being wronged, and they armed  with the Kings Commission, and their owne power. And perhaps others would haue taken all without any goods giuen in exchange. Certaine it is, that the euent (which those Mahumetans make the rule of equitie) was good, the Cambayan Merchants so terrified, that when Gen. Best (ignorant of these passages) not long after came to Surrat with the Dragon, he was promised good dealing; Mill Ieffee, one of the chiefe Merchants of Surrat affirming, that they must else burne all their ships, and giue ouer their trade by Sea. So true was that obseruation of Captaine Hawkins (an Actor, perhaps Author, in this businesse) of these people, insolent, if suffered, and base, if curbed.
On the third of October, 1612. Sheke Suffe, Gouernour of Amadauaz,M T. Best. M. Patrick Copland. M. Nathaniel Salmon. M. Withington. chiefe Citie of the Guzzurats came to Surrat, and thence to Swally, and on the one and twentieth, concluded  vpon certaine Articles, with the English Generall, which I haue read in his owne Relations, too tedious to bee here inserted. Not so the famous fights betwixt him and the Portugals, who had alreadie in their insulting insolent hopes swallowed the English, but Dragons are harsh morsels, and of ill digestion. Master Canning, an English Merchant had beene prisoner with the Portugals, but in a confident brauery, the Vice-Roy commanded to set him on shoare at Surrat, that hee might goe helpe his Countrey-men fight, and then wee will take their ship, and the rest of them altogether. But not altogether, nay, not at all, could hee performe this, with all his great Fleet of foure huge Gallions, with fiue or sixe and twentie Frigates: the Dragon being assisted onely with the Osiander a little Ship (scarcely a Ship, I had almost called her a little Pinnasse) but of great performance in this Fight. Nunno d' AncunaNunno d' Ancuna. was Admirall  of the Portugals, who by the Sabandore or Treasurer vnder the Mogoll in those parts, an experienced Man, who had a little before come aboord the English to spie out their strength, was counselled not to aduenture present fight, with such present courages, but to keepe betwixt them and the shoare, to hinder them from watering, and so (like another Cunctator) to weary the English, and force them from thence. But Ancunas high pride disdained stratagems, and scorned (forsooth) to spend a weekes prouision on his Men in hindring Ours, whom hee could force in an houre. Thus, on the nine and twentieth of Nouember, came hee in sight with his Fleet, with Red colours displayed, where he receiued an vnwelcome welcomming by the Dragon, which after the Generals encouraging speech, went to meet them, and  when he came betweene the Admirall and Vice-Admirall, opened his fierie mouths, and in a thundering Dialect gaue them the first salutation. The other two were not yet come vp, nor could the Osiander get cleere of her Anchor. But the next morning the fight was renewed, and three of the Gallions driuen on ground, not a man of them daring to looke aboue Hatches, and had beene their left but for the Frigates;M. Withington the Osiander danced the Hay (saith one) about them, or played like a Salmon (my friend Mr. Nathaniel Salmon, was Master and Commander in her) swimming, frisking lightly (but not with light effect) leaping about these huge Whale carkasses, which in the afternoone got a-flote, and continued the fight till night. In the night theyM. Copland. manned a Frigate, with sixe or seuen-score of their best men, thinking to haue fired the English, but found both Fire and Water conspire against themselues to their destruction: the Osiander keeping diligent watch, and with a shot sinking  them, there were eightie foure of them taken vp drowned. The shallownesse of the Bay gaue occasion to the Dragon, which drew much water, to remoue to the other side, neere vnto Mendofrobag, or Medhafrabadh, sometime a faire Citie, and walled, ruined by the Mogols
 warres. Here was a Castle of the Razbooches (some call them Reisbuti) which haue beene the Natiue Lords of that Countrey, now as it were out-lawes, spoyling and robbing, besieged by Sarder Chan, a Great Man of the Mogols, who had many thousands in his Campe, which all became witnesses of the English valour, Spectators of the Portugals confusion. Sarder Chans Tent was stately and spacious, couered aboue with Cloth of Gold, on the floore with Turkie Carpets. Hee sent a Horse, and two Vests wrought with Silke and Gold to the Generall, and foure Vests for foure other of his company. Himselfe would not stirre out of his Tent, till he had taken the Castle, but gaue Them licence to take view thereof. But the Portugals approaching with their force, the Mogols by many Arguments dehorted the English from the fight, which yet they presently made good before many thousand  gazing, admiring, astonished Eyes, the Portugals being forced to cut their Cables, and to escape by flight, being swifter of sayle then the English. Thus the Portugals wanted a Hercules for this Dragon (more watchfull then the Hesperidan, more terrible then the Lernaean) or, a Medaea to Charme this, as sometimes the Colchian (these three Dragons the Poets faine Monsters, begotten of Typhon, and Echidna, but none of them breathing Fire, nor roaring Thunders, like this fell Indian Dragon here spoken of.)
In these fights, after Master Salmons reckoning, the Dragon spent sixe hundred thirtie nine, and the Osiander three hundred eightie seuen great shot, besides three thousand small. The Great Mogoll, which before thought none comparable to the Portugall at Sea, much wondred at the English resolution, related to him by Sardar Cham. The Portugals lost by  their owne Confession, one hundred and sixtie, by others report, fiue hundred men (the Sabandar reckoned three hundred and fiftie) in these fights: the English three men, and the arme of another shot off. The Articles agreed on before by the Gouernour, were confirmed by the Kings Firma, which they receiued Ianuary the eleuenth, Captaine Best, returned to Swally, December one and twentieth, and sent Letters of this successe for England by land, but the MessengerAnt. Starky. with his Indian, were both poysoned by two Friers in the way homewards: another Letter sent by a Mariner, came to the Companies hands in very good season: and they sent forth foure ships hither, besides three to other places, vnder the Command of Generall Downton, viz. The New yeeres Gift, the Hector, the Merchants Hope, and the Salomon.  
Ex Relat. M.S. Gen. Nic. Downton. Martin Pring. Beniamin Day. Iohn Leman. William Masham, etc. Master Downton, both buried his sonne, and died himselfe in this Voyage, which since we haue published with other our Pilgrims, continued by M. Elkington, and M. Dodsworth, his successiue successour.These leauing England in March, on October the fifteenth following, 1614. anchored at South Swally, not farre from Surrat: where they found the Countrey in Armes against the Portugals, which had a little before taken a Ship of the Mogols, in which was said to bee three millions of Treasure, and two women bought for the Great Mogol. They also tooke aN. Withington. Guzzarate Ship worth one hundred thousand pounds, with seuen hundred persons therin, at the barre of Surat (notwithstanding their owne Passe granted them) and sent them to Goa. The Decanims laid siege to Chaul, and Mocrob Chan was to doe his vtmost for his Master the Mogol. The Moores on all hands, sought their Destruction; and they were driuen to send away many hundreths of the Banyans out of their Townes, to free themselues of vnprofitable Mouths; three Barkes of which came to Surat, others to Cambaya. Mocrob  Chan laboured very earnestly with the Generall, to ingage himselfe in that warre against the Portugall, which because he could not doe (except in a defensiue quarrell) by his Commission, the Nabab (so they call this Mocrob Chan, then Vice-Roy or Gouernour of the Countrey about Surat: the Iesuites interprete Nabab, supreame Iudge) was strange to the English, and offered the Merchants some hard measure; yea, the Iesuites which, were with Mocrob Chan, tooke occasion from this refusall to counterfeit a Letter from the Vice-Roy, threatning that except they yeelded to peace, He and his friends the English would ioyne against Surat: which suspition Master Aldworth, one of our Merchants, furthered, ignorant of the former; but threatning that their abuses would cause the English to ioyne with the Portugall. Thus ticklish were the termes on which they stood December the sixteenth, the Generall  receiued a Letter, that the Portugals had burntGoga is a rich towne, on the other side of the Bay. Some say that there was not so much harme done. Goga, with many Villages thereabouts, and ten great Ships, one of which was the Rehemee, with one hundred and twentie small vessels: hee read the Letter of a Iesuite, in which the King of Spaine commaunded the Vice-Roy to burne Surat, if they receiued the English. On December the seuen and twentieth, two and twentie Portugall Frigates sought to lay the Hope aboord, but by force of shot were put off. The Vice-Roy sent offer of Friendship to Mocrob Chan, on condition that hee would turne the English out of Surat, and suffer him to build a Fort at Swally, otherwise threatning bloudie warres. And so on Ianuary the fourteenth, came two Fleets of Frigates, and on the eighteenth, sixe great Gallions, with three lesser Ships. Two Gallies were yet behinde. The Frigates were threescore, some adde fifteene more. This great force made  Mocrob Chan to feare, whereupon hee sent a Present to the Vice-Roy, with some Treatie of peace, whereof the Vice-roy made light account, thinking first to ouercome vs (a thing
 not hard in his conceit) and then to treate of peace on his owne termes. Much policie was vsed on both parts, the Nabab complementing and sending Ptesents to the Vice-Roy, and out Generall also; the Vice-Roy promising much to himselfe, but reckoning without his host: and therefore when after the fight hee would haue concluded vpon the conditions that Mocrob had offered, hee was then refused with a scoffe, that hee would not make peace with so weake an enemy, that could not preuaile against foure Merchants Ships.
On the twentieth of Ianuary, their three smaller Ships had thought to haue Stemmed the Hope, then riding at an Anchor, neere the Barre of Swally, some distance from the  rest: these laid her aboord on the Star-boord side; and one Gally, and fiue and fortie sayle of Frigates on their Lar-boord:Masham. the Gallions followed as farre as the Sands would permit. The Admirall made to their helpe, and for the better speed cut their Cable; but the Enemies had alreadie entered (with great shew of resolution) without feare or wit (saith one of the Hopes men) thirtie or fortie were entered on the Fore-castle. But the Gift in this fatall Moneth answered her Name, and gaue them for a New-yeeres-Gift, such Orations (roarations yee may call them) that they were easily perswaded to leaue the Hope, and all hopelesse to coole their hote blouds with leaping into the Seas cold waters, where many for want of a Boat, made vse of Charons: those that were of most hope and courage, held still their possession of the entered Hope, but with enterred hopes, and dispossession  of their liues.
I know not what Salmoneus,
Dum flammas Iouis and sonitus imitatur Olympi,Aere imitans nimbos, and non imitabile fulmen; or what Prometheus hath taught these later Ages to steale Iupiters Fires,Inuention of Ordnance first vsed by the Venetians against the Genuous An. Dom. 1378. who besieged Fossa-Clodia, a town of theirs: inuented by a German Alchymist a Monke called Bertholdus Swartus: Others say Constantinus Anklitzen. Printing was also first inuented by a German: the first Printed booke being Tullies Offices, at Mentz, by one Iohn Fust, which some thinke to be the same with Gutemberg, who had made triall of this Art before, without any perfection. This Booke is still at Augsburg. printed. 1466. Ram. P. Verg. Pancirol. Salmuth, etc. and instructed so many Cyclopean Artificers to imitate those heauenly, in hellish Thunders, and sulphurous lightnings; these Mettall-Deuils, as Angels of Death, with Brazen sides, and Iron Mouths, proclaiming Destruction and Desolation to the World. These Bullets are the true fire-breathing Buls (such the Poets fained at Colchos) and this Ordnance the fire-foaming horses of Diomedes feeding on the flesh of men: which yet I know not whether very crueltie haue made sparing, whiles the Terror hath made men sparing in the vse of it; this Age for  this cause yeelding fewer pitched battels, and in them fewer slaine numbers, then the former, which neuer heard of this cruell-mercifull Engine.
But let vs leaue this Parenthesis. The Portugals, whether themselues by casualtie or industry, set fire on their ships, or that the fire which Master Mullineux, the Master of the Hope cast into one of them, after that by helpe of Fresh-men sent in the Pinace, they were got cleere of them; certaine it is, that all three driuing away vpon the ebbe (the English had entered before and killed all they found) fell on fire, and running on the Sands, there offered vp themselues at once to all the Elements, the Sayles still standing embracing the Ayre, the Keele kissing her Mother Earth, till their more churlish brethren, the Fire and Water, put them out of possession, and shared all betwixt them. One of the Gallies lost her Nose with a  shot, and was content after that, with their Other to looke on. The Gallions rode beyond the Sands. The Frigates could not but participate in their fellowes disaduentures: many of them, saith Leman, were sunke and torne in pieces. Masham, anotherSo doth another namelesse Copy which ^ haue seene. of the Hopes Company, numbreth fiue and twentie thus perishing. The Hope lost three men, and had fourteene wounded, the Hector lost two. One shot of stone, which the Hope receiued, was measured seuen and twentie Inches about: but the hurt was by fire in her tops, by one of her owne men there slain, whiles he sought to fire the Enemy. The Portugals losse is vncertaine: three hundred and fiftie men were said to be carried to Daman to be buried, besides all that the Sea and Fire had shared betwixt them, which were thought to make vp fiue hundred,  some report of eight hundred, and yet themselues gaue out, not aboue fortie or fiftie, whereas the tide cast vp at one place eighteene drowned carkasses.
After this they tried experiments: First by poyson and this was the Iesuites Iesuitisme (I cannot call it Christianitie) who sent to the Muccadan of Swally, to entice him to poyson the Water of the Well, whence the English fetched for their vse: but the Ethnike had more honestie, and put in quicke Tortoises, that it might appeare by their death, if any venemous hand had beene there. But when Virtus and virus wanted vires, Dolus is added, and the Vice-Roy hauing two ships sent him for supply, two Iunkes, eight or ten Boates, these, or the most of them were employed with great secrecie and subtiltie to fire our ships by night: two full of fiery entrailes on the ninth of February, the next night two others chained together and towed with Frigates, and after that in the same night foure other chained together,  one of which being fired with an English shot, burnt her selfe and her fellowes, they put fire to all the rest which deuoured them all, without harme to the English. They tooke some of these Fire-workers, and one of which being examined, confessed after M. Prings Relation thus.

I omit the names of the Captaines.The Admirall, called Todos los Santos, a ship of eight hundred tuns, had sixe hundred men, eight and twentie Peeces, most brasse. The Saint Benito, Vice-Admirall of seuen hundred Tuns, three hundred and threescore men, twentie Peeces. Saint Lorenzo, a Ship of sixe hundred Tuns, three hundred men, twentie Peeces. The Saint Christopher likewise. The Saint Ieronimo of fiue hundred Tuns, three hundred men, and twentie three Peeces. Saint Antonio, foure hundred, two hundred men, and fifteene Peeces. Saint Pedro, two hundred, a hundred and twentie men, and eight Peeces. Saint Paulo as many. A Fly-boat of a hundred and fiftie Tuns, fourescore men, and foure Peeces. The two Gallies had fiue and twentie Oares on a side, and in both a hundred Souldiers. Threescore Frigates, with eighteene, and twentie Oares on a side, in each fifteene Souldiers. So great their forces, and (blessed  be God) so little their force. TheBen, Day. Another hath Sanedo. Vice-Royes name was Don Ieronimo de Sanecko, sometimes Captaine of Mosambike, after that of Zeilan eighteene yeeres, and now Vice-Roy, by the Kings strait command, and others importunitie drawne into this action. Euery day was hee braued with the English Ordnance, but neuer aduentured any other triall by fight: the English riding neere his great Fleet, and dispatching all their other affaires of Merchandise, and mending the Hope, which they sent home with this Newes when they departed from thence; they seemed to stay for them in the way, yet let them passe without any blowes.
This won them much glory among the countrey people, Mocrob Chan giuing stately entertainment to the Generall, in his Tents on shoare, which one saith were a quarter of a mile  about, in the midst, his owne of Crimson Sattin richly embroidered with Gold and Pearle, and couered with Cloth of Gold; he had many Elephants: he gaue the Generall his Sword, made (said hee) in his owne house, the Hilts of massie Gold: (this is their custome to deseruing Captaines) and He gaue him his Girdle, Sword, and Dagger, and Hangers of as faire show, but lesse worth.
Nic. Withington.Because I haue mentioned the Iesuites Arts in these parts, let this also be added, that Master Canning chiefe Merchant, and Agent for the Company, writ to Surat for some others to assist him, being in great feare of poysoning by the Iesuites at the Court, and before any could bee sent, hee was dead, May the nine and twentieth, 1613. One English-man dying a little before, was buried in their Church-yard, whom they tooke vp and buried in the highway,  but were compelled by the King to lay him in his former place, threatning to turne them out of his countrey, and their buried bodies out of that Church-yard. But this later warres brought them into further miseries: being denied their stipend, and therefore forsaken of their new Conuerts, who bringing them their Beades, did vpbraid them the want of their pay, one of the best Arguments (though no great miracle) wherewith they had perswaded them to their Religion. A French Iesuit at Amadabar begged reliefe of the English, wanting necessary sustenance. Before, the King allowed the Superior seuen Rupias a day, and the rest three. But now this and their faire Church also is denied them, and they say their holies in their chamber. Iohn Mildnall, an English Papist, had learned (it is reported) the Art of poysoning; by which he made away three other English-men in Persia, to make himselfe  Master of the whole stock; but I know not by what meanes himselfe tasted of the same cup, and was exceedingly swelled, but continued his life many moneths with Antidotes, which yet here left him at Agra, where hee left the value of twentie thousand Dolars, after through the Kings Iustice recouered by the English.
Many other Sea-fights haue since happened in diuers parts of the Indies, betwixt Our men and the Portugals, as that by Captaine Ben.See M. Terris Booke, and Childs Iournal and Sir Tho. Roe in my voyages. Ioseph (in which he was slaine, and Captaine Pepwel succeeded in the place and quarrell) with Manuel de Meneses, whose Carrack was consumed with fire by themselues (as was thought) rather then so great Treasures should be made English spoyles: also in the Persian Gulfe,See Swans Iournall, and letters of Blithe, Browne, etc. by Captaine Shilling (slaine therein) Captaine Blithe and others, which chaced the assayling Portugals, Ruy Frere de  Andrada their Commander, called the Pride of Portugall getting a fall; and since that OrmusLet. of T. Wilson, and also of Robert Smith. it selfe taken by the Persians; diuers other Portugall prizes, and that especially of theOne Philips in the Richard, was principall cause of that victory by his Manhood. Richard, a small Pinnasse of about twentie Tuns, which tooke a Portugall Ship supposed of two hundred and fiftie; that hauing about fourteene men and boyes, this two hundred and fiftie: These and other fights with them, and more vnfortunate with the Dutch, inOf Dutch and English vnkind quarrells, see Relations of M. Cocke, Tho. Spurway, Captaine Courthop, Rob. Haies, Captaine Pring, Iohn Hatch, William Hord; letters of Cas. Dauid, George Iackeson, Ia. Lane, G. Ball. M. Willes, Kellum Throgmorton, Ric. Nash, S. T. Dale, Io. Iordan, A. Spaldwin, G. Muschamp, W. Anthon. H. Fitzherb^rt, Th. Knollos, B. Church-man,  G. Pettys, etc. those parts I haue deliuered at large in my Pilgrims, or Bookes of Voyages, which now together with this commeth to the publike view of the World.



@. V. Of the Trauels of diuers English-men in the Mogols Dominions.
OF the Trauells of Master Fitch in these parts, wee haue alreadie spoken:Rob. Couert. and of Captaine Hawkins. In the yeere 1609. the Ascension by wilfulnesse of the Master (as is reported) foundred in the Sea, twentie leagues from shoare, which yet they attained, being fiue and fiftie persons, in the Riuer of Gandeuee, from  whence they trauelled twelue Course, or eighteene Miles to Sabay, and twelue Course more to Surrat: from thence to Daytaotote, which Citie, hee saith, could not bee conquered by the Mogol, and yeelded vpon composition, hauing still a Banyan King. Sixe and twentie Course further is Netherbery, a great Basar or Market of Brazen wares, Armour and Beasts. Eight and twentie Course beyond is the Towne Saddisee on the Riuer Tyndee, which runs to Surrat, and diuideth the Bannians and Guzurats. Thence they trauelled twelue Course to a Monasterie, and the next day came to Bramport, where the Great Generall called Can Cannawe liueth, who on the twelfth of October returned from the Warres, with fifteene hundred Elephants, thirtie thousand Horses, ten thousand Camels, three thousand Dromedaries.  This Citie is farre bigger then London, of great Trade, and faire. From hence they went fifteene Courses to Caddor, fourteene to Sawbon, and thence with the Carauan many daies, leauing which they ioyned with a Can of the Countrey bound for Agra, trauelling sixe daies through a Desart, wherein are store of wild Elephants, Lions, Tygres, Cat of Mountaines, Porpentines, and other wild Beasts innumerable; but these they saw, and were forced to make fires in the nights about their Tents to guard them. These Desarts are a hundred Course long, each Course being a mile and halfe. They had in their way after they were past this Desart, the Citie Handee, where the King hath a Castle and House cut out of the maine Rock, and wrought with carued worke round about, in it fiftie Peeces of Ordnance, a Fort impregnable, and made a Prison for great Men. Heere were also two Hospitals for Captaines maymed in the Warres. The next day they came to Tamlico, which runneth  into Indus, and two daies after to Agra.
He tells of Elephants fighting before the Mogol, parted with Rackets of wilde fire,Agra. made round like hoopes, which they runne in their faces: some fight with wild Horses, sixe Horses to an Elephant, which he kills with clasping his trunke about their necks, and pulling them to him, breakes their necks with his teeth. Hee hath also Deere, Rams, Veruathoes, or Bezors, Lyons, Leopards, Wolues, that fight before him. Condemned persons may craue the combate with the Lyon: one he saw that at the first encounter felled the Lyon with his Fist, but was soone torne in pieces, before the King. Hee saw also Allegators or Crocodiles kept in Ponds for like purpose, one of which killed two stoned Horses at one time.
There are foure great Markets euery day, where things are very cheape, a Hen for two  pence, a Sheepe for two shillings, a good Hog sold by the Bannians for two shillings, and other things proportionable. They craued the Kings Passe for England, who granting it vnder his Hand and Seale, the Secretary went with them to the Third Queene (of which he is said to haue ten, and a thousand Concubines, and two hundred Eunuchs) which was Keeper of the Great Seale. Hence they passed fiue in number to FetterbarreFatipore, a Citie as bigge as London, Ios. Salbank. Indico. twelue Course, and twelue more to Bianie, which is the chiefe Place for Indico in all the Indies, where are twelue Indico Mills. Indico growes on small bushes, like Goose-berry bushes, and beares a seed like a Cabadge-seed, and being cut downe lies on heapes for halfe a yeere to rot, and then brought into a Vault to bee trodden with Oxen from the stalkes, and so is  grownd fine at the Mils, and lastly, boyled in Fornaces, refined and sorted, the best there worth eight pence a pound.
Thence they passed to Hendown, fiue and twentie Course, an ancient faire Citie, to Mogol, a small Market Towne fourteene, to Halstot twelue, to Chatsoe twelue, to Ladanna twelue, to Mosabad eight, to Bandason twelue. Thence to Paddar, a Riuer that runnes into the Persian Gulfe, and parts the Indostans and Hendownes. Twentie Course beyond, Roree, Buckar, and Suckar, in the Riuer of Damiadee which runnes into the same Sea. At Buckar lyes Allee Can, Vice-Roy of the Bulloches, a stubborne People: this Towne stands like an Iland in the Riuer. Sucker i^ a clothing Towne, the first of the Bulloches, and Roree the last of the Moltans, which are Mahumetans. Here they staid foure and twentie daies for a Califa  or Carauan (a great company of Merchants trauelling together) because the Countrey was full of Theeues. Seuenteene Course from Sucker is Gorra, a Towne of the Bullochees, which (he saith) worship the Sunne, and are Man-eaters, of Gyant-like proportion. Notry, ten Course: the last Towne of the Bullochees, the next Puttans. Here for their entertainment,




 Aprill the first, 1610. they were beset with Theeues, twelue Fiddlers first meeting them, but their Musicke cost deere by bribes and composition, the Mogols passe hindering further outrage. Seuenteene Course they trauelled to Daddor; foure and thirtie ouer the Mountaines to Vachesto; from thence seuen and fiftie ouer the Mountaines to Candahar, a great Citie of the Puttans, where Sauder Can resided as Vice-Roy, where are continually seuen or eight thousand Camels occupied in Trade to and fro. The Gouernour hath12000. or 15000. within the Citie, Still. R. Still or Stell. and I. Crowther. fortie thousand Horses in redinesse for Warre.
Richard Still and Iohn Crowther, were lately sent from Azmere, Asimere or Agimere, where the Mogoll now resides to Spahan in Persia, to obtaine Trade for the English, by Sir Robert Sherlies meanes, which was effected. They passed by the way of Lahore, and therefore I  would desire You to beare Them company, for better knowledge of the Countrey. Their way was first towards Agra,March. 17. and Fetipore, which is a faire Citie, and hath in it a goodly House of the Kings, built by Echebar, with many spacious Gardens: now it goes to ruine, much of the stone carried to Agra, much ground sowne within the Wals. April the ninth, 1614. they came to Dillee, a very great and ancient Citie, where many Kings lye buried (and as some say the Rites of Coronation are still solemnized) many Nobles and Captaines haue their Houses of Pleasure, and their Sepulchres: the vulgar sort beggarly, most Banians. On the seuenteenth, they came to Sinan an ancient Citie. On the one and twentieth to the old Citie Sultan poare. Sixe Courses from it they passed a Riuer as broad as the Thames called Viau, which runnes West into Sinda or Indus. Here was Pitchte Can his Tents pitched  like a little Citie:T. Cor. his letter to M. L. W. he was Embassadour into Persia. On the foure and twentieth they came to Lahore. Their Report of this agrees with Master Coryats, whose Relation thereof is lately published. They say it is the best of India, plentifull of all things, or in Master Coryats words, such a delicate and euen Tract of ground as I neuer saw before (and hee hath seene a great deale, besides his Europaean sights at Venice, and since at Constantinople, hauing added more Asian Titles to his beforeVers. Hosk. Admired Name, then the ancient Roman Scipio's or Caesars dreamt of, yea more then Iustinian in the Prooeme of hisFlauius Iustinianus, Alemanicus, Gothicus, Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus: for that which followes, Pius, Foelix, Inclytus, Victor, ac Triumphator* semper Augustus, I hope his friends in the Verses before his booke, haue giuen him more prodigious: and himselfe before he comes home must needs multiply further, hauing such huge bundles of papers abreeding in so many places, at Aleppo, Spahan, Asmere, etc. Imperiall Institutions hath marshalled and mustered together; the furthest foot English-Traueller that our dayes haue had, and the longest English stile which our eares haue heard, with many rests for your wearied breath by the way, a stile indeed so high you can hardly get ouer, HIEROSOLYMITAN--SYRIAN--MESOPOTAMIAN--ARMENIAN--MEDIAN-PARTHIAN-PERSIAN--INDIAN  LEGGE--STRETCHER OF ODCOMB) Euen this our Odcombian Foot-Pilgrime, which makes your Pen-Pilgrime in I know not what liking or likenesse, at the very mention of his Name to sympathize, and his braines to fall in Trauell as learnedly mad, scarsly able to containe wonted words and wits, in this extaticall gaze and maze of that Propatetike Foot: ready to admire, adore and kisse, and yet (O braines, No braines) to enuy that his lowest part: For who is able to know his better parts? He doubts whether the like be to be found, within the whole Circumference of the habitable World. A row of Trees extends it selfe on both sides the way from the Towns end of Lahore, twentie dayes iourney, to the Townes end of Agra: most of them bearing (saithR. Still. Lahore. Still) a kinde  of Mulbery. The way is dangerous by night for Theeues, by day secure. Euery fiue or sixe Course there are faire Seraes of the Kings or Nobles, for beautifying the way, memory of their Names, and entertainment of Trauellers, where you may haue a Chamber and a Place to set your Horses, with store of Horse-meat; but in many of them little prouision for Men, by reason of the Banian Superstition. When a man hath taken vp his lodging in one of these, no other man may dispossesse him. About day-breake all make readie to depart together, and then the Gates are opened, till then shut for feare of Theeues. After the Sun hath beene vp two houres, the heat makes trauell irksome.
Lahore is one of the fairest and ancientest Cities in India, standing on Indus: It containeth at the least (M. Coryat tells you) sixteene miles in compasse. Twelue daies before hee  came there, he passed Indus, there as broad as the Thames at London. In the mid-way betwixt Lahor and Agra, ten miles out of the way on the left hand, a Mountainous people, are said to haue but one Wife to all the Brethren of one Family, as wee haue elsewhere spoken of the Arabians. Merchants resort to this Citie out of all parts of India, imbarking their goods here in great Boats for Tutta, the chiefe Citie in Sinda, a Trade of much importance in times of Peace to the Portugals, which by this way Traded to Ormus and Persia, and this way also furnishing India with Pepper. Twelue or fourteene thousand Camels lading yeerely passeth from hence to Persia by Candahar, before the Wars with the Portugalls but three thousand; this mountainous way, being in Winter cold, in Summer hot. The Carauans spend sixe or seuen moneths betwixt Lahor and Spahan. Spices are deere in Persia by reason  of the long land-carriage from Mesulapatan this way. Still and Crowther departed from Lahor, May the thirteenth, and on the two and twentieth came to Multan, a great
 and ancient Citie, within three Course of Indus, but poore; for which cause they detaine the Carauans there diuers dayes, eight, ten, or twelue, to benefit the Citie. They entred the Mountaines, the second of Iune, where they had brackish water: the third and fourth daies they trauelled all night, climing high Mountaines, and following water-courses, and so continued till they came to Chatcha on the tenth. In all these eight dayes trauell,Chatcha, 3 Fort. is no sustenance for Man or Beast, except in some places a little grasse, and therefore at Lacca in the beginning of this way they hyred an Oxe to carry Barly for their Horses. On the nineteenth, they came to Duckee, another Fort of the Mogols, and the seuen and twentieth passed the Durwas, or straits of the Hils, dangerous narrow wayes on both sides menaced by high  Rocks, from whence a few with stones may stop great multitudes, and diuers Carauans are thus cut off. For the Agwans or Puttans, the Mountaine Inhabitants are a theeuish people. The second of Iuly, they came to Pesimga another Fort, and passing thence ouer a mightie Mountaine, on the seuenth came to Candahar. The Agwans are white, stout, strong, rob Carauans, sell all stragglers: but now with feare, and the gaine they get by selling their Cattell to the Carauans, they are more tractable.
Couert saith, they weare their beards long, are not Mahumetans: their Priests weare Sackcloth, with great chaines about their middles, falling downe and praying in Sack-cloth and Ashes. At Candahar they hire Camels for India, or Persia: hence into Persia the Countrey is barren, and therefore they go in smaller companies, sometimes in two or three dayes trauell  not seeing a greene thing: at their lodging-places, water, but often brackish and stinking. Hence they departed, Iuly the three and twentieth, and on the fiue and twentieth came to Cushecunna, the vtmost Garrison in the Mogols Frontiers, thirtie Course from Candahar. On the seuen and twentieth they came to Grees, a Castle of the Sophies, a Course from the Riuer Sabba, which separateth the Persian and Mogoll Confines. The people of Grees are Theeues, and the Captaine little better then a Rebell.
From hence they reckon their way by farsangs (parasangae) fiue of which make two Courses. They trauelledStill. Couerts Trauels are extant in his Booke. August the sixth, to Farra, a Towne walled with Sun-dryed Brick, and stored with Water, without which here is no store, and therefore they carry it in some places, if there be good ground, three or foure miles vnder ground. Heere they vse men kindly as  they goe into Persia, for feare of complaint, but in their returne to India very hardly, searching them to the skin for Gold, which to carry out, or any Siluer coyne but the Kings, is death. On the twelfth day, they were faine to dig for water. On the two and twentieth, they came to Deuzayde, where they pretend all to be Religious people. On September the fifteenth (I still follow Still) they came to Spahan, where they found Sir Robert Sherly, then dispatched in Embassage for Spaine from the King of PersiaHee saith, that he hath put to death his own sonne, and done 1000 other tyrannies. Iohn Crowther. W. Nichols. Iohn Mildnall., by the way or Ormus for Goa, and thence to Lisbon. Hee procured the Kings Great Seale to all his Gouernours of Sea-Ports, kindly to entertaine the English at Iasques, etc. dated Sertember the thirtieth, 1615. the same day that Sir Robert and his Lady departed with great pompe to Siras.
Iohn Crowther returned October the twentieth, towards Lahor, and he on December the  second, towards Bagdat, and thence by Aleppo for England.
William Nicols, one of the Ascensions company, trauelled the Mogols Countrey Eastward to Mesulopatan, where the Hollanders had then a Factorie. Iohn Mildnall in his Letters, dated from Casbin in Persia, 1606. October the third, testifieth, that he had beene at Lahor and at Agra, where hee presented the King with nine and twentie great Horses, at fiftie or threescore pounds a Horse, with diuers Iewels and Rings, and obtained Articles of Trading. Of his comming since into those parts, is before mentioned from Master WithingtonsMic. Withington. Relations. And his Trauells are the next Trauells of our Pen; first, from Surrat to Amadabar, by Periano, Cosumbay, Barocho (a Citie walled, on a high Hill, a Riuer running by as broad as the Thames, where are the best Calicoes in the Kingdome) Saringa, Carron, Boldra  (a City fairer but lesse then Barocho, where Mussaf Chan hath three thousand horse) Niriand a great Towne where they make Indico. These are in the way from Surat to Amadabar,88. Courses* chiefe Citie of Guzerat, neere as great as London, strongly walled, situate in a plaine by the Riuers side, much frequented by Merchants, Christians, Moores, and Ethnikes. The Gouernour is Abdala Chan of fiue thousand Horse pay. From thence hee went to Cambaya. At Serkeffe three Courses from Amadabar, hee saw the Sepulchres of the Kings of Guzerat, very faire and well kept, much visited from all parts of the Kingdome. Their Temple is very faire. A Course from hence is a goodly House by the Riuers side, and a Garden a mile in compasse. It was built by Chon Chonnaw, the chiefe of the Mogol Nobilitie, in memoriall of a great Victorie there obtained on the last King of Guzerat there captiued, and his  Kingdome subdued, the battell was fought in this place. They lodged one night in this House, where none dwelleth. Only poore men are appointed to looke to the Garden. Hauing newes of three English ships arriued at Lowribander the Port towne of Gutu Negar Tutta
 (commonly called Tutta) chiefe Citie of Sinda,1601. hee was sent thither, and December the thirteenth, came to C^ssumpauo, and thence with a Caphilo trauelled on the fourteenth to Callitalowny a faire Castle, and the fifteenth to Calwalla,Calwalla, a Towne of filthy Women. a prettie Village, which Echebar gaue to a company of Women and their Posteritie for euer, to bring vp their children in dancing, etc. They practised this in the Carauan, euery man giuing them money, and then impudently asked if any man wanted a bed-fellow. The next day they came to Carrya, a well-manned Fortresse, and staying a day for more company because of Theeues, came the next to Deceanaura, losing one Camell stolne from them, and a Man slaine. Thence to Bollodo, a Fort kept by Newlock Abram Cabrath, which that day came with a hundred and threescore and nine heads of the Caelies, a robbing Nation. The next day to Sariandgo another  Fort, and on the one and twentieth to Radempoore, a great Town with a Fort, where they staid to make prouision of Water, and other necessaries for their iourny through the Desarts.Desart.
On the three and twentieth they went seuen Course, lay in the Fields, and met a Carauan which came from Tutta, robbed of all their goods: on the foure and twentieth, twelue: on the fiue and twentieth, fourteene, lodged by a Well of water so salt that their Cattell could not drinke it: the six and twentieth ten Course, to such another Well; and their gaue their Camels drinke, not hauing drunke before in three dayes: the seuen and twentieth fourteene course. The eight and twentieth ten, and came to a Village called Negar Parkar. In this Desart they saw great store of wilde Asses, red Deere, Foxes, and other wilde Beasts. At Parkar they met another robbed Carauan. This Towne payes Tribute to the Mogol.  From hence till you come within halfe a dayes iourney of Tutta, they acknowledge no King, but rob and spare whom they please. When the Mogol sends any Armie against them, they fire their Houses (which are made of Straw and Mortar, in forme of Bee-Hiues soone rebuilded) and flye into the Mountaines. They take for custome what they please, and then guard Passengers and Merchants, loth any should rob them but themselues.
From hence they went sixe Courses, and lay by a Tanke or Pond of Fresh-water, and on the last of December, eight Courses, and lodged by a brackish Well, Ianuary the first, they tsauelled ten Courses to Burdiano. The Water is brackish, and many were sicke of it; yet they were forced to make prouision thereof for foure dayes, the space of fortie Courses; and on the fifth they came seuen other Courses to three Wels, of which two were salt, the third  not perfectly fresh: the next day ten Courses to Nauraquemire a prettie Towne, where their Raddingpore Cafila forsooke them. He and two other Indian Merchants, with their nine Seruants, ten Camels, and fiue Camel-men remained to goe for Tutta, whither they had now three dayes iourney.
From this Paradise (so it seemed after so tedious a Desart) they departed, Ianuary the eight, hauing hired one of the Ragi, or Gouernour his kindred for twentie Laries (which make about twentie shillings) to conduct and conuoy them, and went ten Courses to Gundayaw, where they had beene robbed, but for their Guard. The next day were twice assaulted, and forced each time to pay fiue Laries, came to Sarruna, a great Towne of the Razbootches with a Castle:Reisbuti. whence it is fourteene Courses to Tutta. Ragi Bouma the Gouernour,  is eldest Sonne to Sultan Bulbull, who had beene lately captiued by the Mogoll, and spoiled of his eyes, and two moneths before our comming had made an escape to these Mountaines, animating his kindred to reuenge that losse of his sight. This Ragi was kinde to our Author as a stranger, and made him sup with him: the occasion that they hired him for fortie Laries, with fiftie Horse-men to conduct them to the Gates of Tutta. Hereunto they were the rather perswaded by aduice of a Banian, which had then come from Tutta, who also told Master Withinton,S.R. Sherly. that Sir Robert Sherly had beene much abused by the Portugals, and the Gouernour at Lowribander, his House fired, and his Men hurt in the night: and arriuing at Tutta thirteene dayes after, was there vnkindly vsed by Mersa Rusto the Gouernour. This Ragi led them fiue Courses, where they lay by a Riuer side, and at two of the  clocke in the morning they departed, but were led a contrary way, and about breake of day brought into a Thicket,M. Withington robbed. where he made them vnlade, tooke away their Weapons and bound them; suddenly with their Camell ropes drawne close with a Truncheon, hanged the two Merchants and their fiue Men, stripped and buried them. Mee (as a farre Countrey-man, not knowing the language) hee spared with my Pions or Seruants, but tooke my Horse (giuing me a Iade) and fourescore Rupias from mee, sent mee twentie Courses with my men vp to the Mountatines to a brother of his, where I continued two and twentie dayes a close prisoner, and then order was sent to conuey mee to Parker: but in the way was robbed of my clothes and all that I had: so that I and my men were forced to liue vpon the charitie of people by begging: onely my Horse, as not worth taking, was left me, for which  I could get but foure mamoodees (foure shillings) but chancing on a Banian whom I had knowne at Amadabar, I was relieued and sold not my Horse. Wee came to Radingpoore
 May the nineteenth, and April the second, to Amadabar: thence to Cambaya, and (passing the Riuer seuen Courses broad, yeerely drowning many) to Saurau, a Towne and Castle of the Razbootches, and fiue and twentie Courses further to Borocho, and passing that Riuer, to Cassimba, and thence to Surat. In all this Countrey of Sinda,Sinda. no Citie of greater Trade then Tutta; the chiefe Port thereto is Lowribander, three dayes iourney from thence, where is a faire Roade without the Riuers mouth, cleere of Wormes, which about Surat,Wormes dangerous to ships and other places of the Indies infest the ships, so that after three or foure moneths riding, if it were not for sheathing, they were not able to returne. The Ports and Roades of Sinda are free of them. In two moneths they passe from Tutta to Lahor, and returne downe the streame in  one. And from Agra goods may bee conueyed on Camels in twentie dayes, which is on Sinda Riuer, and thence in fifteene or sixteene dayes aboord the Ships at Lowribander, as soone as to Surat, if Theeues did not make it lesse secure.
May the fourth, 1614. Master Withington went from Surat to Brampore, where Sultan Paruise lyes. It is situate in a Plaine by a great Riuer, hauing a large Castle; and thence to Agra: all which way is seuen hundred Courses. From Surat to Brampore is a pleasant and champaigne Countrey, full of Riuers, Brookes, and Springs. From Brampore to Agra very mountainous, hardly passable for Camels by Mando the neerest way: there are many high Hils and strong Castles in the way, Townes and Cities in euery dayes iourney well inhabited, the Country peaceable and cleere of Theeues. Betweene Agimere or Azmere and Agra,  are a hundred and twentie Courses: at euery Course end a great Pillar erected, and at euery tenth Couse a Seraglia or Place of lodging for Man and Horse, with Hostesses to dresse your Victuall (if you please) three pence will pay for your Horse and Meate-dressing: there are also at euery tenth Course faire Houses erected by Echebar for his Women, and none else may lie in them. The reason heereof is reported, that Echebar wanting Children went on Pilgrimage on foot to Asmere for that purpose, at euery Course end saying his prayers, and lodging at the tenth. Agra is a huge Towne, situate by the great Riuer Geminie or Iamena. The Castle is the fairest thing in it, compassed with the fairest and highest Wall that I haue seene, two miles about, well replenished with Ordnance: the rest, except Noble-mens houses (which are faire and seated by the Riuer) ruinous. Fatipore is decayed, but hath a very stately  Temple built by Geometry; as Echebars Sepulchre, the fairest thing that euer I saw. I went to Ganges, two dayes iourney from Agra, the Water whereof is carryed a hundred miles by the Banians for deuotion, which say it will neuer stinke, how long soeuer it bee kept. From Agra Master Fitch went to Satagam in Bengala by Water. So that if you obserue all these Trauels ofFitch to the South-East and to the East from Agra. Nicols S.E. by Land. Goes N. E. to China. Couert N. and S. quite through. Still to Lahor N. E. and to Persia N.N.W. Withington the Westerle parts to Sinda, etc. Fitch, Couert, Still, Withington, and the rest of our Countrey-men, and adde thereto the iourney of Goes from thence to China, with other Relations of the Iesuites before expressed, you shall haue a better Corographie of this Countrey, then any of our Maps haue yet deliuered. And their want hath made me thus full and tedious. I might adde the Trauels ofW. Clarke. William Clerke, one of the Ascensions Company, which serued the Mogol in his Warres diuers yeeres (and returned in the last Ship, whiles these things are publishing)  against the Rasboots and Decans, hauing two Horse pay, which is neere sixe pounds a moneth, and had some moneths pay allowed him before-hand, that so hee might furnish himselfe: for they must buy and maintaine their Horses.
Master WalterW. Payton. Payton was Master in the Exepedition, and carried Sir Robert Sherly, whom they had thought to haue landed at Gauder or Guader in Masqueranno, in fiue and twentie Degrees, and six and twentie Minutes, but the people were then in Rebellion against the Persian, and by damnable treachery had possessed themselues of the Ship and all the goods, had not one Hoge Comal, a Surgeon amongst them reuealed this mysterie of their iniquitie: they had thus betrayed three ships before. By this villany of the Bulloches, they were  forced to goe further to the mouth of Sinde, which is East and by North, in foure and twentie Degrees, and foure and thirtie Minutes. They landed the Embassador, September the nine and twentieth, 1613. at Diul, in rhe Mols Dominion, fifteene miles from the ships. The Portugals reported them to be Theeues, according to their custome. And when they sought for Trade in Sinda, the Gouernour had yeelded but for the Portugals, which threatned to depart if the English were admitted, whose custome hee was loth to lose, being worth, hee said, a Leck of Rupias, ten thousand pound English and more (which shewes the exceeding Trade of Sinda) by the yeere.
But this Countrey, and the disposition of their King, are most amply described to vs together, with the remarkable Rarities of those parts, by the Hon. industry of Sir Thomas Roe, Embassadour for his Maiestie with the Mogoll, whose Map of those parts wee heere present  you; as likewise by his learned Chaplaine, Master Edward Terry: both whose Obseruations wee haue presented in our first Tome of Voyages. To them I referre the industrious Reader, for more ample relations of these parts, then in this Worke were couenient to insert.
 Amongst other things, the Reader shall see the true course of Indus (which all Moderne Geographers haue exceedingly falsified) and of Ganges. William Finch hath also written of those parts. I thought good heere to adde that which Master Steele and his wife told me of the Women of those parts. Master Steele hauing a proiect of Water-works, to bring the water of Ganges by Pipes, etc. carried fiue men with him to the Mogol, who gaue them entertainment with large wages by the day, and gaue to each an Arabian Horse. One of these was a Painter, whom the Mogol would haue to take his picture; and because hee could not speake the language, Master Steele (who could speake the language of the Court, which is Persian) was admitted (a thing not permitted to Men) into the Mogols lodgings, where he did sit for the said Limner. At his entrance, the chiefe Eunuch put a cloth ouer his head,  that he should not see the Women (which hee might heare as hee passed, and once also saw them, the Eunuch purposely putting on a thinner cloth ouer his head) there being of them some hundreds. His wife had more accesse at Chan Channas Court, whose daughter (sometimes wife to the elder brother of this Mogol, and liuing still a widdow) had a desire to see the English-woman, and Chan-Channa intreated her husband to permit it. Shee was fetched in a close Chariot drawne by white Oxen, attended by Eunuchs; and was first brought into an open Court, in midst of which was a Tanke or Well of Water, where sate many women, slaues to Chan-Channas daughter, of diuers Nations and complexions; some blacke, exceeding louely and comely of person notwithstanding, whose haire before did stand vp with right tufts, as if it had growne vpward, nor would ruffling disorder them; some browne, of  Indian complexion; others very white, but pale, and not ruddy: many of them seemed goodly and louely, all sitting in their slight, but rich garments on the floore couered with carpets. The Lady came forth in meaner attire, whereat they all arose and did her reuerence, with their faces to the ground. Mistresse Steele made her three courtsies, after the English fashion (being also in English attire) and deliuered her a Present (without which there is no visitation of great persons) and the Lady caused her to sit by her, and after discourse, entertained her with a Banket; and began familiaritie with her, continued and increased with often visitations, and rewarded with many gifts, as of womens vestments of of those parts; some of which I saw, the vpper garment like a smocke, of thin Calico, vnder which they weare a paire of breeches close aboue, the neather parts very long and slender, loosely ruffling  about their legs, of thin stuffe also; the mans garment differing from the womans, by the fastning on the side vnder the arme, whereas the womans is fastened before, both tyed with ribbands. Chan Channa caused his Taylor to take view of Master Steele, and without other measure hee made him a cloake of cloth of gold, after the English fashion very comely, which I also saw.


@. VI. Of the Rasboots, and other people subiect to the Mogol, and of their  Countries, Religion, and Rites.
THus haue we delineated this huge Giantly Body of the Mogol Empire. The Soule or Religion thereof, is more inuisible. What lurking places and labyrinths the breasts of the Kings haue had in their vnknowne, curious, vncertaine Faith, yee haue heard, and may there by guesse at the rest. As the people are manifold, so are their Rites; some of which, about Ganges, and in other parts, haue alreadie beene touched: and some hereafter, as the People and their Rites are diffused and dispersed in diuers Tracts of India, we shall elsewhere mention. Besides Christian Forreiners, the principall Religion is Ethnike, though that of the Prince be Mahumetan.  
The Reisbuti, Rasbootes, or Rasbooches, the ancient Inhabitants of the Countrey of Sinda, are Gentiles. How strong20000. horse, 50000. foot, and a mountainous Countrey, hardly inuaded and conquered. one of them is, you haue heard Captaine Hawkins report. His name, as I haue since learned of Mr. Rogers, Mr. Clarke, and Mr. Withington, is Ranna; some of them affirming, That hee is lately come in, and hath sent his sonne a pledge to the Mogols Court, who for this cause, and his sake, hath beene so long resident at Azmere. But Mr. Clarke, employed in these wars, saith, That it is not a subiection, but voluntarie friendship and neighbourhood, with acknowledgement of himselfe the Inferior. A Rebell or Outlaw he cannot be called, because hee was neuer subiect; accounting the Mogoll Superior in power, but not his Lord. There are of these many Casts, or Tribes, each of which haue supreame and independent Lords: Nature building them, with little helpe of Art, impregnable  Fortresses,M. Clarke. or inaccessable Hils. One of which, called Dewras, is said to haue very many populations; able on the Hill tops to gather sufficient prouisions for themselues, and the neighbour-Markets;
 impossible without corruption to be conquered. When any of these Casts, or Tribes, disagree, the Mogoll interposeth himselfe, professing to take part with the right. Their Countrey lies in the direct way from Surat to Agra, the wayes by Amadauar, or by Brampore, both much about, yet frequented by Merchants, for feare of them. The Countrey peopleM. Withington. are rude, naked from the waste vpwards, with Turbants differing from the Mogol fashion. Their Armes are Sword, Buckler, and Launce. Their Buckler is great, in fashion of a Bee-hiue, in which they will giue their Camels drinke, and Horses prouender. Their Horses are good, swift, and strong, which they ride vnshod, and back at a yeere old. A resolute people; which the Mogoll saith, knowes as well to die, as any in the world. They eate  no Beefe nor Buffolo, but haue them in superstitious respect. The Rasbutche husband dying, the wife is burned. The manner is this: The wise accompanies the dead bodie of her husband in her best array, pompously attended with her friends and kindred, and with Musick. The fire being made, she compasseth the same twice or thrice: first bewayling her husbands death; and then reioycing, that she shall now liue with him againe; and then embracing her friends, sits downe on the top of the pyle, taking her husbands head in her lap, and bids them kindle the fire. This done, her friends throw Oyle and other sweet Perfumes on her, shee enduring the fire with admirable patience, loose, and not bound. I haue seene many (it is M. Withingtons report) the first at Surat, the woman being but ten yeeres old, and not yet a woman hauing not knowne her husband, who was slaine in the wars, and his clothes  brought home. Yet would she needs burne with his clothes: and the Gouernour not permitting, because shee was a Virgin, her friends intreated and bribed him thereto, shee seeming impatient of that delay, and saying, her husband was a great way before her, with much blind ioy entring into endlesse sorrowes. The kindred of the deceased husband doe not force this vnkind kindnesse, but the wiues owne kindred; holding it a disgrace to their family, if shee refuse; which she hath power to doe: but few will; and then shee must shaue her haire, and breake her iewels, and is not suffered to eate, drinke, sleepe, or company with any bodie, till her death. If, after purpose to burne, impatient of the flame, she leapes out, her father and mother will bind and burne her perforce. But such weaknesse seldome happens. In some places they obserue it, with Rites a little differing: carrying the woman in great pompe on  a Pageant, and binding her to a stake, all her kindred kneeling round about her,R. Couert. and praying to the Sun, and their other Idols. Shee hath betwixt her legs, and vnder each arme, a bag of Gun-powder; the fire made all of sweet Woods. Wee shall mention other Rites in other places.
The Hendownes possesse the Countrey North from Asmere toward the Multans:R. Couert. degenerate Gentiles, and refusing no manner of Flesh or Fish. They pray naked, dresse and eat their meat naked; and where they dresse and eate their meat, make a Circle, within which, none must enter during that time. Their women are brought vp from their child-hood with shackles, some of Siluer, some of Brasse, and some of Iron, on their legges, and Rings in their eares; all which encrease with themselues, being made bigger, as they grow; so that in time a man may thrust his hand through the holes of their eares. Also they weare Bracelets  of Elephants teeth about their armes, from the wrist to the elbow. Wee haue alreadie spoken of the Bulloches, their Northerly neighbours, Sunne-worshipping, Giantly bignesse, and Inhumane humanitie, in eating mans-flesh (and likewise of the Puttans or Agwans.) The Bulloches in Sinda, and vpon the Persian Gulfe (it seemes of this generation) are Mahumetans, Robbers by Land, and Pyrats by Sea, whereto they adde the murther of those they rob. Their treachery to Sir R. Sherly, and the Expedition, is before mentioned:M. Payton. which had it had expedition according to their plot, they had murthered all but the Surgeon, the Musician, the Boyes, and the Women. When I was in Sinda (saith M. WithingtonM. Withington.) they tooke a Boat, with seuen Italians, and one Portugall Fryar, this ripped vp by them, to seeke  Gold in his entrailes, the rest slaine in the fight. Yet there are very honest men of them in Guzerat, and about Agra.
Touching other Superstitions of this Kingdome, thus wrireth Ioannes Oranus, in the Narration of this KingdomeNarratio Reg. Mogor. Lahor is 300, miles from Agra.. Not farre from the Citie Lahor is an Idoll, resembling a woman, which they call Nazar Coto, framed with two Heads, and six or seuen Armes, and twelue or fourteene Hands; one of which brandisheth a Speare, another a Club. Hereunto resort many Pilgrims to worship; and hereof they tell many miracles: as, that many cut off their tongues, which are againe restored whole vnto them, but remaine mute. Some thinke our breath to bee our Soule. Some affirme, That all things are the same thing. Some, that God onely hath a being, other things are shadowes and appearances. Some thinke all things, and  some, the round Circle of the World; and some, themselues, to bee God. Almost all doe hold the commigration of Soules into the bodies of Beasts. They say, the World shall last foure Ages, or Worlds; whereof three are past. The first lasted seuenteene Laches (euery
 Laches contained an hundred thousand yeeres) and eight and twentie thousand yeeres. Men in that World liued ten thousand yeeres, were of great stature of bodie, and great sinceritie of minde. Thrice in this space did God visibly appeare on the Earth: First, in forme of a Fish, that hee might bring out the Booke of the Law of Brama, which one Causacar had hurled into the Sea: The second time, in forme of a Snaile, that he might make the Earth dry and solid: Lastly, like a Hog, to destroy one that said he was God; or as others of them as truely say, to recouer the Earth from the Sea, which had swallowed it. The second World lasted ten Laches, and ninetie two thousand and six yeeres; in which, men were as tall as before, and liued a thousand yeeres. God did appeare foure times: First, in a monstrous forme, the vpper part a Lion, the lower a Woman, to represse the pride of one, which gaue out himselfe for  God: Secondly, like a poore Bramane, to punish a proud King, that would by a new-deuised Art fly into Heauen: The third time, to be reuenged of another King, which had slain a poore Religious man, he came in the likenesse of a Man, named Parcaram: and lastly, like one Ram, the sonne of Giocorat, which had slaine Parcaram. The third World continued eight Laches and foure thousand yeeres, wherein men liued fiue hundred yeeres; and God appeared twice in Humane likenesse. The fourth Age shall endure foure Laches, whereof are alreadie passed foure thousand sixe hundred fourescore and twelue yeeres. They say God will also appeare in this Age. Others imagine, That he hath alreadie appeared, and that Echebar is hee. Some hold, That those ten Appearances were but creatures, which had receiued Diuine power. They themselues easily perceiue the vanity of these Chimaera's, and monstrous opinions, but  will not leaue them, lest they should (at the same cast) lose their Wealth and Superstition together.
In the Countrey of the Mogor they haueR. Fitch. many fine Carts, carued and gilded, with two Wheeles, drawn with two little Buls, about the bignesse of our great Dogs in England, and they will runne with any Horse, and carry two or three men in one of those Carts. They are couered with Silke, or fine Cloth, and be in vse as our Coaches in England.
But we will shut vp this too great discourse of the great Mogols Greatnesse, in the words of the Worlds Greatest Foot-post.T. Coryat. He tels vs, from the very Mogols Court, That this present Prince, is a man of three and fiftie yeeres of age, of complexion middle, betwixt white and blacke, in a more expressiue Epitheton, Oliue; of a feemely composition of bodie, of stature  little vnequall to Mine, but much more corpulent (hee neuer trauelled so much on foot, nor ten moneths together with fiftie shillings expence.) His Dominion is little lesse then foure thousand English miles: which, if it come short of the Turke in Geometricall dimension of ground, it is with a great pleonasme supplied by the fertilitie of his Soyle, and in the vnion of all his Territories. Againe, hee exceedeth him in Reuenue (a great deale more then M. Coryats reckoning) hee presenteth himselfe thrice euerie day: at the rising of the Sunne, which hee adoreth by the eleuation of his hands; at noone, and at fiue of the clocke in the euening: but he standeth in a roome aloft, alone by himself, and looketh from a window that hath an embroidered sumptuous Couerture, supported with two siluer Pillasters, to yeeld shadow vnto him. In feeding of his Beasts, hee spendeth at the least ten thousand pound sterling  a day, and keepeth a thousand women for his owne body, whereof the chiefe is Normal. I haue bin in a Citie in this Country, called Detee, where Alexander ioyned battell with Porus, and in token of his victory, erected a brasse Pillar, which remaineth there to this day. There arriued foure English ships at Surat, and in the same Sir Thomas Rowe, the English Embassador to the Mogol: the newes whereof came to Asmere, Octob. 8. 1615. and did much resocillate M. Coryats spirits (as did M. Brownes verses from Amadavars) and so I hope will yours.



CHAP. VIII. Of Cambaya, Decan, and the neighbouring Nations.

@. I. Of the Cambayans.
ALthough we might seem to haue spoken sufficiently of the Cambayans alreadie, in our former Mogol-Relations; yet, both as better knowne, and because such was our Order in the former Editions, wee haue allowed them a Chapter here by themselues. Cambaya is also called GuzaratMaginus., containing  in length, from the Riuer Bate to Circam, a Persian Region, fiue hundred miles of Sea-coast, being on other parts enuironedMaff. lib. 4^ with the Kingdomes
 of Dulcinda and Sanga, on the North; Mandao, on the East; on the West, Nautacos, or the Gedrosians. The Sea, and the Confines of Decan are the Southerly bounds. It hath in it, by estimation, threescore thousand Populations, or inhabited Places, watred with many Streames, the chiefe whereof is Indus, which diuideth it in the middle, running from Caucasus, or Naugrocot, and after nine hundred miles iourney, with two nauigable mouths disemboquing it selfe into the Ocean. This Countrey is very fertile, not yeelding to any other in India, in the fruits which the Earth and Trees bring forth, besides their store of Elephants, Gems, Silke, Cotton, and such like. The people are of an Oliue-colour, and goe naked, except about their priuie parts. They eate no Flesh, but Rice, Milke, Barley, and other life-lesse  Creatures. The Inhabitants are, for the most part, Gentiles; and so were their Kings, vntill the Mahumetan Superstitions preuailed. There areIoseph. Ind. Linsch. l. 1. c. ^7. vp within the Land, People called Reisbuti, which are the natural Nobles of this Kingdome, chaced by the Moores to the Mountaines, whence they make often excursions and spoyles in the Country; and the Cambayans pay them tribute, that they might liue in peace: of these is spoken alreadie. Their chiefe Sea-Townes are Daman, Bandora, Surate, Rauellum, Bazuinum; and within Land, Cambaya, Madabar, Campanel, Tanaa, etc. Surat (now an English Factory) hath a Castle ofPat. Copland. Stone, with good Ordnance: The Houses are faire, of Stone and Brick, square, with flat roofes: they haue goodly Gardens, with Pomegranats, Pome-Citrons, Melons, Limons, Figs all the yeere long, curious Springs of fresh Water. The people neat, tall, louing, graue, iudicious,  clothed in long white Calico, or Silke.
Cambaya hath bestowed the name on the whole Kingdome, which they call the Indian Cairo, for the excellencie thereof: it standeth three miles from Indus. The Tides hereL. Vertom. l. 4 encrease not, as with vs, at the full, but in the decrease of the Moone they are at the highest. Of this Riuer Indus, Ptolomey and Arrianus in his Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, reckon seuen Mouthes or Entrances into the Sea; and Theuet (I know not with what Friar-like, and Lyar-like boldnesse) nameth seuen at this day: but Arrianus saith, in those times six of the seuen were ouer-growne, and but one nauigable. But Dionysius, Pomponius, Strabo, and the other Arrianus, which writ the life of Alexander, ascribe but two vnto it; which is confirmed by the Portugals. Arrianus hath in his eight Booke largely described the Voyage of Nearchus  and Onesicritus, from this Riuer, about the Coast into the Persian Gulfe, employed by Alexander the Great. It is not 160. yeeres since Machamut, a Moore, expelled the Guzarat King.
This Machamut deserueth mention for one thing, wherein the Sunne hath scarce beheld his like. Hee so accustomed himselfe to ^^ysons, that no day passed wherein hee tooke not some; for else hee himselfe had dyed, saith Barbosa; as it fareth with Amfian or Opium, the vse whereof killeth such as neuer tooke it, and the disuse, such as haue. And beyond that which we reade of Mithridates in the like practice, his Nature was transformed into so venemous a habit, that if hee did meane to put any of his Nobles to death, hee would cause them to be set naked before him, and chewing certaine fruits in his mouth, which they call Chofolos and Tambolos, with lime made of shells, by spitting vpon him, in one halfe houre depriued  him of life: if a Fly sate vpon his hand, it would presently fall off dead. Neither was hisOd. Barbosa. loue to be preferred to his hatred, or with women was his dealing lesse deadly. For he had three or foure thousand Concubines, of whom, none liued to see a second Sunne, after hee had carnally knowne them. H^s Mustaches (or haire of his vpper lip) was so long, that hee bound it vpon his head, as women doe with an haire-lace; and his beard was white, reaching to his Waste. Euery day when he arose, and when hee dined, fiftie Elephants were brought into the Palace, to doe him reuerence on their knees, accompanied with Trumpets and other Musicke.
Coelius RhodiginusCoel. Rhodig. lib. 11. cap. 13. mentions the like of a Maid, thus nourished with Poysons, her Spettle (and other Humours comming from her) being deadly: such also as lay with her carnally,  presently dying. Auicenna hath also a like example of a Man, whose Nature, infected with a stronger Venome, poysoned other venomous Creatures, if any did bite him. And when a greater Serpent was brought for triall, he had by the biting thereof a two-dayes Feuer; but the Serpent dyed: The other did not harme him.
Mamudius, the Successor of King Machamut, was a great enemy to the Portugals. Bad^rius succeeded in state and affection, and exceeded in greatnesse and ambition. Hee inuadedMaff. lib. 11. Mand^o, and Sanga, where hee besieged Citor: then gouerned by a warlike woman: which not able to hold out longer against him, fled, and left the people in forlorne plight; who in a desparate resolution (like Sardanapalus) heaping vp their Treasures, set fire thereto, and then cast themselues therein. This fire continued three dayes, and consumed threescore  and ten thousand persons.
Hence Badurius triumphantly marched against the Mogor, whom Maffaeus calleth Miramudius, with an Army of an hundred and fiftie thousand Horse, whereof thirtie thousand
 were barded; and fiue hundred thousand Foot-men: of great brazen Ordnance, a thousand; whereof foure Basiliskes were drawne (such was their weight) by so many hundred yokes of Oxen: with Shot and Powder hee laded fiue hundred Waynes, and as many with Gold and Siluer, to pay his Souldiers. These Forces, with this prouision, might rend the Ayre with Thunders, might make the Earth to shake with Terror, might dry and drinke vp Riuers of Water, might frame another fiery Element, of Arts inuention; but could not either terrifie the Mogor, or saue Badurius from a double ouerthrow; first, at Doceri; next, at Mandoa, where hee loseth his Tents and Treasures; and shauing his beard, flyeth disguised to Diu: in which, that the Portugalls might be engaged in the same warre, hee gaue them leaue to erect a Fortresse: A thing of such moment vnto them, that Iohn Botelius (confined before  vnto India, for crimes obiected) thought, by being the first Messenger thereof in Portugall, to purchase his libertie: whereof he might well bee reputed worthy, who in a little Vessell, scarce eighteene foot long, and sixe wide, with vndaunted courage contemning that wide, long, and tempestuous Ocean, arriued with his small companie, great newes, and greater admiration, at Lisbone. Badurius after altering his minde, and therein entertaining a treacherous Proiect against the Portugalls, coloured the same with kindnesse, and he (which feared allCic. Offic. men, no lesse then hee was feared, as guiltie to his owne Tyranny, which sometime made Dionysius of a King, a Barbar, and now this, a King of others, and his own Cooke, trusting no man to dresse his meat) aduentured to visit the Portugall Vice-Roy in his ships, professing great friendship, with great dissimulation, and by a meane Mariner, at his returne,  was slaine; whereupon the whole Iland submitted it selfe to the Portugall yoke. And because we haue in this Chapter mentioned so many Wonders, let this also haue place among (if not aboue) the rest, which presently happenedMaff. Histor. Ind. lib. 11.. Whiles the Portugalls were busie in their Buildings, a certaineThis same man appeared before Solyman the Turkish General, at the siege of Diu. Viag. di vn Comite Venetiano. Nic. di Conti saith, hee saw a Bramane thr^e hundred yeers old. Bengalan came to the Gouernour, which had liued, as hee affirmed, three hundred thirtie fiue yeeres. The old men of the Countrey testified, That they had heard their Ancestors speake of his great age, and himselfe had a sonne fourescore and tende yeeres old, and not at all Booke-learned, yet was a speaking Chronicle of those passed times. His teeth had sometimes fallen out,Morison part. 3. c. 3. saith the same of the Irish Countesse of Desmond (mentioned also by S. W. Ral.) and that she liued 140. yeeres. others growing in their places; and his beard, after it had beene very hoarie, by degrees returned into his former blacknesse. About an hundred yeeres before this time, he had altered his Pagan Religion into the Arabian or Moorish. For  this his miraculous age, the Sultans of Cambaya had allowed him a stipend to liue on; the continuance of which he now sought, and did obtaine of the Portugals. Friar Ioano dos SantosIo. Santos. l. 4. deu^n. hist de India orientali. cells a long story of one yet aliue, Ann. 1605. of whom the Bishop of Cochin had sent men to inquire, who by diligent search found that hee was then three hundred eightie yeeres old, and had married eight times, the father of many generations. They say his teeth had thrice fallen out, and thrice renewed: his haire thrice hoary, and as oft black againe. Hee could tell of nineteene successiue Kings, which reigned in Horan his Countrey in Bengala. He was also borne a Gentile, and after turned Moore, and hoped, he said, to dye a Christian, reioycing to see a picture of Saint Francis, saying, Such a man when he was twentie fiue yeeres old had foretold him this long life.  
But to returne; Mamudius, successor to Badurius, sought with all his forces to driue these new Lords out of Diu, as Solyman had done before, by a Nauie and Armie sent thither; but both in vaine: of which Wars, Damianus a GoesDam. a Goes, op. Di. and Bell. Camb. hath written diuers Commentaries. But this whole Countrey is now subiect to the Mogor. It was, in Alexanders time, peopled by the Massani, Sodrae, or Sabracae, Praestae, and Sangadae, as Ortelius hath placed them; where Alexander (as in diuers other places he had done) erected a Citie of his owne name, called Alexandria. Daman, another Key of this Bay, and entrance of the Riuer Indus into the Sea; fell to the Portugals share.
The Land of CambayaLinschot. is the fruitfullest in all India; which causeth great traffique of Indians, Portugals, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, etc. The Guzarates, or Cambayans, are  the subtillest Merchants in all those parts. They haueOd. Barbos. amongst them many Histories of Darius and Alexander, which sometime were Lords of this Indian Prouince. The PortugalsGotardus Arthus Hist. Ind. O^ent. cap 23. Bally, cap. 18. haue at diuers times conquered diuers of the chiefe Townes in this Kingdome, some whereof they keepe still. The women in Diu, by Art dye their teeth black, esteeming themselues so much the more beautifull, and therefore go with their lips open, to shew the blacknesse of their teeth, drawing away the couer of their lips, as if they were lip-lesse, giuing the prize of Beautie to a double deformitie, Blacknesse, and a Mouth O Hellish wide. When a Cambayan dyeth, they burne his body, and distribute the ashes vnto the foure Elements (of which man consisteth) part to the Fire, part to the Ayre, to the Water also and Earth their due portions, as Balby hath obserued.  
M. Patrike Copland (Minister in the Dragon, with Captaine Best) writes, that hee rode in this Countrey, from Medhaphrabadh to Surat, in a Coach drawne with Oxen, which is the
 most ordinary, though they haue goodly Horses. He saw at once the goodliest Spring and Haruest that euer he had seene: Fields joyning together, whereof one was greene as a medow; the other yellow as gold, ready to be cut, of Wheat and Rice. All along, goodly Villages full of trees, yeelding Taddy (the Palme; of which after) a new sweet Wine, strengthning and fattening. A Smith which loued his liquor, said hee could wish no other wages, but a pot of this Taddy alway at his girdle.


@. II.  Of the Kingdomes of Decan.
OF the Decans we haue spoken before, in the Mogol conquests. Decan is the name of a Citie, sixe leagues from which is a Hill, out of which the Diamond is taken. This Hill is kept with a Garrison, and walled about. Of the Decan Kingdomes, Barros hath reported, That about the yeere 1300. Sa Nosaradin reigned in Delly, or Delin, and inuaded the Kingdome of Canara (which reacheth from the Riuer Bate, North of Chaul, vnto the Cape Comori) and wonne much from the Ancestors of the King (now termed) of Bisnaga. At his returne, he left Habedsa his Lieutenant, who  added to the former Conquests, gathering a Band of all mixtures, Gentiles, Moores, Christians. His sonne was confirmed in the Gouernment, therefore called Decan, and the people Decanins, because of this confusion of so many Nations, of which, his Fathers and His forces consisted: for Decanins signifies Bastards. He shooke off alleageance to his Lord, and acknowledged none Superiour. Hee also much encreased his Dominions. His name was Mamudsa. Hee appointed eighteene Captaines or Commanders, allotting to each, seuerall Prouinces. These Captaines hee made, were but slaues, that so hee might the easier hold them in subjection. He commanded, that each of them should build a Palace at Bedir, his chiefe Citie, and there reside certaine moneths in the yeere; his sonne remayning there in perpetuall hostage. These, in processe of time, grew fewer, and therefore greater;  the King holding nothing but his Royall Citie; all the Empire being in the hands of these slaues: which, when the Portugals came thither, were no more, but Sabay, Niza-Malucco, Madre Malucco, Melic Verida, Coge Mecadam, the Abessine Eunuch, and Cota Malucco. The mightiest of them was Sabay, Lord of Goa: His sonne was Hidalcam. Thus Barrius. Garcias ab Horto writes, That the Mogors had possessed the Kingdome of Delly: but a certaine Bengalan (rebelling against his Master) slue him, vsurped his State, and by force of warre added this of Canara also to his Dominion; he was calledXaholam, that is, Lord of the World, a Title, and not a proper name. Xaholam. This King made his sisters sonneDaquem. his Successor, who was much addicted to Forreiners. He diuided his Kingdome into twelue parts, or Prouinces, ouer which, he set so many Captaines: Idalcam, from Angidaua to Cifarda: from thence to Negatona, Nizamaluco: Ouer Balaguate,  or the vp-hill Countrey (for Bala in the Persian language signifieth The toppe, and Guate a Hill) Imadmaluco, and Catalmaluco, and Verido, etc.
These all rebelled, and captiued Daquem their King at Beder, the chiefe Citie of Decan, and shared his Kingdome amongst themselues, and some Gentiles, partners in the conspiracie. They were all forreiners, but Nizamaluco. This, and the other names, before mentioned, were Titles of Honour, giuen them, with their Offices, by the King, corrupted by the vulgar in pronouncing. Idalcam, is Adel-ham; Adel in the Persian language, signifieth Iustice; Ham is the Tartarian appellation, signifying a Prince, or King (which name might well be the Reliques of the Tartarian conquests in those parts) so Adelham, is King of  Iustice. Neza in the Persian (which ScaligerIos. Scal. de Emana. temp. lib. 7. saith is of like extent in the East, as Latine in the West) is a Lance: Maluco signifieth the Kingdome. Neza, or Nizamaluco, the Speare or Lance of the kingdom. So Cotamaluco the Tower of the kingdom, Imadmaluco the Throne of the Kingdome, etc, Nizamaluco is also called Nizamoxa: which Xa, or Scha, is a Persian title (signifyingIos. Scal. Can. Isag. lib. 7. as Monsieur in France, Don in Spaine) and giuen by Ismael the Sophi, and Tamas his sonne, to all those Kings that would communicate in their Sect, which Nizamoxa only yeelded to, Other of them made shew, but soone recanted. Thus farre Garcias.
The DecanClarke. Kings being now ten or twelue, make joynt warre against the Mogoll, hauing one Lieutenant Generall, which is Amber Chapu an Abassen slaue (before mentioned, out of Captaine Hawkins) who hath many Lecks of Rupias in ready money, and is Protector of the Kingdome of Amdanagar, the titular King being a childe. One Robert Iohnson  an Englishman turned Moore, and was entertained with much respect of one of the Decan Kings, but died eight dayes after his Circumcision. So were Robert Claxon, and Robert Trally, voluntarily robbed of that which they neuer had (Faith and Religion) and turned
 Moores. The Decans dominians reach from the West Sea to that of Choromandel, or very neere thereto. The chiefe reason of their Mahumetan Religion was that Conquest by Nosaradin, and his successors Moores: that there are so many Kingdomes proceed from that diuision before mentioned.


@. III. Of the Banian and Cambayan superstitions.
THe Religion in Cambaya is partly Moorish, partly Heathenish. The BaniansBanians. M. Withington. are  many, in Sinda and other Countries of the Mogol. There are some thirty Casts of them in Sinda (this is the Countrey which Indus last forsaketh, inhabited by Boloches, and Rasbooches, and Banians, the great Townes and Cities gouerned by Mogols.) These are of thirty different Sects, which may not eate with each other. They must also marry in their owne Cast, Tribe and Sect, and which is more, in the same trade, as the Sonne of a Barber with a Barbers Daughter. These marriages are made when they be yong, sometime almost before they be. For when two women are pregnant, the Parents will make a match betweene their Children,Marriages solemnized betwixt infants. if death or the sexe disappoint not. When they are three or foure yeeres old, the Parents which haue agreed on a match betweene their Children, make  a great feast, and set this young couple on horsebacke (a man behind each of them to hold them) in their best clothes, accompanied with the Bramenes or Priests, and many others according to their state, and so leade them vp and downe the Citie where they dwell, and then to the Pagode or Temple. After Ceremonies there done, they come home and make festiuall cheere certaine dayes, as they are able. At ten yeeres of age they lie together. The burning their dead is common to all their Sects. They are of the Pythagorean, or he was rather of their fancy, which he learned of the Indians. When the husband dies, the wife shaues her head, and weares her jewels no more, so continuing till death. Thus farre Master Withington. M. CouertR. Couert. relateth that they haue God in pictures of stone, hanging their Beades on the heads of the pictures, and then with their faces towards the Sunne doe worship it,  saying all their comforts proceed from it. I saw a Kow adorned with Iewels and a Vest of gold, her head bedecked with garlands and flowers, and then being brought to a burial place, where they vse to make Sermons, they kisse her feet and teats and worship her. I asking why they did so? they answered that she was the mother of beasts, and brought them milke, butter, cheese, and the Oxe to till the ground, and lastly, her Hide did make leather to make them shooes. Moreouer they say, she is blest by the Mother of God to be honored aboue all beasts.
Anominus.Another writes that these Banians are the wisest Merchants in the East, exceeding the Iewes, very rich, some worth 2. or 300000 li. He addes that they pay a great summe to the Mogol to preuent killing of Oxen: and when our men had shot a Turtle-doue through the wings, they will giue a Riall of eight to redeeme and preserue it.N. Downton. Generall Downton in his  last Iournall writes, that when they would haue obtained a Bazar or Market by the shoare: answere was made that they might, but not for Bullocks. For the Mogol had granted his Firma to the Banians for a mighty summe yeerly to saue their liues. For Souldiery these are but shadowes of men, all their Fortitude smoking out in these superstitious speculations, and therefore an easie prey to any Inuader. So true a (...) haue they sustained, being metamorphosed and transanimated from men to blockes, and liuing statues, or to ghosts. Beniamin DayBen. Day. nameth one of their Sects called Ash-men, whose bodies being most part naked, are couered with ashes, whereby they looke like ghosts or dead men. They liue idlely on reliefe not so much as begging. One of these was in great account, with haire hanging to his feet platted together, his nailes fiue or sixe inches long. VertomannusL. verb. lib. 4. is Author, that they  worship not Idols, or Pagodes. Others report, That this way, aad others, they are exceeding religiously deuoted. They obserue a strict kind ofEman. Pinner. Balby saith at other times they eate but one meale a day. cap. 10. fasting, which lasteth with some eight dayes, with others fifteene, twenty, or thirty dayes: in all which space they eate not a bit; onely, when they thirst, drinke water. One could not see when to make an end of this his penance, till his left eye fell out of his head, as both had done before out of his heart. In Cambaia they had one Bramene in such reputation of holinesse and honour, that they would salute him before they meddled with their worldly affaires. One affirmed to this Iesuite, That if his Bramene should command him to distribute all his goods to the poore, he would doe it,An. Dom. 1595. yea, he would lay downe his life at his command.
On the eight day of Ianuarie i, in that Citie, were giuen in almes twenty thousand Pardawes,  (which is in value about a Flemish Dollar;) one man had giuen fiue thousand thereof, another three thousand, another fifteene hundred. The cause was, because that day (as
 their Bramenes affirmed) the Sunne departed from Sur to Horte. Of their Pilgrimages is spoken before; some Eastward to Ganges; some Westward to Mecca, to wit, the Moores; not men alone, but women also: and because Mahomet hath forbidden all vnmarried women this holy Iourney, they will marrie before they set forth, and dissolue the same marriage againe, after their returne. Hereby they thinke to purchase merit with God.
I went one day (sayth Pinnerus) to the publike Hospitall, which the Citizens of Cambaia had founded for all kindes of Birds, to cure them in their sicknesse. Some Peacockes were there incurable, and therefore might haue beene expelled the Hospitall. But (alacke for pitie of so rufull an accident) a Hawke had beene admitted thither for the cure of his  lame legge, which being whole, hee inhospitally slue many of these co-hospitall weaker Fowles, and was therefore expelled this Bird-Colledge by the Master thereof. For Men they had not an Hospitall, that were thus hospitall to Fowles.
They haue certaine Religious persons, called Verteas,The Religious in Cambaia. Pinner. which liue in a Colledge together, and when I went to their House, they were about fiftie in number. They ware white cloth, were bare-headed, and shauen; if that word might bee applied to them, who pull off their haire on their heads and faces, leauing onely a little on their crowne. They liue on almes, nor receiue they but the surplusage of the daily food of him that giueth them. They are wiuelesse. The Orders of their Sect are written in a booke of the Guzarates writing. They drinke their water hot, not for Physike, but deuotion, supposing that the water hath  a Soule, which they should slay, if they dranke the same vnsodden. For the same cause they beare in their hands certaine little brushes, with which they sweepe the floore, before they sit downe, or walke, lest they should kill the soule of some Worme, or other small creature. I saw their Prior thus doing.
The Generall of this Order is said to haue an hundred thousand men vnder his canonicall obedience, and is newly chosen euery yeere. I saw amongst them little boyes, of eight or nine yeere old, resembling the countenances of Europe, rather then of India, by their parents consecrated to this Order. They had all in their mouth a cloth foure fingers broad, let thorow both their eares in a hole, and brought backe againe thorow their cares. They would not shew me the cause; but I perceiued it was, lest some Gnat or Flie should enter  thither, and so bee slaine. They teach that the world was made many hundred thousand yeeres agoe: and that God did then send three and twentie Apostles, and how hath sent the foure and twentieth in this third age, two thousand yeeres since, from which time they haue had writing, which before they had not.
The sameEm. Pinner. Banians. Author in another Epistle saith, That the most of the Inhabitants of Cambaia are Banians. They eat no flesh, nor ^ill any thing yea they redeem the beasts and birds maymed or ficke, and carry them to their Hospitals to be cured. In Guzarat he had seene many Gioghi, a religious Order of Monks, which yeeld to none in Penance and Pouertie. They go naked in cold weather: they sleep on the dung-hils vpon an heape of ashes, with which they couer their head and face. I saw the place where one of these Gioghi kept in the middest of  the Citie Amadeba, to whom, in conceit of holinesse, resorted more numbers of people then to the shoares of Lisbon at the returne of the Indian Fleet. This Gioghi was sent for by the Prince Sultan Morad, sonne of the Mogor, and refused to come,Onesicritus reporteth the like of the Gymnosophists. bidding that the Prince should come to him: It is enough that I am holy, or a Saint to this end. Whereupon, the Prince caused him to be apprehended, and (being soundly whipped) to bee banished.
This people killeth not their Kine, but nourisheth them as their mothers. I saw at Amadeba, when a Kow was ready to die, they offered her fresh grasse, and d^aue he Flies from her: and some of them gaue this attendance two or three dayes after, till shee was dead. A league and a halfe from this Citie, I saw a certaine Coemiterium or burying-place, then which  I had neuer seene a fairer sight, wherein had beene buried one Cazis, the Master of a King of Guzarat, who had erected this fabrike, and three other were buried in another Chappell. The whole worke and pauement was of Marble, contayning three Iles: in one whereof I told foure hundred and fortie pillars with their chapiters and bases of Corinthian worke, very royall and admirable. On one side was a Lake, greater then the Rozzio at Lisbon; and that building was curiously framed with faire windowes, to looke into the Lake.
Balbi telleth of a certaine Temple at Cape Bombain, not farre from Chaul, which is cut out of a Rocke: ouer the said Temple growe many Tamarinds, and v^der it is a Spring of running water, whereof they can finde no bottome. It is called Alefante, is adorned with many Images, a receptacle of Bats, and supposed the worke of Alexander the Great, as  the period of his Peregrination. And hereto agreeth the report of Arrianus in hisArrian. Perip. Mar. E^yth, Periplus of many memorials and monuments of Alexanders Expedition to these Parts, as old Chappels, Altars, Camping-places; and great Pits. These hee mentioneth about Minnagara, which Ortelius in his Map placeth here-away.

LinschotenLinsch. c. 37. Andrea Corsuli. affirmeth the same things of their Pythagorean errour, and addeth that they sometimes buy Fowles or other beasts of the Portugals, which meant to haue dressed them, and let them flie or runne away. In the High-wayes also and Woods they set pots with water, and cast Corne or other graine vpon the ground, to feed the Birds and Beasts, and (to omit their charitable Hospitals before mentioned) if they take a Flea or a Louse, they will not kill it, but put it in some hole or corner in the wall, and so let it goe: and you can doe them no greater iniurie, then to kill it in their presence, which with all intreatie they will resist, as being a hainous sin, to take away the life of that, to which God hath imparted both soule and body: and where words will not preuaile, they will offer money. They eate no Radishes, Onyons, Garlike, or any kind of Herbe, that hath red colour in it, nor Egges, for  they thinke there is bloud in them. They drinke not Wine, nor vse Vinegar, but only Water. They would rather starue, then eat with any, but their countrey-men: as it happened when I sailed from Goa to Cochin with them in a Portugall Ship, when they had spent all their store, the timefalling out longer then they made account of; they would not once touch our meat. They wash themselues euery time they eate, or ease themselues, or make water. Vnder their haire they haue a star vpon their foreheads, which they rub euery morning with a little white Sanders tempered with water, and three or foure graines of Rice among it, which the Bramenes also do as a superstitious ceremony of their law. They sit on the ground in their houses, vpon Mats or Carpets, and so they eate, leauing their shooes (which are piked and hooked) at the doore: for the which cause the heeles of their shooes are seldome  pulled vp, to saue labour of vndoing them.
The MooresOd. Barbosa. amongst them will sometimes abuse the superstition of these Cambayans to their owne couetousnesse, bringing some Worme, Rat, or Sparrow, and threatning to kill the same, so to prouoke them to redeeme the life thereof at some high price. And likewise if a malefactor be condemned to death, they will purchase his life of the Magistrate, and sell him for a slaue. The Moores will sometimes make semblance, as if they would kill themselues, that these foolish Guzzarates may see them in like sort. They will go out of the path, if they light on an Ant-hill, lest they might happily treade on some of them: they sup by day-light, lest their candle-light should occasion the death of some Gnat or Fly. And when they must needs vse a Candle, they keepe it in a Lanthorne for that cause. If  Lice doe much annoy them, they call to them certaine Religious and holy men, after their account: and these ObseruantsThe like lowsie trick is reported in the L^gend of S. Francis, and in the life of Ignatius, of one of the first Iesuitical pillars, by M^ff^eus. will take vpon them all those Lice which the other can find, and put them on their head, there to nourish them. But yet for all this lousie scruple, they sticke not at coozenage by false weights, measures, and coyne, nor at vsury and lies.
Some are saidN. di Cont. to be so zealous in their Idol-seruice, as to sacrifice their liues in their honour; whereunto they are perswaded by the preachings of their Priests, as the most acceptable deuotion. Many offer themselues, which being brought vpon a scaffold, after certaine ceremonies, put about his neck an Iron coller, round without, but within very sharpe: from which hangeth a chaine downe his brest, into which, sitting downe he putteth his feet, and whiles the Priest muttereth certaine words, the party before the people with all his force  stretcheth out his feet, and cuts off his head: their reward is, that they are accounted Saints.



CHAP. IX. Of the Indian Nations betwixt Cambaia and Malabar; and their Religions.

@. I.  Of the seasons of the yeeres: and of the parts next to Cambaya.
THe mightie Riuers of Indus and Ganges, paying their fine to the Lord of waters, the Ocean, almost vnder the very Tropick of Cancer, do (as it were) betwixt their watery armes, present into that their Mothers bosome, this large Chersonesus; A Countrey, full of Kingdomes, riches, people, and (our dewest taske) superstitious customes. As Italy is diuided by the Apennine, and bounded by the Alpes, so is this by the Hils which they call Gate, which goe from East to West (but not directly) and quite thorow to the Cape Comori, which not only haue  entred league with many In-lets of the Sea, to diuide the soyle into many Signiories and Kingdomes, but with the Ayre and Natures higher officers, to dispence with the ordinary
 orders, and established Statues of Nature,Gi. Bot. Ben. Maff. lib. 1. Linschot. lib. 1. cap. 34. Iarric. l. 3. c. 1. at the same time, vnder the same eleuation of the Sun, diuiding to Summer and Winter, their seasons and possessions. For whereas cold is banished out of these Countries (except on the tops of some Hils) and altogether prohibited to approach so neere the Court and presence of the Sun; and therefore their Winter and Summer is not reckoned by heate and cold, but by the fairenesse and foulenesse of weather, which in those parts diuided the yere by equall proportions: at the same time, when on the West-part of this Peninsula, betweene that ridge of Mountaines and the Sea, it is after their appellation Summer, which is from September till April, in which time it is alwayes cleere skie, without once or very little raining; on the other side the hils, which they cal the coast of  Choromandell, it is their Winter; euery day and night yeelding abundance of raines, besides those terrible thunders; which both begin and end their Winter. And from April till September in a contrary vicissitude, on the Westerne part, is Winter, and on the Easterne, Summer; insomuch that in little more then twentie leagues iourney in some place, as where they crosse the Hills to Saint Thomas, on the one side of the Hill you ascend with a faire Summer, on the other you descend attendant with a stormy Winter. The like, saith Linschoten, hapneth at the Cape Rosalgate, in Arabia, and in many other places of the East.
Their Winter also is more fierce then ours, euery man prouiding against the same, as if he had a voyage of so many moneths to passe by Sea, their ships are brought into harbour, their  houses can scarce harbour the Inhabitants against the violent stormes, which choake the Riuers with Sands, and make the Seas vnnauigable. I leaue the causes of these things to the further scanning of Philosophers; the effects and affects thereof are strange. The Sea roareth with a dreadfull noyse: the Windes blow with a certaine course from thence: the people haue a Melancholike season, which they passe away with play. In the Summer the Wind bloweth from the Land, beginning at Midnight, and continuing till Noone, neuer blowing aboue ten leagues into the Sea, and presently after one of the clock vntill midnight, the contrary winde bloweth, keeping their set-times, whereby they make the Land temperate, the heate otherwise would bee vnmeasurable. But this change commonly causeth diseases, Fluxes, Feuers, Vomitings, in dangerous (and to very many, in deadly) manner, as appeareth  at Goa, where, in the Kings Hospitall (which is onely for white men) there die fiue hundred in a yeere. Here you may see both the North and South Starres; and little difference or none is found in the length of day and night throughout the yeere.
Dely, is the next Kingdome to Camboia, now not the next, but the same; the Mountaines which before diuided it, not prohibiting the Mogors Forces to annexe it to his Crowne. Of it is spoken before in the Chapter of Cambaya, as also of Decan, which lyeth along the Coast, betwixt the Riuers Bate and Aliga two hundred and fiftie miles. HereGio. Bot. Ben. Garcias ab Horto. l. 2. c. 28. Linschot, etc. was, as is said, sometimes a Moore King; who, leading a voluptuous and idle life, by his Captaines was dispossessed of his State: the one of these was called Idalcan: whose Seat-Royall is Visapore, who in the yeere 1572. incamped before Goa, which the Portugals had taken from him, with an Army of seuenty thousand Foot, and fiue and thirty thousand Horse, two thousand  Elephants, and two hundred and fiftie pecces of Artilerie. The other was Nizzamalucco, which resideth in Danager, and besieged Chaul (now belonging to the Portugals) with not much lesse forces, against a Captaine of the Venazarie, which are a people that liue on spoyle, as the Resbuti in Cambaia, the Belemi in Delly. Canara or Concam seemeth to haue beene a part of Decan, but is possessed by the King of Narsinga, whose state is on the East side of the Mountaines. It hath in it the Coast-townes of Onor, Batticalla, Mayander and Mangalor,Lins. l. 1. c. 27. famous for trafficke, but eclipsed by the Portugals neighbourhood.
The Religion of these parts is partly Mahumetan, partly Heathenish.Iarric. Thes. rerum Indic. l. 3. Th^se haue their proper Iolatries, as wee haue before noted, peculiar Idols and Sects to peculiar Tribes and  Trades. They haue also more common Rites, worshipping the Images of diuers Beasts, Elephants, Kine, Apes, and the like, to which they dedicate Pagodes or Temples. They haue other common deuotions, and haue appropriated to War, to Seed, to Fortune, to Life, to Death,No exact order can bee v^ed in relating so confused Rites. seuerall Deities. The Deuill they worship in horrible forme, as we shall after see; for in this confusion the Reader must pardon, if we do not keep exact order alway, besides that in seuerall places the Rites somewhat differ in these which are accounted of one Sect. They paint him blacke, because to that colour they ascribe beauty: and in more solemne Festiuals with Oile, Suet, and fat Grease, and make them as lothsome to the Sent, as to the Eie. So senselesse is their Religion, and yet addicted the sense, and sensible Images (as they do their Temples they call these Pagodes) and sacrifice there to Goates, Sheep, and other Beasts, but not Kine,  which they doe account sacred, and worship the same, esteeming that man most happy that dyeth in the presence of that beast or touching the same; perswading themselues, that the departing soule passeth into one of these creatures. They will performe more pietie (let Piety
 pardon such abuse of the Name) to a Cow dying, then to their deceasing Parents: And would account it a hainous crime at vnawares to haue killed such a beast, seeking by sacrifices and offerings to turne away Diuine vengeance, after so Humane and accidentall error.


@. II. Of Goa, the Heathens and Christians liuing therein, and the Countrey about.
GOaOf Goa, reade Arthus hist. Ind. c. 15. Linschot. Al. Valignan. is the Seat of the Vice-Roy, and of the Arch-Bishop, and of the Kings Councell  for the Indies, and the Staple of all Indian commodities. It standeth in a little Iland, in nineteene degrees, called TizzuarinTizzuarin signifies thirtie villages; for so many it seemes were then there. nine miles long, and three broad, in circuit one and twentie. Bardes on the North, and Salzette are both in like subiection to the Portugalls; the King letting them to Farme, and employing the Rents to the payment of the Arch-bishop, Gloysters, Priests, Vice-Roy, and other his Officers. Salsette is nine miles from Goa, being a Peninsula twentie miles about, containing sixtie sixe Villages or Townes, and about fourescore thousand Inhabitants. Antonius Norogna the Vice-Roy, destroyed therein two hundred Temples, some of them sumptuous, 1567. and many Pagodes, which caused them to rebell, and afterwards they slew some of the Iesuites and their company.
BarrosDec. 1. l. 8. c. vlt. and Dec. 2. l. 5. c. 1. relates, that the King of Bisnaga, hauing warres with the Moores of Decan, and  being then Lord of the Ports of Batecala and Onor, where hee had store of Hors^s out of Arabia, and Persia, brought thither by Merchants, seruiceable for his Warres: the Moores in those parts forestalled the Market, and sold the Horses to the Decans his Enemies. Wherevpon he commanded the King of Onor his Vassall, to kill all the Moores in the Countrey, which was effected to the death of ten thousand Moores. The rest that escaped gate them to the Iland of Tizuarin, and first peopled this Citie of Goa, translating the Mart from Onor thither: but the King of Onor by a power at Sea forced the trade to be kept still at Onor, till the Portugals came into those parts. This murther of the Moores was done, An. 1479. The Founders name was Mellique Hocen. This is to be vnderstood of this New Towne, for of the Ancient there is no memory. It seemes by a Crosse there found, that it had beene inhabited  by Christians. It stands in that part which is reckoned to the Kingdome of Canara. Sabaius (one of those Decanine Captaines, which shared their Masters state, as before is deliuered) when he died, left his sonne Idalcan very young; whereupon his Subiects rebelled, and the King of Narsinga warred vpon him, to dispossesse him of his Dominion. Abulquerke taking that opportunitie, besieged, and vpon composition, tooke Goa with the Iland. Which was soone after recouered by Idalcan, comming with a strong Armie thither, the Portugals flying away by night. But when the King of Narsinga againe inuaded Idalcan. He was forced to resist the more dangerous Enemy, leauing a strong Garrison at Goa, which yet Albuquerk ouercame, and sacked the Citie. Euer since, as standing in the midst of that  Tract of land, from Cambaia to Comori, it hath beene thought the fittest Staple for Merchandize, and Seat for the Vice-Roy, the Chiefe of the foure chiefe Cities in the Indies. The three other, Ormus, Diu, and Malaca.
There dwell in Goa of all Nations and Religions. The Gouernment is as in Portugall. Onely publike vse of forraine Religion is forbidden them: but in their houses priuately, or on the maine land, they may practise the same. The Portugals many of them are married with Indian women, and their posteritie are called Mesticos, and in the third degree, differ nothing in colour and fashion from naturall Indians. Of the Portugals they reckon two sorts, married Men, and Souldiers, which is a generall name to all Batchellers, although they are at their owne command. Of these are many Knights, and are called Caualhiero Fidalgo:  for if a man doe any thing worth reckoning, presently his Captaine imparteth this honor to him; whereof they much boast themselues, albeit that this Knight-hood hath descended to Cookes boyes. Many of the Portugals liue onely by their slaues. They vse great Ceremony or Pride (whether you will call it) in their behauiour: the particulars whereof letLins. l. 1. c. 28.29, 30, 31, 32. Linschoten, that there liued amongst them, teach you.
Besides both Abassine and Armenian Christians, Iewes, and Moores, here are many Heathens. The Moores eate, all things, but Swines flesh, and dying, are buried like the Iewes. The Heathens, as Decanijus, Guzarates, and Canarijns, are burnt to ashes, and some women aliue are buried with the Gentlemen or Bramenes, their husbands. Some will eate nothing that had life; some all but the flesh of Kine, or Buffles. Most of them pray to the Sunne and  Moon: yet all acknowledge a God that made al things, and ruleth them after this life, rendring to all according to their works. As for the Idols or Pagodes, they worship them, saith Balby,Balb c. 23.
 euen as wee adore in the Images that which they represent vnto vs. A good Argument for Image-worship.
But they haue Pagodes, which are Images cut and framed most vgly, and like monstrous Deuils, to whom they pray and offer: and to Saints which here haue liued holy, and are now Intercessours for them. The Deuill often answereth them out of those Images,Balb. c. 22. to whom also they offer, that he should not hurt them. They present their Pagode (when a marriage is to be solemnized) with the Brides mayden-head; two of her neerest kins-women forcing her vpon the Iuory pin or member of stone (leauing the bloud there for a monument) of that Deuilish Idoll; the husband herein applauding His happinesse. Not much vnlike the beastly  custome of the Romane Dames,Lact. l. 1. c. 20. Aug. de C. D l. 6. c. 9. Ros^anus Antiq. 1. 2. which being newly married were caused to sit on Priapus his! But who can honestly name that which they dishonestly doe? They haue for the most part, a custome to pray vnto the first thing they meet withall in the morning, and all that day they pray vnto it; be it Hog, or any other thing. But if they first meet with a Crow (whereof there are great store) they will not for any thing stirre out againe that day, after so vnlucky a signe. They pray likewise to the New Moone, saluting her first appearance on their knees. They haue Iogos or Hermites, reputed very holy. Many Iuglers also and Witches, which shew deuilish tricks. They neuer goe forth without praying. Euery Hill, Cliffe, Hole, or Den, hath his Pagodes in it, with their Furnaces hard by them, and their Cisternes alwayes full of water, with which euery one that passeth by, washeth his feet, and  then worshippeth and offereth Rice, Egges, or what else their deuotion will affoord: which the Bramene eateth. When they are to goe to Sea, they will feast their Pagode with Trumpets, Fires, and hangings, fourteene dayes before they set forth, to obtaine a good voyage: and as long after their returne; which they vse to doe in all their Feasts, Marriages, Child-births, and their Haruest and Seed-seasons.
The Indian women in Goa, when they goe forth, haue but one cloth about their bodies, which couereth their heads, and hangeth downe to the knees, otherwise naked. They haue rings thorow their noses, about their legs, toes, neckes, and armes, and seuen or eight bracelets vpon their hands (according to their abilitie) of glasse or other metall. When the woman is seuen yeeres old, and the man nine, they marry, but come not together till the woman  is able to beare children. Mr. Fitch mentionethR. Fitch. the solemnitie of these marriages, and the cause to be the burning of the mother when the father is dead, that they might haue a father-in-law to bring them vp.
To leaue Goa with this Iland. The Canaras and Decanijns weare their beards and haire long, without cutting, as the Bramenes. They except from food, Kine, Hogs, and Buffles. They account the Oxe, Cow, or Buffle to be holy, which they haue commonly in the house with them, and they belmeere, stroke, and handle them with all friendship in the world; feed them with the same meat they eate themselues; and when the beasts ease themselues, they hold vnder their hands, and throw the dung away: they sleepe with them in their houses, hereby thinking to doe God seruice. In other things they are as the Bramenes. For those  are the Laitie, these are the Spiritualtie. When they take their oathes, they are set within a circle of ashes, on the pauement, and laying a few ashes on their heads, the other on their breasts; sweare by their Pagodes to tell the truth.
The Canarijns and the Corumbijns are the rustickes, and Countrey-husbandmen, the most miserable people of all India: their Religion is much as the other. They couer onely their Priuities, and eate all things, except Kine, Oxen, Buffles, Hogs, and Hens flesh. Their women binde a cloth about their Nauell, which reacheth halfe way the thigh: they are deliuered alone by themselues, without other helpe: their children are brought vp naked, till they be seuen or eight yeeres old, without any trouble about them, except washing them in a little cold water, and liue to be an hundred yeeres old, without head-ache or losse of teeth. They  nourish a cuffe of haire on their crownes, cutting the rest. When the man is dead, the wife breaketh her glasse-jewels, and cutteth off her haire; his bodie is burnt. They eate so little, as if they liued by the ayre: and for a penny would endure whipping.
In Salsette are two Temples, or holes rather of Pagodes, renowned in all India: one of which is cut from vnder a hill, of hard stone, and is of compasse within, about the bignesse of Village of foure hundred Houses: with many Galleries or Chambers of these deformed shapes, one higher then another, cut out of the hard Rock. There are in all three hundred of these Galleries. The other is in another place, of like matter and forme. It would make a mans haire stand vpright to enter amongst them. In a little Iland called Pory, there standeth a high Hill, on the top whereof is a hole, that goeth downe on the Hill, digged and carued  out of the hard Rocke; within, as large as a great Cloyster, round beset with shapes of Elephants, Tygres, Amazons, and other like worke, workemanly cut, supposed to be the Chinois handy-worke. But the Portugals haue now ouerthrowne these Idol-Temples. Would
 God they had not set new Idols in the roome; with like practice of offerings and Pilgrimages, as did these to their Pagode.
I onceLinscho^. went into a Temple of stone, in a Village, and found nothing in it, but a great Table that hung in the middle of the Church, with the Image of a Pagode thereon painted, hellishly disfigured with many hornes, long teeth out of the mouth downe to the knees, and and beneath his nauell with such another tusked (...) horned face. Vpon the head stood a triple crowne, not much vnlike the Popes. It hung before a wall, which made a partition from another Chamber, like a Quire, close without any light: in the middle whereof was a little doore, and on each side of it a furnace within the wall, with certaine holes, thereby to let the smoake or sauour of the fire to enter into that place, when any offering should bee  made. Whereof wee found there some Rice, Corne, Fruits Hens, and such like. There issued thence such a filthy smoake and stinke, that it made the place black, and almost choaked such as entred. We desired the Bramene to open the doore, which with much entreatie he did, offering first to throw ashes on our fore-heads, which wee refused, so that before hee would open vs the doore, we were forced to promise him not to enter beyond the doore. It shewed within like a lime-kill, being close vaulted, without hole or window: neither had the Church it selfe any light but the doore. Within the the said Cell hung an hundred burning Lampes, and in the middle stood a little Altar couered with Cotton Cloth, and ouer that with Gold; vnder which, as the Bramene told vs, sate the Pagode all of Gold, of the bignesse of a Puppet.  
Hard by the Church without the great doore, stood within the earth a great fouresquare Cisterne, hewed out of freestone, with staires on each side to goe downe into it, full of greene, filthy, and stinking water, wherein they wash themselues, when they meane to enter into the Church to pray. In the euening they carried their Pagode on Procession, first Ringing a Bell, wherewith the people assembled, and tooke the Pagode out of his Cell with great reuerence, and set it in a Palamkin, which was borne by the chiefe men of the Towne; the rest following with great deuotion, with their vsuall noise and sound of Trumpets, and other Instruments; and hauing carried him a prettie circuit, brought him to the stone Cisterne, washed him, and placed him againe in his Cell, making a foule smoake and stinke, and euery man leauing his offering behind him, intended to the Pagode, but consumed by the Bramene  and his family. As we went along by the wayes, we found many such shapes vnder certaine couertures, with a small Cisterne of water hard by, and halfe an Indian Nut hanging thereby, to take vp water withall, for the Trauellers to wash and pray. By the said Pagodes doe stand commonly a Calfe of stone, and two little Furnaces; before which they present their offerings. My fellow leaping on one of those Calues in the Church, the Bramane called out, and the people came running, but we stayed their fury, by gentle perswasion of the Bramene before. And thus much of these deformed formes, and misshapen shapes, with their woshippings and worshippers sutable. Like lips, like lettice. Vaine Rites, stinking sinks and smoakes, vgly Idols, conspiring with Internall Darkenesse of the Mindes, and Externall Darkenesse of their Temples, to bring an Eternall Darkenesse to the Followers, that all may shut vp (as they  are begun) in an hellish period.
Don Duart de Menezes. He summ^th the publike ordinary expences of the Port in India, at ^34 199. li. 5. sh. 11. d. o^.I haue seene in Mr. Hakluites hands a large Treatise, written by Don Duart de Menezes of the Customes, Courts, Officers, Expences, and other remarkeable obseruations, for knowledge of the Portugall State and affaires, in the East Indies. He saith, that the Iland Tisoare (so he writeth it) in which Goa standeth, hath thirtie two Townes and Villages therein. The Iesuits Colledge in Salsete enioyethIn Sals. are fiue Churches, S. F. the Rents before belonging to the Pagodes, being two hundred and fiftie pound yeerely, besides their Glebe-lands of Rice grounds, and other commodities: also the Parishes subiect to them are worth two hundred ninetie eight pounds, and sixteen shillings. In Goa they receiue seuen hundred and fifteene pound, twelue shillings and sixe pence per Annum, and their yeerely Presents amount to three hundred seuentie  fiue pound. In Cochin also they haue three hundred thirtie seuen pound. The Monastery of Saint Francis in Goa hath Rents sixe hundred and thirteene pound and ten shillings, and one hundred fortie three pound twelue shillings and sixe pence in other duties. The Dominicans receiue fiue hundred pound, and fourescore and ten pound in other rights. The Friars of Saint Augustine fourescore pound twelue shillings and sixe pence. The Inquisition one hundred three pound and ten shillings (besides the Rents of the Hospitall, one thousand eight hundred seuenty fiue pound, and an Almes-house for Widowes and Orphans two hundred and fiftie pound.) These things I thought worthy relation, not so much to satisfie the curious, as to answere the ordinary brags of that World-wandring Generation, pretending Mortification to the World, strictnesse of their Vow, loue to Religion, and compassion  to the poore Pagans; when as they haue such Golden chaines to draw them thither. Whereunto if wee adde the bountie of Christians in those parts vnto these pretended holy
 Fathers, their gaines from the pearle-fishings, the vowesSee Linschot in the story of I. Newbery, etc. l. 1. c. 92. of such as become of their Societie, and many other wayes accruing to their Coffers, together with those nouelties and rarities, wherewith euery sense in varietie is here presented; wee may see the World a sufficient argument to lead them about the world, whatsoeuer other pretences notwithstanding. But this hath beene learnedly handled against them by others already: amongst others and before others, Our most Reuerend and learned Metropolitan,Arch. Abbo^ against Hill. Reason 4. and 5. in vnmasking the reasons of Hill for Popery, hath shewed both this our Hill to be an ignorant Mountebanke, and our Iesuites in India rather enrichers of their owne Societie in Europe with Gold, Pearle, Spice, and other Indian wares, then of those Asian Proselites with sound Europaean Christianitie; besides  that, they seeme necessary to their Nation for the establishing of their Trading and ciuill affaires, vnder colour of Religion, winning estimation with the Pagans, and remaining there as well for Intelligencers, and as it were Leeger Embassadours with their Kings, as for Conuersion of the Heathens. For me, what I can shew against this their allegation, belongeth to another taske.


@. III.Linschot. Of the Indian Bramenes, both Secular and Religious.
 THe Indian Wisemen may be diuided into two Sects, the Banianes, of whom is already spoken; and the Bramenes. These obserue the Indian Heathen custome, that no man may change his fathers trade, but must succeed in the same, and marry a wife also of the same Tribe. The Brachmanni, or, as they are at this day called, the Bramenes (who haue their shops, as well as other Merchants, throughout the Cities) are the chiefe Tribe, and of best reputation, and weare in signe of their profession (from the shoulder, crosse vnder the arme, vpon their naked body, downe to the girdle) three strings like sealing threeds: which for their liues they will not, nor may by their vow put off. They are naked, sauing that about their middles they haue a cloth bound to hide their priuities.  And sometime when they goe abroad, they cast a thin Gowne ouer them. Vpon their heads they were a white cloth, wound twice or thrice about therewith, to hide their haire, which they neuer cut off, but weare it long, and turned vp as the women doe. They haue commonly hanging at their eares, Gold-rings. They are very subtill in writing and accounts, making other simple Indians beleeue what they will. Whatsoeuer they meet first with in the streets, they pray to all day after.
When the Bramenes die,Ceremonies at the death of a Bramene. all their friends assemble together, and make a hole in the ground, in which they throw much sweet Wood, Spices, Rice, Corne, and Oyle. Then lay therein the dead body; his wife followeth with Musicke, and many of her neerest friends, singing praises in commendation of her husbands life, encouraging her to follow him, which accordingly she doth. For parting her Iewels among her friends, with a cheerefull countenance  she leapes into the fire, and is presently couered with Wood, and Oyle, whereby shee is quickly dead, and with her husbands body burned to ashes. And if it chanceth (which is seldome) that any woman refuseth this Fiery Coniunction, they cut the haire cleane off from her head; neither may shee after that weare a Iewell, but is accounted a dishonest woman. This custome is (as may appeare) very ancient, and supposed to haue beene ordained because of the libidinous disposition of the Indian women, which for their lusts would poyson their husbands.
The Bramenes obserue Fasting-dayes with so great abstinence, that they eat nothing that day, and sometime not in three or foure dayes together. They tell many miracles of their  Pagodes. They hold the immortalitie of the Soule, both of Beasts and Men, and that so often mentioned Pythagorean succession, and renuing of mens soules in beasts; and contrariwise. They by the direction af the Deuill (the author of their miracles) frame such deformed Statues to their Idols.
Botero saith, the Bramenes also worshipGi. Bot. Ben. 2. part. 3. Maff. l. 1. one Parabramma, and his three sonnes, and in honour of them weare those three threeds aforesaid. He affirmeth that the Ioghi wander vp and downe through India, abstaining from all carnall pleasure, but a certaine time; which being expired, they are past possibilitie of further sinning, and are then called Abduti, as the Illuminate Elders of the Familists, polluting themselues in all filthinesse.Od. Barbosa. The Bramenes b haue Images of the Trinitie, and haue in religious estimation the number of Three. They acknowledge  and pray to the Trinitie in Vnitie; but affirme many Demi-gods, which are his Deputies in gouerning the World. They honour the Portugals Images also, as approaching to their owne superstition. They marry but one wife, and admit no second succeeding marriage.
 The Bramenes must descend of the Bramene Tribe, and others cannot aspire to that Priesthood: but some are of higher account then other. For some serue for messengers, which in time of warre, and among theeues may passe safely, and are called Fathers. They will not put a Bramene to death for any crime.Heur. Indic. c. 3. Heurnius reporteth that they haue bookes and Prophets, which they alledge for confirmation of their opinions: that they thinke God to be of blacke colour: that they worship the herbe Amaracus or Marioram with many superstitious Ceremonies: that they haue in their writings the Decalogue, with the explanation thereof: that they adjure all of their Society vnto silence touching their mysteries: that they haue a peculiar language (as Latine in these parts) wherein they teach the same in their Schooles: that their Doctors hallow the Sundayes in diuine worship,  adoring the God which created heauen and earth, often repeating the sentence, I adore thee, O God, with thy grace and aide for euer: to take food from the hands of a Christian, they account as sacrilege.
When they are seuen yeeres old,Od. Barbosa. they put about their necke a string two fingers broad, made of the skinne of a beast called Cressuamengan, like a wilde Asse, together with the haire: which he weareth till he is fourteene yeeres old, all which time he may not eate BetelleBetelle, a leafe.. That time expired, the said string is taken away, and another of three threeds put on, in signe that hee is become a Bramene which hee weareth all his life. They haue a Principall amongst them, which is their Bishop, which correcteth them if they doe amisse. They marrie but once, as is said, and that not all, but onely the eldest of the brethen, to  continue the Succession, who is also heire of the fathers substance, and keepeth his wife straitly, killing her, if he finde her adulterous, with poison. The yonger brethren lie with other mens wiues, which account the same as a singular honour done vnto them; hauing libertie,Balb. voyag. c. 26. as Balby affirmeth, to enter into any mans house, yea of the Kings no lesse then of the Subjects, of that Religion: the husbands leauing the wiues, and the brethren their sisters vnto their pleasures, and therefore departing out of the house when they come in. And hence it is that no mans sonne inheriteth his fathers goods, (and I knowe not whether they may inherite that name of father or sonne) but the sisters sonne succeedeth, as being most certaine of the bloud.Nicolas Withington. They eate but once a day, and wash before and after meate, as also when they make water and goe to stoole.
They haue great cournu^s belonging to their Churches, besides offerings, and at set  houres of the day resor^ thither to sing, and doe other their holy Rites. Twice in the day, and as often in the night, their Pagode is taken out of the Altar, and set on the Bramenes head, looking backward, and is carried in Procession three times about the Church; the Bramenes wiues carrying lights burning: euery time they come to the principall doore of the Church, which is on the West side thereof (some Churches haue two doores on a side) they set it downe on their offering-stone, and worship it. Twice a day they bring it to eate of their sod Rice, as often (it seemeth) as the Bramene is hungry. When they wash them (which is often) they lay a little ashes on their heads, foreheads, and breasts, saying that they shall returne into ashes. When the Bramenes wife is with childe, as soone as he knoweth  it, he cleanseth his teeth, and abstaineth from B^telle, and obserueth fasting till shee bee deliuered.Sumario di pop. Orient. The Kings of Malabar will scarce eate meate but of their dressing. They are of such estimation, that if Merchants trauell among theeues and robbers, one Bramene in the companie secureth them all: which Bramene will eate nothing of another mans dressing; and would not become a Moore for a Kingdome. Nic. di Conti saith,Nic. di Conti. he saw a Bramene three hundred yeeres old: hee addeth that they are studious in Astrologie, Geomancie, and Philosophie. To be short, they are the Masters of Ceremonies and the Indian Religion, in whose precepts the Kings are trained vp.
Iarric. l. 3. Thes. Indic.The Bramenes haue (it seemeth) much familiaritie with the Deuill, so strangely doe they foretell things to come, though they bee contingent. They also interpret Prodigies, Lots,  Auguries, and thereby growe into great credit, the people depending on them, and the Kings becomming of their Order. They perswade the people that their Pagodes doe often feast together, and therefore would haue such dainties offered, which they and theirs deuoure: threatning if they be sparing and niggardly, plenty of Plagues and diuine wrath.
Besides these Secular, There are other Religious or Monasticall Bramenes, which are called Iogues; anciently called by the Greekes, Gymnosophists, because they went naked; and so they still doe, professing much austeritie of life, at least for a time, with long Pilgrimages,1. Tim. 4.8. and much bodily exercise little profiting the soule, possessing nothing but want and beggarie, seeking thereby to winne credite to themselues and their Sect. The Verteas I take to bee another Sect, the religious Votaries of the Banians or Pythagoreans. Both  those and these are kindes of Ethnike Monkes, which professe by strict penance and regular obseruations, to expiateSeb. Ferdinandus. their sinnes, and procure saluation to their soules. There are
 also some that liue as Heremites in Desarts, some in Colledges, some wander from place to place begging: some (an vnlearned kind) are called Sanasses:Nic. Pimenta. Iarric. l. 6. c. 22. some contrary to the rest, nothing esteeme Idols, obserue chastitie twenty or fiue and twenty yeeres, and feed daily on the pith of a fruit called Caruza, to preserue in them that cold humour, neither doe they abstaine from flesh, fish, or wine, and when they passe along the way, one goeth before them crying Poo, Poo, that is, way, way, that women especially may auoid: for their vow will not permit the sight of a woman. These weare not the three threads which the other Bramenes weare, neither are their bodies burned after death, as of the rest, yea, the King himselfe honoreth them, and not they the King: some liue inclosed in iron Cages all filthie with ashes,  which they strew on their heads and garments: some burne some part of their body voluntarily. All are vain-glorious, and seeke rather the shell, then the kernell, the shew, then the substance of holinesse.
Xauerius once in conference with the Bramens,Xauerij vita l. 2. c. 9. Iarric. l. 3. c. 8. demanding of them what their God commanded to those that would come to Heauen, was answered; Two precepts, one to abstaine from killing of Kine, in whose shape the Gods were worshipped: and the other to obserue the Bramenes, the Ministers of their Gods. But they haue more mysticall learning, which one of them secretly disclosed to the Iesuite. This was of a famous Schoole, College or Vniuersity of those Bramenes, all the Students whereof at their first Admission, he said, were sworne by solemne Oath vnto their Doctors, neuer to reueale any of their secrets; First, that there was  one God, maker of Heauen and Earth, who alone, and not the Pagodes, ought to be worshipped: after that, they were instructed in precepts necessary to saluation. Xauerius asking what?The Decalogue. he repeated the Ten Co^mandements in order as we do, and that in a mystical language known to few, which their Doctors obserue in their holy things. But the Bramene pronounced and explained them in the vulgar. Further, that the eight day, or Sunday is to be kept holy, and then often to repeat the prayer Oncery Naraiua Noma (the same which before is related and interpreted out of Heurnius) this to be spoken with a lowe voice that they breake not their Oath: likewise that their old bookes foretell of a time when all shall be of one Religion.
Fenicius another Iesuite learned of one of their Doctors,Iacob. Fenicius. other their mysteries contained in their Bookes, that God produced all this world out of an Egge: out of one part thereof the  Land, Sea, and inferiour creatures: out of the other, the Heauens for habitation to the Gods: that this World was founded on the end of a Buffals horne, and because this beast leaned on one side ready to fall, a huge Rocke was placed vnder him to support him. But as before, so here also followed some notice of better things. For there was a Malabar Poet which writ 900. epigrams against their Pagodes, each consisting of eight verses; wherein he speakes many things elegantly of the Diuine Prouidence, of Heauen, and the torments of Hell, and other things agreeing to the Christian Faith; that God is present euery where, and giues to euery one according to his estate, that Celestiall blessednesse consists in the vision of God, that the damned in Hell shall be tormented 400. millions of yeeres in flames, and shall neuer die: Thebramenes he calls fooles and blockes. By this booke, and by Mathematicall doctrine of  the Sphere, which they had scarcely euer heard of, he made way for conuerting the people.
I haue thought good to say thus much together of them, as in one view representing the Bramenes; a name so anciently, so vniuersally communicated to the Indian Priests, although some particulars before haue beene, or hereafter may be said touching some of them in other places, according to the singularitie of each Nation in this so manifold a profession, which they all demonstrate in their singular Superstitions.



CHAP. X. Of the Regions and Religions of Malabar.

@. I. Of the Kingdome of Calicut.
MAlabar extendeth it selfe from the Riuer Congeraco to the Cape Comori; which some take to be the Promontory Cory, inPtol. l. 7. c. 1. Ptolomey: Maginus doubteth, whether it be that which he calleth Commaria Extrema. In the length it containeth little lesse then three hundred miles, in bredth from that ridge  of Gate to the Sea, in some places, fifty. From Cangerecora to Puripatan areBar. Dec. 1. l. 9. c. 1. 60. miles of Coast; therein Cota, Colan, Nilichilan, Marabia, Bolepatan, Cananor, where the Portugals haue a Fort, in 12. degrees; Tramapatan, Chomba,
 Main, and Perepatan. From thence to Chatua is the Kingdome of Calicut fourescore miles 11 coast therein Pandarane, Colete, Capocate, Calecut in 11. 15. Chale a Portugall Fortresse, Pa^angale. Tanor a Citie Royall, Pananc, Baleancor and Chatua. Then followes the Kingdome of Cranganor. Next to that the Kingdome of Cochin: then that of Porca without a good Port in her foure and fortie miles coast. Coulan is next, and then that of Trauancor, which the Portugals called the Great King, as being greater in State then the former, subject to the King of Narsinga. It is full of people, diuided into many States, by variety of Riuers, which cause Horses to be vnseruiceable in their Warres, and nourish many Crocodiles, enrich the soyle, and yeeld easie transportation of commodities, which are spices of diuers kindes. They haue Bats, in shape resembling Foxes, in bignesse Kites.  The chiefe Kingdomes in this tract are Kanonor, Calicut, Cranganor, Cochin, Carcolam, and Trauancor. AboutL^p Castaneda lib. 1. Od. Barb^sa. G. Bot. Ben. Linschot. G. Arthus, hist. c. 26. 27. and seq. seuen hundred yeeres since it was one Kingdome, gouerned by Soma or Sarama Perimal, who by perswasion of the Arabian Merchants became of their Sect, in which he proued so deuout, that he would end his dayes at Mecca. But before his departure he diuided his estate into these pety Signiories, among his principall Nobles and kindred: leauing vnto Coulam the spirituall preeminence, and the Imperiall Title vnto his Nephew of Calicu^, who onely enjoyed the title of Zamori, or Emperour, and had prerogatiue of stamping coyne. Some exempt from this Zamorin Empire and Allegeance, both Coulam, the Papall See of the high Bramene, and Cananor: and some haue since by their owne force exempted themselues. This Perimal died in his holy Voyage: and the Indians  of Malabar reckon from this diuision, their computation of yeeres, as we doe from the blessed Natiuitie of our Lord. He left (saith Castaneda) to himselfe but twelue leagues of his Countrie, which lay neere to the shoare, where he meant to embarque himselfe, neuer before inhabited: this he gaue to a Cousin of his then his Page, commanding that in memorie of his embarquing there it should be inhabited, and the rest to take Him for their Emperour (except the Kings of Coulan and Cananor) whom yet with the rest he commanded not to coine money, but onely the King of Calicut. For Calicut was therefore here built: and the Moores for the embarquing tooke such deuotion to the place, that they would no more frequent the Port of Coulan, as before (which therefore grew to ruine) but made Calicut the Staple of their Merchandise.  
Calicut, the first in order with them, shall bee so with vs. The Citie is not walled nor faire built, the ground not yeelding firme foundation, by reason of the water which issueth if it be digged. This Kingdome hath not aboue fiue and twenty leagues of Sea-coast, yet rich both by the fertilitie of the soyle, which yeeldeth Corne, Spices, Cocos, Iaceros, and many other fruits: and by the situation; as the Staple especially before the Portugals vnfriendly neighbourhood, of Indian merchandise, and therefore in her varietie of Merchants, being a Map (as it were) of all that Easterne World. TheIosephus Indus. Egyptians, Persians, Syrians, Arabians, Indians; yea euen from Catay the space of sixe thousand miles journey, here had their trade and traffique. The Palace also contained foure Halls of Audience, according to their Religions, for the Indians, Moores, Iewes, Christians. Of their Bramenes or Priests  we haue already said. They yeeld diuine honours to diuers of their deceased Saints, and build Temples vnto beasts. One of which (dedicated to an Ape) hath a large Porch for cattell, to the vse of Sacrifice, in which are (saithMaff. lib. 1. Maffaeus) seuen hundred marble Pillars, not inferiour to those of Agrippa in the Roman Pantheon. It seemeth that the ground in that place is not of so queasy and watery a stomacke, but that it can digest deepe foundations. To Elephants they attribute like Diuinitie: but most of all to Kine, supposing that the soules of Men departed doe most of all enter into these beasts. They haue many bookes of their superstition, neere the Augurall discipline of the Hetrurians, and fond fables of the Graecians: and diligently conceale the same from vulgar knowledge, except some Bramene Proselyte doe detect those mysteries.Lud. Vert. lib. 5. cap. 2. They beleeue one God, maker of Heauen and Earth,  but adde that he could haue no pleasure in so weighty a charge of gouerning the world, and therefore hath delegated the same to the Deuill, to reward euery man according to his workes; Him they call Deumo: they name GOD Tamerani.. The King hath in his Palace the Chappell of Deumo, carued full of Deuils, and in the middest sitteth this Image of metall in a Throne of the same matter, with a triple Crowne, like the Popes, and foure hornes, with teeth, eyes, and mouth wide and terrible, hooked hands, and feet like a Cocke. In each corner of this square Chappell is a Deuill set in a fiery Throne, wherein are many Soules, the Deuill putting one with his right hand into his mouth, and taking another from vnder him with his left hand. This Idoll is washed by the Bramenes with sweet water, incensed, and worshipped euery morning. Somtime in the weeke they sacrifice on this manner:  They haue an Altar strewed with flowers, on which they put the bloud of a Cocke, and coales of fire in a siluer Chafing-dish, with much perfumes incensing about the Altar, and
 often ri^ging with a little Bell of siluer. They hold in their hands a siluer Knife, with which the Cocke was killed, which they dip in the bloud, and put into the fire with many Apish g^^tures. All the bloud is thus burned, many Waxe-candles burning meane-while. The Priest hath on his wrists and legs as it were Morrice-bels, which make a great no^e, a certaine Table hanging at his necke: and when he hath ended his Sacrifice, he taketh his hands full of Wheat, goeth backward from the Altar (on which hee alwaies fixeth his eies) to a certaine Tree, and then hurleth the Corne vp ouer his head as high as he can: after which he returneth and vnfurnisheth the Altar. The King of Calicut eateth no meate, before foure principall Bramenes haue first offered thereof to the Deuill, which they do lifting both their  hands ouer their heads, and shutting their fists draw back the same with their thumbe, presenting of that meate to the Idoll, and then carrie it to the King on a great Leafe, in a Treene Platter. The King sitteth on the ground at his meate, without any thing vnder him, attended with Bramenes, standing foure paces off, with their hands before their mouthes in great reuerence. And after the King hath eaten, those Priests carry the Relikes into the Court, where they clap thrice with their hands, whereat presently certaine Crowes resort thither to eate the Kings leauings, which Crowes are hereunto accustomed, and may not bee hurt of any.
When the King marrieth a wife,Castaneda and Barbosa saith, that she is not married, but as his Concubine one of the principall Bramenes hath the first nights lodging with hee, for which he hath assigned him by the King foure hundred or fiue hundred  Ducats. The King and his Gentlemen, or Nayros, eate not flesh without license of the Bramenes. The King committeth the custodie of his Wife to the Bramenes when he trauelleth any whither, and taketh in too honest part their dishonest familiaritie. But for this cause, the Kings Sonne succeedeth not in the Crowne, but his sisters Sonne, as being certainly of his blood. These sisters of the King choose what Gentleman they please, on whom to bestow their Virginitie and if they proue not in a certaine time to be with child, they betake them go these Bramene-stallions.
The Gentlemen and Merchants haue a custome to exchange Wiues, in token of great friendship. Some women amongst them haue sixeH. de Sancto Stephan^. or seuen Husbands, fathering her children on which of them shee best pleaseth. The Men when they marry, get others to vse  them (if they bee Virgins) fifteene or twentie dayes before they themselues will bed them. This Author affirmeth, that there were a thousand Families of Christians in Calicut, at the time of his being there, a hundred and twentie yeeres since.
If a Debtor breake day with his Creditor, and often disapoint him, hee goeth to the principall of the Bramenes, and receiueth of him a Rod, with which he approcheth to the Debter, and making a Circle about him, chargeth him in the name of the King, and the said Bramene, not to depart thence till he hath satisfied the Debt, which if he do not, he must starue in the place: for if he depart, the King will cause him to be executed.^d. Barbosa. The new King for one yeeres space eateth neither Fish nor Flesh, nor cutteth his Haire or Nailes, vseth certaine Prayers daily, eateth but one meale, and that after he hath washed, neither may hee looke on any man till he hath ended his repast. At the yeeres end hee maketh a great Feast, to which  resort aboue ten thousand persons to confirme the Prince and his Officers: and then much Almes is giuen. Hee entertaineth tenne thousand Women in diuers Offices in his Palace. These make to the King (after his fasting yeere is out) a Candlemasse Feast, each of them carrying diuers lights from the Temple (where they first obserue many Idoll idle Ceremonies) vnto the Palace with great Musicke and other iollitie.


@. II.  Of the King of Calicut.
OF the election and erection of the Zamoryn, we haue spoken in the beginning of the Chapter: let vs here adde out of CastanedaHervan. Lop. de Castaneda, l. 1 c. 14. concerning his deuotion. Hee saith, that this King of Calicut is a Bramene, as his Predecessors also. And for that it is a custome that all the Kings die in one Pagode, or Idoll Temple, hee is elected for that cause. For alwaies there is and must be in that House a King to serue those Idols; and when hee that serueth there dieth, then must the King that then raigneth leaue his Empire, and goe serue in that place as the other did; another being elected to succeed him in the Kingdome. And if any refuseth to forsake his Court for the Pagode, they enforce him  thereunto
The Kings of Malabar be browne men, and goe naked from the girdle vpward, and from thence downward they are couered with cloth of Silke and of Cotton, adorned with Iewels.
 For their Children; the Sonnes inherit not, but the Brother, or if there bee none; the Sisters Sonne. When their Daughers are ten yeeres old, they send out of the Kingdome for a Nayro, and presenting him with gifts, request him to take her Virginitie: which hauing done, hee tieth a Iewell about her necke, which she weareth during her life, as a token that from thenceforth she hath free power of her bodie to doe what she will, which before she might not. After their deathFunerall Rites. these Kings are carried forth into a plaine Field, and their burned with sweet wood very costly, their kindred and all the Nobilitie of the Countrey being present: which done, and the ashes buried, they shaue themselues, without leauing any haire except on the browes and eye-lids, euen on the least child; and for the space of thirteene dayes cease to eateA leafe of which see c. 13. Botels (his lips are out that doth it) and all that time is an Inter-regnum, wherein  they obserue if any will come in to obiect any thing against the new future King. After  thisInauguration of the new King. hee is sworne to the Lawes of his Predecessor, to pay his debts, to recouer whatsoeuer belonged to his Kingdome being lost; which Oath he taketh hauing his Sword in his left hand, and in the right a Candle burning, which hath a Ring of Gold vpon it, which he toucheth with two of his fingers, and taketh his Oath. This being done, they throw or powre vpon him a few graines of Rice; with many other Ceremonies and Prayers, and he worshippeth the Sunne three times: after which, all the Caymailes or principall Nobles sweare their fealtie to him, handling also the same Candle. The thirteene dayes ended, they eate their Betele againe, and Flesh and Fish as before; the King except, who then taketh thought for his Predecessor, and for the space of one whole yeere (as is before obserued  in part out of Barbosa) eates no Betele, nor shaueth his beard, nor cutteth his nailes: eateth but once a day, and before hee doth it, washeth all his bodie, and obserueth certaine houres of Prayer daily. The yeere being ended, he obserueth a kind of Dirige for his Predecessors soule, whereat are assembled 100000. persons, at which time hee giueth great Almes, and then it confirmed. All these Malabar Kings haue one speciall Man, which is the chiefe Administrator of Iustice, who in matters of gouernment is obeyed no lesse then the King himselfe. The Souldiers are Nayr^s, none of which can be imprisoned or put to death by ordinarie Iustice: but if one of them kill another, or else kill a Cow, or sleepe with a Countriewoman, or speake euill of the King: the King after information giues his Warrant to another Nayro, who with his Associates kill him wheresoeuer they find him, hewing him with  their Swords, and then hang on him his Warrant, to testifie the cause of his death. These Nayros may not weare their Weapons, nor enter into combate, till they be armed Knights, although that from the Age of seuen yeeres they are trayned vp in Feates and practice of Armes. He isThe dubbing of the Nayros. Bar. Dec. 1. l. 9. dubbed or created by the King, who commandeth to gird him with a Sword, and laying his right hand vpon his head, muttereth certaine words softly, and afterward dubbeth him, saying,Paguego Bramena Bisquera. Haue a regard to keepe these Bramenes, and their Kine. These are the two Great Commandements of the Bramene Law. The King sometimes commits this Ceremonie to their Panicall or Master in the Feats of Armes, whom they euer honour as their Father, and next to the King most reuerence. They teach them to Run, Leape, Fencing, and managing of Weapons, and anoint them with Oyle of Gergelin, to make their sinewes pliant for  all winding and tumbling gestures. They begin to goe to Schoole at seuen yeeres olde. In fight they are valorous, and account it no shame to flee, but will doe it in policie, and yet when they yeeld themselues to any mans seruice, they bind themselues to die with him, and for him, which they faithfully performe, fighting till they bee killed. They are great South-sayers, haue their good and bad Dayes, worship the Sun, the Moone, the Fire, and the Kine, and the first they meet in the morning. The Deuill is often in them (they say it is one of their Pagodes) which causeth them to vtter terrible wordes; and then hee goeth before the King with a naked Sword, quaking and cutting his flesh, saying with great cries; I am such a god, and I am come to tell thee such a thing; and if the King doubteth, he roreth lowder, and cutteth himselfe deeper till he be credited. The Fortugals haue much eclipsed the greatnesse of  the King of Calicut, and caused many other alterations in all the East in this last Age of the World. Of whose exploits, Castaneda, Barrius, Maffaeus, Oserius, and others haue written at large. Our English-Indian Societie haue setled a Factory at Calicut, touching the conditions and condition whereof you may reade at large in Roger Hawes his Iournall, deliuered amongst other our Pilgrimes.My Pilgrims or Voyages. Tom. 1. l. 5. c. 1. He telleth of the perfidiousnesse of this people, how hardly they could get in debts, they chusing rather to spend much in bribes then to pay debts. Ours made vse of ther Superstition to Iustice: for vnderstanding that they would neither eate nor wash whiles the English were in their houses, they would threaten not to depart till they were payd; hauing meane while Nayros for their Guard. Thus Iniustice made them iust, and vncharitablenes charitable. For rather then be long troubled with their company, most of them would pay  part of their debts, so that they got fifty Fanos (kind of Coine) of one, 100. of another, but one notwithstanding their three dayes abode, would pay nothing: it seemes, equally prophane, superstitious and vniust.



@. III. Of their differing Sects.
BArbosa reckoneth eighteene Sects that haue no mutuall conuersation, nor may marrie, but in their owne rankes or order. Next to the King and Bramenes,Maffaeus reckons foure orders. The Caymales, or Nobles, the Bramenes or Priests, the Nayros or Souldiers, the Vulgar. The Nayros. he placeth the Nayros, which are Gentlemen and Souldiers, and are not professed Nayros (notwithstanding their bloud) till they be by their Lords or by the King made  Knights or Souldiers. And then hee must neuer from that time goe without his Weapons, which commonly are a Rapier and a Target, and sometimes Peeces or Bowes. They neuer marry, but lye with such of the Nayros Women or Daughters as like them, leauing his Weapons meane while at the doore, which forbid any man else, although it be the goodman himselfe, to enter, till he hath ended his businesse and be gone. And if one of the common people once touch a Nayro, it is lawfull for the Nayro to kill him: and he is also vncleane, and must be purified by certaine washings. And for this cause they cry as they goe in the streets, Po, Po, that the baser Raskality may giue place. They haue a Pit of standing Water at their doores, hallowed by the Bramenes, wherein euery morning they wash themselues, although it bee greene, slimie, and stinking, imagining thus to be clensed of their sinnes. They are brought vp  altogether to Feats of Armes and Actiuitie, from their Child-hood, admirably able to wind and turne themselues, and are very resolute and desperate, binding themselues by oath to liue and die with their King or Lord. No Nayro's women may enter into Calicut but one night in the yeere, when the Citie is full of Lights: and then they goe with the Nayros, to behold and gaze their fill. They intend nothing but their lust, and thinke that if they die Virgins, they shall neuer enter into Paradise.
The BiabariThe Biabari. are another sort, and are Merchants Gentiles, and enioy great priuiledges. The King cannot put them to death, but by sentence of the principall of themselues. They were the only Merchants before the Moores traded there, and still enioy many possessions. These marry one Wife, and their Children inherit, and they may touch the Nayro's. The  Cagianem are a Sect of the Nayros, hauing a Law and Idols by themselues, which they may neuer alter. They make Tiles to couer the Temples and the Kings Palace. The Nayro's may be with their women, but must wash themselues before they goe home.
Another Sect is called Manantamar, which are Landerers, nor may they or their Posteritie be of other function: nor may they mingle themselues with any other Generation. They haue Idol ceremonies and Temples by themselues. The Nayros may vse their Wiues (or Women rather.) Their Brethren or Nephewes are their Heires. The Calton are Weauers, and haue a distinct Idolatrous Sect; otherwise are as the former.
Besides these of better condition, there are of baser sort eleuen Sects, which may not marrie nor meddle with others. The first of these are called Tiberi, Husbandmen; the second, Moger,  and are Mariners; both hauing their proper Superstitions, and vse their women in common: the third are Astrologers, whom they call Canius. Great men aske their counsell, but may not touch their persons. The Aggeri are Masons and Workers in Metals. The Muchoa or Machoe are Fishers, dwelling in Villages by themselues; the men Theeues, the women Harlots, with whom they please. The Betua are Salt-makers: the Paerun are Iugglers, Inchanters, and Physicians (if such damnable Deuillish practices may deserue so honourable Name) which, when any are sicke and require their helpe, vse Coniuration to cause the Deuill to enter into some of them, and then by his suggestion declare the euent of the Disease, and what Sacrifices or other things are to be performed. They may not touch or bee touched of other men.
 The Reuolat are a baser sort of Gentiles, which carry wood into the Citie to sell, and herbs. The Puler are as excommunicate persons, and liue in Desarts, where the Nayros haue no occasion to passe, and when they goe neere any of these Nayros, or any of the better sort, they cry as lowd as they can (as theLeuit 15 (...) Lepers among the Iewes) that others may auoid them. For if any touch them, their Kindred may for such action or passion stay them, and as many of these Puler also, as may make satisfaction for such disparagement. Some nights they wil go of purpose, seeking to touch some of the Nayro women with hand, sticke, or hurling of a stone: which if they effect, there is no remedie for the woman but to get her forth and liue with these Villaines, or to be sold, to escape killing by the hands of her Kindred. These Puler are Theeues and Sorcerers. The Pareas are of worse esteeme, and liue in Desarts without commerce  of any, reputed worse then the Deuill. These ten sorts (or eleuen, if you reckon two sorts of the Tiberi, as our Author doth; whereof one are Warriors, distinguished by a certaine cudgell, which they must carry in their hands, from the Nayros, are as well differing in Religions,
 matters of common life: though for their seuerall Rites, it were wrong to the Reader at large to recite them, if we had the particulars to deliuer. But this is common in India, that each Trade and Tribe distinguish a new Sect.
There are besides these Gentiles, Naturall of Malabar, many strangers of Indians, Moores, and Christians. But in other Kingdomes of Malabar, the Heathenish Religion is little differing from that in Calicut.
CranganorCranganor. is a small Kingdome: the Inhabitants of the Citie, which giueth name to the Region, are Christians of Saint Thomas profession, about seuentie thousand in number. Cochin is now growne great by the Portugals traff^que and friendship. Of the rest there is not much worth the recitall. The Papall honour among the Bramenes, was by ordination of Perimal,  which placed there the Supremacie of the Bramens, because He to whom he gaue Coulam, was a greater Man then the rest. This Papall title was Cobritin, a dignity which the King of Cochin still retayneth to be supreme Head of the Bramenes. For the ancient Kings of Coulan remooued their seate to Cochin, which was then in their Territories. But Warres haue since much altered the face of things in those parts.Bar. Dec. 1. l. 9. In these parts are now many Christian Proselites of the Iesuites Conuersion, besides many of the olde Thomas Christians. Both Men and Women in Cochin, account it a great Gallantry to haue wide Eares, which therefore they stretch by Art, hanging Waights on them till they reach to their shoulders.
Porca is a Kingdome Southwards from Cochin, but little we can say of it. In Trauancor  betweene Coulan and the Cape were many Christians, if they may be so called, which want Sacraments. For in fifty yeeres together they had not seene a Priest, only they had the priuiledges and name of Thomaean-Christians. These Thomaeans are now, as the Iesuites report, reduced to their Catholicisme.
The King ofCoulan. Trauanc^rs DominionOd. Bar. stretcheth beyond the Cape Comori, (where Malabar endeth) on the East-side fourescore and ten miles, as farre as Cael: which diuers great Lords hold vnder him. Among the rest is the Signiory of Quilacare. In the City of Quilacare is an Idoll of high account, to which they solemnize a Feast euery twelfth yeere, where the Gentiles resort as the Popish Christians in the Romish Iubilee. The Temple sacred to this Idoll hath exceeding great reuenue. The King (for so he is called) at this Feast erecteth a  Scaffold couered with silke, and hauing washed himselfe with great solemnity, he praye^h before this Idoll: and then ascendeth the Scaffold, and there in presence of all the people cutteth off his Nose, and after that his Eares, Lips, and other parts, which he casts towards the Idoll, and at last he cutteth his throate, making a butcherly sacrifice of himselfe to his Idoll. He that is to be his Successor, must be present hereat: for he must vndergoe the same Martyrdome, when his twelue yeeres Iubilee is come. Along this Coast dwell the Paraui, simple people, and Christians, which liue by fishing of Pearles. The Nayros make such holes in their Eares, thatCas. Fred. Caesar Fredericke sayth, hee thrust his arme vp to the shoulders in one of them. They are prodigal of their liues in the honour of their King. Os^riusOsorius de Reb. Eman. telleth of some, which, like the renowmed Decij, had vowed themselues to death, and not to returne from  the enemy without victory. Aloisius Goueanus numbreth in the Sea Coast of Coulam three and twenty townes, of which nineteene had Christian Churches.
The MalabarsBar. Dec. 1. l. 9 are generally of one Language, and one kind of writing. This their writing was in leaues of Palme, which they call Olla, two fingers broad, and long as the matter they intended, written on both sides with a stile of Iron, which they binde vp in Bookes betweene two boord^ in greater or lesser forme as they please. Their writing is from the left hand to the right. They reckoned their times before the Portugals came into the Indies, from the departure of Parimal. There are two sorts of Moores, one Mesticos of mixed seed of Moore-fathers and Ethnike-mothers, called Naiteans, Mungrels also in their Religion: the other Forreiners, which come thither in trading. There are also many Iewes, which haue almost  lost their Iudaisme, minding more their merchandize then superstition.
Step. de Brit. 1600. Maleas^Besides those former Sects, Stephanus de Brito speaketh of the Maleas which inhabit small Villages in the Mountaynes, which are Hunters of Elephants: amongst whom are no thefts or robberies, and therefore they leaue their doores open when they goe abroad. They haue no Idoll amongst them, only they obserue their Ancestours Sepulchres. These haue no Commerce with their Neighbours, nor are much subiect to Kings, only pay them a kinde of tribute, hauing Arelli set ouer them as Iudges or Magistrates, vnder each of them fiue or sixe thousand men. Their houses are made of Indian Canes dawbed with earth, and some liue on trees laying beames from one tree to another, and so building them lofty Cottages free from Tygres and wilde Elephants, whereof the Montaynes are full, which  they take in Pits couered ouer with leaues. They haue fertile fields and Valleyes, but not diligently husbanded. They are content with one Wife, which they carry with them
 whithersoeuer they goe, though but a Hunting-voyage. They are as other Malabars naked from the waste vpwards, a long garment hangs thence to the ankles, and on their heads a Turbant as the Mores. Their necke, eares, and nostrils, are laden with gold. For the Malabars weare gold aswell for nose-rings, as eare-rings. These Maleas are of better estimation then the base vulgar, nor is it accounted a pollution to touch them, no more then other Nairos or Thomaean Christians. They haue their Pipes and Tabors on their Feasts. They are also Sorcerers acd diuine by familiar Spirits, but vse not to kill or hurt men by Witch-craft, as other Indians and Malabars doe. A witty, docible, honest people, perhaps descended of those Malliani, which Plutarch and Curtius mention in the life of Alexander.
 Of the Feast which all the Malabar-Kings hold euery twelfth yeare in honour of the Riuer Ganges, we haue there spokenSupra cap. where we haue discoursed of the Riuer. This Feast lasteth eight and twentie or thirtie dayes with great solemnitie: the Samorin euery day washing himselfe and offering Sacrifices to Ganges: after which hee returnes to his Palace with innumerable troupes of men, riding vpon an Elephant in great pompe: and three dayes after in the morning and euening with greatest Royaltie, makes shew of himselfe in a high Throne, many Lampes of gold and siluer burning about him, many Peeces discharged, with other ceremonie of State. The King prostrates himselfe on the ground, and three times doth reuerence to the People, and they to Him, the Kings Vassals then doing him homage. After this, many Champions exercise their Fencing-skill before him, and at the sound of Instruments,  the chiefe Nobles by two and two in a ranke, with their faces to the ground, doe reuerence: the Elephants are likewise to honour Him. Twentie thousand Crownes are spent on this solemnitie by the King. Another more diuellish rite followes. About the yeare 1520. the Zamorin slue a certaine King. In memorie whereof the Successors of that King send a certayne number of their Souldiers to reuenge his death, themselues being sure to be slaine: these are called Amocae, which are Clients to that King, and are either to come themselues, or to send so many Souldiers, to the number of thirtie, which rush among the People, and kill as many as they can; themselues certayne to be killed of the Kings Souldiers.



CHAP. XI. Of the Kingdome of Narsinga and Bisnagar.

@. I. Of their Funerall and Idolatrous bloudie Rites.
FRom those places where our feet last rested (or touched rather) vnto the Cape GuadauerinMagin. Gi. Boter. Ben., betwixt that ridge of Mountaines called Gate, and the Ocean  (which is there named the Gulfe of Bengala) trendeth the Kingdome of Narsinga, or Bisnagar; those two Royall Cities contending which shall giue name to this mightie Empire, containing two hundred leagues of Sea-coast. The King hath in continuall pay forty thousand Nairos. But as occasion serueth, he can bring into the field many many thousands more: as in that Expedition against Idalkan, specified by Barrius and Boterus; in which, was a world of people (seuen hundred thousand foot, fortie thousand horse, seuen hundred Elephants, twentie thousand harlots.) Hee sacrificed also vnto Idols twentie thousand seuen hundred and threescore head of Beasts and Fowles in nine dayes space, which in Idoll-deuotion were all bestowed after on the poore.
 In the yeare of our Lord 1565. BiznagarC. Fred. was sacked by foure Kings of the Mores (as saith Frederike) naming them Dialkan, Zamaluc, Cotamaluc, and Viridy, through treason of two More Captaines, which had seuen or eight score thousand Souldiers vnder them; but being of the same Religion with the Kings of Decan, betrayed their owne King, forsaking him in the midst of the battaile. This was a iust reward of treason to the true King of Biznegar. For three Captaines had kept the King thirtie yeares as prisoner, once a yeare shewing him to the people, themselues ruling the State. When he dyed, then Ramaragio exalted himselfe to the Throne. Temiragio, the second, swayed the gouernment, and the third Bengahe was Generall of the Armie. Onely Temiragio escaped and returned (when the Decans had sacked the Citie, and were gone) to Beznegar, and sent to Goa great promises for Horses,  if any Merchants would bring any. Whereupon Frederike went with other Merchants, which carried store of them, but brought no store of money in payment; the Tyrant accepting the Horses, but paying nothing. Temiragio temoued his Court from Bezneger to Penegorde,
 eight dayes iourney within Land. And his sonne put to death the sonne of that King before mentioned, which had beene imprisoned, as this also had beene, till Death by a murthering hand freed him. Hence grew many broyles, the Nobles refusing to acknowledge this New King: and thus Bezneger being forsaken, remained after this an Habitation for Tygres and wild Beasts, containing in circuit foure and twentie myles, as our Author (that stayed there seuen moneths) affirmeth. He neuer saw Palace exceeding that of Biznagar. It had nine Gates with guards of Souldiers. Here hee obserued their Rites in burning the women, so often mentioned, which after his and Balby his relations are thus. (I haue declared the like for substance before; this, as in some Rites differing, I adde also.)
The womanThe solemnitie of burning of the wife after her husbands death. The Ancients mention this Rite. Vid Ael. var. Hist. l. 7. c. 18. Hier ad ^ou. l. 1. See the same described in Porchacchi Fun. Anticbi Tau. 17 taketh two or three moneths respite after her husbands death: The day  being come, she goeth earely out of her house, mounted on a Horse or Elephant, or else on a Stage, carried by eight men: apparelled like to a Bride, adorned with Iewels, and her haire about her shoulders; holding in her left hand a Looking-glasse; in the right an Arrow: and singeth as shee passeth through the Citie, saying, That she goeth to sleepe with her husband. She is accompanied with her friends, vntill it be one or two of the clocke in the afternoone: then they goe out of the Citie, passing by the Riuers side to the burning-place, where is prepared a great square Caue, full of Wood. Here is made a great Banquet, the woman eating with ioy, as if it were her wedding-day, and after, they sing and daunce, till the woman bid to kindle the fire in the Caue: then she leaueth the Feast, and taketh her husbands neerest kinsman by the hand, and goeth with him to the banke of the Riuer, where  she strippeth her of her cloathes and iewels, bestowing them at her pleasure, and couering herselfe with a cloth, throweth herselfe into the Riuer, saying, O wretches, wash away your sinnes. Comming out of the Water, shee rowleth herselfe into a yellow cloth; and againe taking her husbands kinsman by the hand, goeth to the said Caue, by which is erected a little Pinnacle, on which she mounteth, and there recommendeth her children and kindred to the people. After this, another woman taketh a pot with oyle, and sprinkleth it ouer her head, and therewith annoynteth all her bodie, and then throweth it into the Furnace, the woman going together with the same. Presently after the woman, the people throw great pieces of Wood into the Caue, so that with those blowes, and the fire, she is quickly dead, and their great mirth is on a suddaine turned into great lamentation and howling.  
When a Great man dyeth, all the women of his house, both his wife and slaues, with whom hee hath had carnall copulation, burne themselues together with him. Amongst the baser sort, I haue seene (saith Master Frederike) the dead man carried to the place of buriall, and there set vpright: theThe wise immured with her dead husband. woman comming before him on her knees, casteth her armes about his necke, while a Mason maketh a wall round about them: and when the wall is as high as their neckes; one comming behind the woman, strangleth her; the workeman presently finishing the wall ouer them: and this is their buriall.
Ludouicus VertomannusLud Vert. l. 6 relateth the same Funerall Rites of Tarnasseri (as in other parts of India) sauing that there fifteene or twentie men, in their idolatrous habit, like Diuels, doe attend on the fire wherein the husband is burned; all the Musicians of the Citie solemnizing  the Funerall pompe: and fifteene dayes after, they haue the like solemnitie, at the burning of the woman; those diuellish fellowes holding fire in their mouthes, and sacrificing to Deumo, and are her intercessors to that Diuell for her good entertainment.
The cause of burning their wiues, is by some ascribed to their wonted poysonings of their husbands, before this Law;Odoricus. by others, that the husband might haue her helpe and comfort in the other world.
OdoricusOdoricus: telleth of a strange and vncouth Idoll, as bigge as Saint Christopher, of pure Gold, with a new band about the necke, full of precious stones, some one whereof was of value (if he valued iustly) more then a whole Kingdome: The roofe, pauement, and seeling of the walls, within and without the Temple, was all Gold. The Indians went thither on  pilgrimage, some with halters about their neckes, some with their hands bound behind them, some with kniues sticking on their armes and legges; and if, after their pilgrimage, the wounded flesh festered, they esteemed that limbe holy, and a signe of their Gods fauour. Neere to the Temple was a Lake, where-into the Pilgrims cast Gold, Siluer, and Gemmes, for honour of the Idoll, and reparation of his Temple. At euery yearely Feast, the King and Queene, with the Pilgrims and People, assembling, placed the said Idoll in a rich Chariot, and with a solemne procession of Virgins, two and two in a ranke, singing before him, and with Musicall Instruments carrie him forth. Many Pilgrims put themselues vnder the Chariot wheeles, where they are crushed in pieces. More then fiue hundred persons vsed thus to doe, whose carkasses were burned, and ashes kept for holy Reliques. Otherwise  also they will deuote themselues to such a martyrdome in this manner: The parents and friends assemble and make a Feast to this Votarie, and after that, hang fiue sharpe
 kniues about his necke, and so carrie him before the Idoll; where he taketh one of his kniues, and cryeth, For the worship of my God I cut this my flesh; and cutting a piece, casteth it at the face of the Idoll; and so proceeding, at the last sayth, Now doe I yeeld my selfe to death in the behalfe of my God; and being dead, is burned as before.
Our Country-manSir Iohn Mandeuile. Sir Iohn Mandeuile reporteth the same Historie of their Idoll-Procession, and the ashes of those voluntary Martyrs; which they keepe, to defend them against tempests and misfortunes. He also sayth, That some Pilgrims, in all their peregrinations, not once lifted vp their eye-lids; some, at euery third or fourth pace fell downe on their knees, to worship; some whipped; others wounded themselues; yea, killed themselues  (as is before said.) Nicolo di ContiNic. di Conti reporteth the same in his time.
Neither is this bloudy custome yet left, as LinschotenLinschot. l. 1. cap. 44. affirmeth, by report of one of his chamber-fellowes that had seene it. They haue (sayth he) a Waggon, or Cart, so heauie, that three or foure Elephants can hardly draw it, which is brought forth at Faires, Feasts, and Processions. At this Cart hang many Cables or Ropes, whereat all the people hale and pull, of deuotion. In the vpper part of the Cart standeth a Tabernacle, and therein the Idoll: vnder it sit the Kings wiues, playing on Instruments. And while the Procession passeth, some cut pieces of their flesh, and throwe at the Pagode; some lay themselues vnder the wheeles of the Cart, with such euent as you haue heard.
Gasparo BalbyBalby cap. 30. and Arthus Dan^ Hist. Ind. O^. c. 2. relateth the same, and addeth, That the Priests, which haue care of this  Idoll, and certaine women, are consecrated to these deuotions from their Cradles, by their Zeale-blind parents. And the women prostitute their bodies, to gaine for the Idoll whatsoeuer they can get ouer and aboue their owne maintenance. This filleth the Citie with Strumpets; there being of this Sacred (you may interpret it Cursed) crue, foure hundred in one place of the Citie. These haue their place in the Idoll-procession, some of them in the Chariot which is drawne by men; euery one accounting himselfe happy, that can touch or draw the same. This he sayth was at Negapaton.
He further affirmeth, That not farre from the Citie of Saint Thomas is the Towne Casta: where the the Wife is not burned (as at Negapatan) but a great Graue being made for the deceased Husband, they place the liuing Wife by the dead corps, and their neerest kindred  cast earth vpon them both, and stampe thereon. They which marry, wed in their owne degree, as a Smith to a Smiths daughter: and they powre out their prayers at the Image of some Kow, or a Serpent, called Bittia di Capella. Their Bramenes burne Kowes dung; and if they intend any warres with other Nations, they anoint their Nose and Forehead with those ashes, not washing themselues till the euening. They which sacrifice themselues to the Pagode, when they haue wallowed a long time in lustfull pleasures, shoot into the aire pieces of their flesh tyed to Arrowes, and diuersly mangle themselues; at last, cut their owne throats, so sacrificing themselues to the Pagode.
There are also certaine people called Amouchi, otherwise Chiani, which perceiuing the end of their lifeDesperate dying. approach, lay hold on their weapons, which they call Chisse, and going forth, kill euery man they meet with, till some body (by killing them) make an end of their killing.  They are loth (it seemes) to come into the Deuils presence empty-handed, or to goe to Hell alone. Some of them worship GOD in the likenesse of a Man; some in the images of Kine and Serpents: some inuoke the Sunne and Moone; others, some Tree or Riuer.
Among many Feasts which they celebrate in the yeere, one in Autumne is most solemne, in which they take some great tree, and fasten it in the ground, hauing first fashioned it like a mast of a Ship, with a crosse-yard, whereon they hang two hookes of iron. And when any one by sicknesse, or other miserie, hath made a vow to their Idoll or Pagode, hee commeth thither, and being first admonished by the Priests to offer his sacrifice, they lift him with those hookes by both the shoulders, and there hold him to the Idoll, till he hath three  times saluted the same, with clapping his folded hands to his breast, and hath made some sport thereto with weapons which he hath in his hand. After this he is let downe, and the bloud which issueth from his shoulders is sprinkled on the Tree, in testimonie of his deuotion. Then they draw him vp againe by the middle, to giue thankes to the Idoll: and then giue him leaue to heale himselfe, if he can. They which are in great miserie, or seeke some great matter at the hand of their Idoll, doe this. They haue another Feast, celebrated in the night, continuing eight nights: in which many Candles were seene burning thorow the Citie. Three or foure runne from one end of street to the other, and hurling Rice, and other meates after them, say, they offer it to the Deuill which followes them; not daring to looke behind, lest he should slay them. In other places also they haue those Idol-chariots,  like vnto Towers, to the drawing whereof, many thousands of deuout persons put their helping-hand.
Anno 1598.An. Dom. 1598. there was a great contention, whether the signe of Perimal should bee
 erected in the Temple of Cidambacham. This signe was a gilded Mast, with an Ape at the foot thereof. Many Embassadors were there about this quarrell; some vrging, some resisting this deed. But the Prince (called the Naicho of Gingi) would haue it set vp, notwithstanding the Priests greatest vnwillingnesse. The Priests therefore, both regular (which are the Iogues) and secular Bramenes ascended vp the roofe of the Church, and thence threatned to hurle downe themselues, which twenty of the Iogues did, and the rest threatned to follow. But the Naicho caused Gunnes to be discharged at them, which slue two, and caused the rest to retire and breake their couenant (rather then their necks) with their fellowes. A woman also of this faction cut her owne throat for zeale of this new superstition.  


@. II. Of the Kings and Bramenes in this Kingdome.
THe swelling stile of this King of Bisnagar, I thought worthie to be here inserted, which is this.The titles of the Kings of Bisnagar. The Husband of good fortune, the God of great Prouinces, King of the greatest Kings, and God of Kings, the Lord of horsemen, the Master of them which cannot speake, Emperour of three Emperours, Conquerour of all he sees, and Keeper of all he conquers, Dreadfull to the eight coasts of the world, Vanquisher of the Mahumetans, etc.  Lord of the East, West, North, and South, and of the Sea, etc. Vencapadinus Ragiu Deuamaganus Ragel, which now ruleth and gouerneth this world.
Bar. Dec. 1. l. 9. cap. 1.These Kings of Bisnagar haue, as sayth Barrius, a great part of the Westerne coast subject vnto them, all betweene the riuers of Aliga and Cangerecora: in which space are these coast Townes, Ancola, Agorapan, Mergeu, Onor, a Royall Citie, Baticala, Bendor, Bracelor, Bacanor, Carara, Carnate, Mangalor, Mangliran, Cumlata, and Cangerecora. From this Citie standing on a Riuer of the same name, Southwards vnto the Cape Comori is reckoned the Malabar coast. And although Goa and Calecut much hinder those his Ports, yet to salute and shake hands, with both Seas, argues a great State, specially where the adioyning are so small. There are three Naichi or Tributary Kings subiect to Him; such in  power,Iarric. l. 6. c. 21. but in title Naichi, that is, Deputies or Presidents, of Madura, Gingi, and Tanaior. The Naicho of Madura is Lord of the Fishing coast. The people are called Badagae, and despise the Portugals, because they drinke Wine, eate Beefe, and suffer themselues to be touched of the Pareae, and carried on their shoulders. For these in their Bramene zeale, would not endure to touch or talke with the baser vulgar, and their Bramenes would die rather then eate that which a Bramene had not dressed. And therefore Robert SforceRobert Sforce. a Iesuite comming amongst them, professed himselfe of the Bramene or Rape bloud, that is, of Noble race, procured a Bramene to dresse his meate, abstained from Flesh, Fish, Wine, and Egges, after their Countrey manner, and attired himselfe in the habite of a Sanasse (one of their votaries) and in pretence of chastitie stirred not out of his house in a whole yeere, nor  would be spoken with by euery one, alleaging somtimes his deuouter conference with God, so to winne credite with these Ethnikes. He learned by conference with a Bramene, that they maintayned that Philosophicall axiome, that Nothing could be made of nothing, and held three Beginnings or Vniuersall Causes, the first Padi, that is God, the second Paiu, the Matter of which they say the Soules are made, the third Passan, the Corporall matter. They maintayned also the (...) or Pythagorean passage of Soules out of one body into another: for else (say they) how could there be such diuersitie of Men, one a King, another a Seruant; one a Bramene, another a Parea? They are also Platonikes, holding the Soule not to be the forme of the Body, but enclosed therein as a Bird in a Cage.
Votaries and Doctors.The Bramenes weare ashes on their heads. It seemes they are zealous Baneanes. Their  Saneasses are Asses indeed for literature, only as Hermites, they vow chastitie. The Gorupi or Gorusi are the Doctors of their Law. The Iesuites professed the Doctorship of these, in the habite of the former; which is a white Garment to the ankle with another of the same colour but thinner ouer it, a red cloth cast ouer the shoulders, one like a Cap or Hat on his head: from his necke hangs downe a corde of fiue threeds, three of gold, and two of white silke, they eate but once a day.
Their Bramenes haue a proper language and mysticall (as Roman for the Romish holies) called Gueredan, which the Iesuite learned, and thereby out of their books, that there had beene in these parts foure Lawes or Sects, three of which the Bramenes still obserued, to wit, of Vesmu, of Brama, of Rubren; the fourth meerely spirituall, partly mixed with others,  and partly lost, tending to the saluation of the Soule, which he said that He brought now vnto them; their Almes and Bodily chastisements, without this, not being effectuall
 to their saluation. Any might learne and choose a Doctor for any of the other three, but none was able to teach this. When they become Schollers to such Doctors,Forme of reuerence. they doe a triple reuerence vnto the ground, lifting vp their hands aloft, then letting them downe to their heads; and must (like the Pythagoreans of old, which was learned of the Indians) rest satisfied with his Masters bare Assertion, without questioning or further disputing.(...). He was once brought before a Consistorie of the Bramenes, and accused for his new Doctrine. Some Articles were, That he should affirme that the washing in Remanancor and Ganges were to no effect; That the Bramenes are inferior to the Raij or Princes; That they should be all damned, notwithstanding there were of them many Nhanisij and Sanasses (the NhanisijNhanisij. also vow  chastitie and to forsake the World.) The President of this Councell cleered the Iesuite vpon the Apologie of another Bramene. For that of Remanancor,Ramanancor. it is a corner of the Fishing Region, wherein is a Temple famous through all the East, which hee that shall visit and wash himselfe in the Sea iust by, shall bee cleered from all his sinnes, aswell as if it were done in Ganges.
Id Madura and the Territorie thereof are numbred a hundred thousand Bramenes, the chiefe of which is Chocanada, as their Bishop or Pope: He would haue this Iesuite expelled the Countrie, for that this Franke (so euer since the Expedition to Ierusalem vnder Duke Godfrey of Bull^n, all Westerne Christians are called in all the East, a name, it seemes which the Saracens communicated to the Ethnikes) had eaten with another Franke. Hee meant  Fernandes, another Iesuite, that had not thus acted the Sanasse and Gurupi amongst them. He alleadged also that His Temple was built in the ground of His Pagode. But this Iesuite with Gold stopped this Bramenes mouth, and had the soyle of the Church granted him in peace, with promise of all fauour. One thing that holds them intangled in this errour, is, that they hold it vnlawfull to copie out their Lawes and Religion in writing, so that they which wil learne them, must (like the Druydes) from their youth learne them of some Doctour, and commit them to memorie: in which they spend tenne yeeres and more. And if any should write them, they would pull out his eyes.
Emanuel Leitanus, another Iesuite, comming to Madura in the like Sanassian Habit,M. Leitanus. obserued the Gorupian order, and fell downe before Sforce to the ground, Hee sitting in a Chaire couered with red; because some of the Madurians were present. The Bramenes in the Kingdome  of Bisnaga are of such power, that nothing is done without them; and of the fiue Counsellours of State, foure are Bramenes: yea, with their face to the earth, all men, and the King himselfe, adore the Bramen-Pope: nor doth the King admit any to conference in the morning, before hee hath seene two Bramenes. In Chandegrin is a Clocke that strikes not foure and twentie houres, but sixtie and foure, according to their diuision of the Night and Day, each into foure parts, and those subdiuided into eight. The Iesuites conceiue that thefe Bramenes are of the dispersion of the Israelites, and their Bookes (called Sameseretan) doe somewhat agree with the Scriptures, but that they vnderstand them not. They haue some propheticall phrases, and some of them affirme that God made Adam the first man, and being pressed acknowledge one God. The King and his Nobles speak the learned and sacred  tongue of the Bramenes.
Anno 1609. One of his Great men rebelling against him, and fortifying the Castle of Vellur, the King besieged him, and on his submission pardoned him; but so as hee turned his Fort (which had stood the Rebell in an hundred thousand Crownes) into a Palace,A Pardaw is foure shillings, 3. Pardawes are 2. crownes. Ventacapatus his letter. besides twentie Fannes, each worth an hundred thousand * Pardowes, and innumerable Horses and Elephants. The same yeere did the King write to the King of Spaine in commendation of the Iesuites, with promise to assist the Vice-roy against the Moores and Hollanders, which had obtained to build a Fortresse of the Naichus of Tanauapatan, desiring the same friendship, that since the King of Narsing as dayes had beene betwixt both their Ancestors, subscribed,  King Ventacaxa.
Thus you see the same King diu^rsly entituled according to the Citie Royall, yea I finde him called (of the ^astle before named) King of Vellur, so Floris stiles him,Pe. Flori^. saying that in Iune 1614. He grant^d trade to the English, as likewise did Obiana Queene of Paleacatte. One of his Wiu^s which (it seemes) gouerned that Citie: On Iuly the nine and twentieth, his Abeskian was sent, being a white cloth where his owne hand is printed in Sandall or Saffron, and another the like from the Queene of Paleacatte. The Kings Letter was written vpon a leafe of Gold, wherein hee made excuse of former wrong^, gaue them libertie to build a House or Fort, with other priuiledges. He gaue Floris the English Merchant a Towne of foure hundred Pardawes yeerely reuenue, notwithstanding the Hollanders (his Countrimen)  did what they could to hinder it. W^ngal^ (Floris his man) had beene in the Kings presence, who laid his hand vpon his head. But on the eight and twentieth of October following* newes came that this King was dead, hauing raigned aboue fiftie yeeres. His
 three wiues, of which Obiana Queene of Paleacatte was one, burned themselues with his corpse, and great troubles were expected. The Hollanders had presented this King with two Elephants of Seilan. Cotabaxa the King of Badaya and Lellengana, his Neighbour, died not long before. Mahum^d Vmin Cotabaxa his Brothers Sonne succeeded. Musulipatan is in his Dominion. Golconda is the Metropolitan Citie. But hee is a Moore of the Sophi his Sect. Golconda is the Citie Royall.
With the Naicho or King of Gingi (vassall to the King or Emperour of Bisnagar) the Iesuites found good entertainment. Heere some of the Iogues distributed the water of Ganges out of certaine vessels couered with foule and filthie clothes, which yet the people for deuotion kissed. These Iogues with admirable patience endured the Sunnes heate: and one among the rest enclosed himselfe in an Iron Cage, with his head and feet onely out of the Cage,  that he could neither sit nor lie downe at any time: and on the Cage were hanged an hundred Lampes, which foure other Iogues his companions lighted at certaine times. And thus walked he in this his perpetuall Prison, as a Light vnto the World, in his vaine glorious opinion. They reasoned with certaine Bramenes; some of which held the Sunne for God, and yet sometime to haue beene a man, and for his merits so promoted. Some denied a multitude of Gods, onely allowing that priuiledge to Pyrama, Vidhun, and Vaitir, one of which maketh, another keepeth, the third destroyeth all things.
Neere to Madure is an Idoll called Chocanada: which by night appeared in a vision to ^ Priest, and bade him goe say to the Naicho of Madure, that hee or I must abide in this house:  whereupon he would not be corriuall with his Idoll, but resigned the Palace to him. His deuotion is such, that euery day, while hee sitteth in iudgement, a Bramene euer and ano^ soundeth the name of Aranganassa in his eares; and when one is wearie, another succeedeth in the same Office, neuer ceasing this Idols remembrance, although hee there sitteth fiue or sixe houres.
I thought meete to mention one customeDiscourse of Chin^, p. 40. which some report of the Brama, or Pope-like Bramene in these parts, who by his authority dispenseth with many of their Lawes, and dissolueth Marriages: giuing libertie at his pleasure to the woman to marrie another; which his Dispensation is sealed on her right shoulder, with a marke of a hote Iron.  


@. III. Of many other strange Rites: And of Saint Thomae.
CHandagrin is the Royall Seat of the great King of BisnagarMechlor Cotignus.. The chiefest Families therein are the Bramenes, Raia^, and Creti^^. They affirme that their Idoll P^rimal did bring foorth the Bramenes out of his head (as the Poets tell of Mi^er^a) the second out of his brest; third out of his belly: and all other inferiour Families out of his feet. The Bramenes haue some opinions, not altogether dissonant from the Scriptures.  They say, That God onely by his thought made a man, which they call Adam.
On the tenth day of Iuly, Anno 1600. happened an Eclipse of the Sunne, which the Bramenes said was by meanes of the Dragon (which they make a Celestiall Signe) his byting of the Sunne and Moone: whereupon the King and other^ neither ate nor dranke that day; deploring their misery, because the Dragon deuoured the Sunne. In the Citie Prepeti, three miles from Chandagrin is the Feast of Perimal, in remembrance of his Marriage: at which the Offerings amounted to two hundred thousand Crownes: and the Chariot of the Idoll was drawne forth a mile and a halfe in Procession by ten thousand men. They ^aue another Feast of the Kine, because they suppose Perimal to bee the Sonne of a Cow, and then the  wayes and streets are fullSimon Sa. of that cattle. They haue a Feast in honour of the Sunne, which lasteth eight dayes, solemnized by the Emperour himselfe, and he is iudged a Traytor which is not present thereat. Then they cast lots, the King fi^st, and after the rest, diuining by Arrowes the next yeeres destinie. If an Arrow light on a Tree, and being plucked out, causeth^ red liquor to follow, it prognosticateth Warres; if white, Peace. Not f^rre hence is an Idoll called Tripiti, to which are great Pilgrimages and Offering^; alwayes they goe, some begin, and the rest answere, and so all continue to resound the name of the Idoll G^ia. Before they enter into the Temple, they sh^ue and wash themselues. The Heremites, which they call Sanasses, liue in Desarts, and at sometimes appeare before the people naked. The G^^^pi beare a great port, and neuer goe forth on foot. The Idoll Tripiti is seated on a Mountaine,  about which are fertile Valleyes, stored with Fruites, which none may touch, as being consecrated.

There are in the Woods great abundance of Apes so tame, that they will take meate out of mens hands: the people esteeme them a diuine Race, and of the familiaritie of Perimal the chiefe God, whom they worship in many colours and shapes, as of a Man, Oxe, Horse, Lion, Hogge, Ducke, Cocke, etc.
FrancisF. Fernandes Epist. 1598.Fernandes saith, that Cidambaram is the Mother-citie of their Pagan Rites, wherein are many stately Temples, and the reuenue of the Bramenes amounted to 30000. Ducats, but now they are payd but 12000. yeerely.
Here happened a strange accident, the same day the Iesuits departed, the occasion of which was this. There is in this Citie a Temple of Perimal, wherein they worship an Ape called  H^^^ant, whom they report to haue beene a God, and (for I know not what) together with many thousands of other Gods, to haue remained there, being all transformed into Apes. Now when this principall Ape was forced to passe into the Iland Zeilan, and wanted a ship, he leaped, and at euery leape left an Iland or heape of Land behind him, so making way for his Apish traine to Zeilan. The tooth of this Ape was kept for a great relike in that Iland, with great resort of Pilgrims thereunto: and in the yeereLinschot. c. 4^ 1554. was by the Portugals (who made a roade thither, in hope of great bootie) taken away. The Indian Princes offered the Vice-roy three hundred thousand (or as Linschoten telleth, seuen hundred thousand) Ducats, for the ransome of this Apes tooth, but the Archbishop disswaded the Vice-roy; who thereupon burnt the same before those Indian Embassadors, and threw the ashes into the Sea. Not long after, a Beniane of Cambaya perswaded the Indians, that hee by Diuine Power had  taken away that holy Tooth, beeing inuisibly present, and had left another in the roome which was burnt. Superstition is credulous, and the King of Bisnagar gaue him a great summe of Gold for that Apes Tooth, wherewith hee thus Apishly had bitten and mocked them, which was after holden in like veneration as the former. But to returne to our Cidambaran Historie.
TheyF. Fernand. tell, That an holy man, in great penance, had many yeeres held his foot pierced thorow with a piece of Iron; and when he was often by God commanded to leaue that selfe-rigour, he flatly refused, vnlesse that hee might see God dancing about him, which also Hee condescended vnto; and with the Sunne, Moone and Starres, which played the Musicians, he appeared dancing: And as he danced, a Chaine of Gold fel from his foot, whereof this Towne  tooke name. For Cidambaran signifieth a golden Chaine.
As ViegaEm. de Viega and Ricius, two Iesuites, trauelled to Chaudegrin, they came to Trauilur, where they say their Idoll, with a white Banner on his back, and after him three sacred Kine, with Drummers on their backes, and after them Trumpetters and many Musicians of other sorts. Then followed twentie women dancing, which were also consecrated to the Idols seruice, and might not marry, but yet prostitute their bodies: these were richly attired, and carried Lights. The Priests followed with the Idoll, and were followed by the people with Lights. At their returne they set downe the Idoll, and set sodden Rice before him to eate; others meane while driuing away the flies, and others couering him that hee should not bee seene eating: and at last, one maketh a long Oration of the worthy acts of their God, and  then set him againe in his place. This lasted foure houres; and in the meane space many reasoned with the Iesuits, and some held vaine Discourses of the Creation: as that there were seuen Seas; one of Salt-water, the second of fresh, the third of Honey, the fourth of Milke, the lift of Ta^r (which is Creame beginning to sowre) the sixt of Sugar, the seuenth of Butter that the Earth had nine corners, whereby it was borne vp by the Heauen. Others dissented, and said, that the Earth was borne vp by seuen Elephants; the Elephants feete stood on Tortoises, and they were borne by they know not what.
When the Naicho of TangaorMelch. Cotig. died, 375. of his Concubines willingly offered themselues to the fire, to honour his Funerall; so much can Custome harden so delicate and soft-hearted  a nature.
The TemplesGi. Bot. Ben. in the Countrey haue great reuenues, which in some places are encreased by the deuotion of women, which prostitute themselues to gaine for their Idols: and many young Girles are brought vp for this purpose. Many are in these parts, of the Sect of the Guzzarates, which kill no quicke thing, as is spoken.Osor. lib. 4. Some haue a stone hanging about their necks, as bigge as an Egge, with certaine lines drawne thorow the middle thereof; and this they worship, and call it Tambarane: they keepe euery Friday holi-day.
The Kingdome of Orissa hath on the Sea-coast 350. miles, betwixt the richer Kingdomes of Bengala and Bisnagar, poore of Ports and Traffique. Frederike writes that before the King of Patane had conquered Orissa, there was great Trade for Oile of Zerzeline, Lacca,  Long Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolans, and cloth made of herbs, which grow with a bowle as bigge as an Orange, yeelding silke. The Countrey was so safe, that a man might haue trauelled with his Gold in his hand. The King was a Gentile, and resided in the Citie Catecha
 sixe dayes Iourney within Land. The King of Patane was soone after subdued by the Mogoll. The Inhabitants (except a few Moores) are Gentiles, little or nothing (that I can learne) differing in Rites from their Neighbours, of which yee haue heard. SomeSummario di Pop. Orient. ascribe to the Citie Orissa, as the name, so the Principalitie of the other Cities of this Kingdome.
In these parts is the Citie of Saint Thomas or Malepur; where they say Saint Thomas (after he had preached the Gospell to the Indians) was martyred and burned. The Legend which some report of his death, were too tedious to recite: and as little likelihood of truth is in that long tale of the miraculous Crucifixes heere found, related byOsorius lib. 3. Osorius, who likewise declareth the Rites of those Saint Thomas-Christians, of their Chaldean-Pope, Cardinals, Patriarches  and Bishops; of which in a another place we shall more fitly speake. On the first day of Iuly Saint Thomas Holiday is celebrated, as well by the Pagans as Christians: and his Sepulchre is had in deuout estimation, both of the Moores, Gentiles, and Christians; eachOd. Barbosa. pretending the right of his owne Religion to the Church, where this Saint lieth interred, to which the Indian Christians goe on Pilgrimage, carrying with them a little of that earth for a great Relique. A Moore had the keeping of the Church, which was built after our fashion, and begged of the commers for maintenance of it, and of a light continually burning therein.
The PortugalsLinschoten. now inhabit this Towne almost desolate: the Iesuites also haue heere a Residence. The Church doores (by the Superstition of some) are almost cut in pieces, and  carried away to set in Gold and Siluer, and to weare about their neckes, as a holy relike; the Portugals herein being exceedingly vaine, and attributing hereunto many Miracles, verifying that Prouerbe which the Spaniards vse, affirming the Portugals to beFew, Fooles, deuout. Pocos, sotos, deuot^s. One sent Linschoten a whole Bead-roll or paire of Beads thereof, the bringer affirming that those Beades had calmed a Tempest miraculously by the way. The Inhabitants in this respect haue driuen their Church-doores full of nailes: but Saint Thomas bones are now remoued to Goa. Those doores are of such renowned holinesse, because they were made of that wood which Saint Thomas drew with his girdle out of the Hauen (which it choaked) and could not before this Miracle by any meanes be remoued.
One thing I thought not to omit, that there beeLinschot. c. 15 whole Villages and Kindreds of people,  in other things like to other men, but are borne with one of their legs and one foot from the knee downwards, as thicke as an Elephants legge; which the common people imagine to be a curse by Diuine Iustice, inflicted vpon the whole Generation, for that their Progenitors murthered Saint Thomas. Linschoten saith, he hath seene and spoken with them, and could learne no other cause thereof. It is to them a deformitie, but no let or impediment otherwise.
P. Floris.The Gouernour of Musulipatan being of Mahomets posteritie, had agreed for custome to take foure per centum, and exacted twelue, Offering the English there diuers wrongs. Here the Gentiles haue in those parts a Feast when the New Moone comes vpon Munday, and then both Sexes wash themselues in the Sea, as a matter of much Indulgence for their sinnes. And  then after much indignitie, the Cape-Merchant Floris, performed a worthy exploit, deseruing still to flourish, though he be dead. The Gouernours Sonne being set ouer the Custome, and at the Custome-house guarded with his Souldiers,Nouemb. 24. An. 1614. Floris entred alone as it were for businesse, and as he had plotted, a few English followed by diuers wayes, which seized on the weapons of the Guard, at the Custome-house doore, and Floris laid hold of the Gouernours Sonne Wencatadra by name, which was suddenly conueyed into their Boat, three thousand people presently running to the shoare. But being vnder their ships protection, they both secured themselues, and for redemption of his Sonne, forced the Father to pay all debts by him detained, with satisfaction for wrongs offered. Yet such was his Superstition, that he almost first starued a shipboord rather then he would eate or drinke with the English. Thus  from the foure and twentieth of Nouember till the thirtieth, he kept a strict Bramene Fast, the English pittying his misery, and willing therefore to take pledges in his roome. But after that weeke of cleane Lent without eating or drinking, he was redeemed, the debts being paid by his Father. And hence let the Reader iudge of bodily exercise, and opus operatum without true faith, how little it auaileth.
In Narsapur Peta (a place not farre hence, where they Careened the Globe) happened in August that yeere such ouerflowings of water, that many thousands of men and cattell were drowned, Townes, Fields of Rice and Salt-hils ouerflowne, foure thousand houses washed away, and two Stone Bridges ouer the Riuer, one of nineteene, the other of fifteene Arches, comparable to Rochester Bridge, standing three fadome aboue water. Many Portugals also  liue in the parts of Bengala adioyning like Wildmen; and Iaric speakes of 1200. which thus obserue not Christianitie, and therefore may be reckoned amongst these Heathens.

And thus haue we finished our perambulation of the Continent of Asia. Some perhaps will maruell why I haue not handled the Muscouites and Russians in this Asian Discourse: to whom I answere, That of the Tartarians subiect to the Muscouite, I haue already spoken; and the rest of the Muscouites Dominions, especially the most populous, ciuill, wealthy; yea, the Imperiall City it selfe, by most Maps, is ascribed to Europe: that I speake not of the vncertainty of that troubled Estate, now these many yeeres, whereof I would haue more certaine and setled Relations to bestow on our Reader, which I hope with Gods helpe, in our European Discouery shall be performed.
Now let vs ship our selues ouer (for wee are not skilfull of Hanimants leapes) vnto the Ilands:  hauing first feasted you with the Fruits and other Rarities of Nature in India.



CHAP. XII. Of the Creatures, Plants, Fruits, and Drugs in India.

@. I.  Of their Beasts and liuing Creatures.
OF the Elephant and Rhinoceros is already spoken: and of diuers others of their beasts. The Elephant isVid. Arist. and Aelian. hist. Animal. Plin. lib. 8. Gesner. etc. of great vse, both for warre and peace. When the keeper employeth him in any burthen, he getteth first on his necke, and putteth his feet vnder the beasts eares, hauing a hooke in his hand, which he sticketh aboue betweene his eares,So Linschot c. 46. but Arist. hist. An. l. 2. placeth them within his body neere the reines. where (hee sayth, I thinke it an errour) his stones lie: they bind the burthen with a rope, which at his keepers bidding hee taketh in his mouth, and windeth it about his teeth, and so draweth the packe after him. The Elephants are said to keepe themselues chastly to one Female, which is  thought to bring forth in a yeere and halfe, or (as Aristotle affirmeth) two yeeres.
William Clarke which serued the Mogol diuers yeeres in his warres, saith that he hath seene in one Army twenty thousand Elephants, whereof foure thousand for warre, the rest Females for burthens, young, etc. In the engendring the Female lyes on her backe: some say if any shall be witnesse of that Act, the Elephant will seeke to kill them. Their running mad once a yeere is in their season of lust, nor doe they grow mad till they grow to a certaine age, and those Males. The wild ones keepe in Heards or companies, all of one Males breed keeping together: and sometimes perhaps more. For Andrew Battell liuing nine moneths in the Woods of Afrike, hath seene (he sayd) in a Heard hundreds of them. They beare, sayth Clarke, but three men, one before to guide, another behind to make them goe, the third in  the midst for fight, to which end they haue foure Peeces in a kind of Towre on their backe.
Christ. Aco^^^ in fine Linschot. lib. 1. cap. 46, Thomas Lope^ and^.Christophorus Acosta, Linschoten, and other moderne Authors, as also Aristotle, Plinie, Aelian and others of the Ancient, relate strange reports of the Elephant. For the Readers delight I will mention some. An Elephant being weary, hasted home; his keeper after much entreaty not preuayling, told him it was for the King of Portugals seruice, which hee would haue him doe: the beast answering h^^, hoo (which in the Malabar Language signifieth I wil, I will, as Acosta interpreteth) fulfilled his request. The same Elephant wanting his meate; his Master said it was, because his Kettle wherein he vsed to boyle it was broken, and therefore willed him to carry it to the Tinker; which hee did, and brought it againe, but ill mended:  whereupon he was sent againe, and the Tinker to cry him, amended it worse. The Elephant carryes it to the Riuer which ranne by, to see if it would hold water, and finding it to runne, came backe with great noyse, and anger: the Tinker entreates pardon, and at the third time doth it well, which yet the Elephant would not beleeue, till by tryall hee saw it held water, and then shewing it to the standers by that it would hold, carried it home. A Souldier hurled a Coco shell at an Elephant: which (because he could not then repay it) put the shell in his mouth, and a few dayes after seeing him in the street, at Cochin, he burled the same out of his mouth at the Souldier againe. Another Souldier iniured the keeper of an Elephant, which would haue reuenged the wrong, but was forbidden by his said keeper: but after espying the Souldier, when his keeper was absent; he tooke him vp in his trunke, and ducked him diuers times in the water, and then set him downe where he had taken him vp.  They are very ambitious. One being vpbrayded of lazinesse by his keeper, when as his burthen was to heauy for him to draw, and therefore they had brought another Elephant to help
 him; disdayning a companion, thrust him away, and drew him dead in the place. Another in like case fell on his fore-legs, and wept at his keepers chiding, and although he admitted a companion till the greater difficulty was ouercome, yet feeling it then in his owne power to draw, he put away the other Elephant with his head and teeth, to recouer his credit. Plutarch tels of one which learned his Theatricall gestures, practising them alone by Moonelight: another which reuealed his keepers hard vsage, to his Master, with other like Stories. Pliny reports things more incredible. Of the admirable capacity, gratitude, and other qualities of this beast, were tedious to recite. An ample testimony hereof, is the example of the King of Aua his Elephant before mentioned. Plutarch, Pliny and Aelian, adde also Religion,Plut. de An. comparat. in washing himselfe, adoring the Sunne, lifting vp his trunke into the Aire: but this was  rather the Relaters Superstition, as that which also followes in Plutarch, of Ioues offence with Antiochus, for offering foure Elephants in Sacrifice, in expiation whereof, hee made foure others of Brasse.
Galuanus in his Discoueries mentions a small vermine in Sian, which cleaueth fast to the trunke of the Elephant, and sucketh out his bloud and life: his scull is so hard, that it cannot be pierced with a Hand-gun: he addes, that in his Liuer is said to be the likenesse of men and women, and he which hath one of them about him, is safe from wounds by Iron. Perhaps it is the Cabal, a beast, whose bone did so preuayle in Nahodabegua, that no wounds, so long as his chaine was on, could bring any bloud from him, as is before obserued in our Relations of Malaca.  
The mightiest Elephant which euer I read of by many degrees (if not some degrees beyond truth) is that which Eleazar is said to kill, which exceeded his fellowes, and yet each of them bare (sayth the Story) two and thirty fighting men with their furniture, in woodden Castles, besides the keeper; whereas Pliny and Aelian,Ael. de An. lib. 13. c. 9. and Clarke speake but of three, and other Moderne Obseruers but of fiue or sixe in those Towres girded (for fight) to the Indian (and therefore the best) Elephants. Of the Rhinoceros is spoken before: the best are in Bengala. It is lesse and lower then the Elephant, snouted like a Hogge, with a horne therein, whence he hath this name. His skin seemeth as it were armed. It is enemy to the Elephant.
As for the Vnicorne we haue before obserued, That none hath beene seene these hundred  yeeres last past, by testimonie of any probable Authour (for Webbe, which sayth hee saw of them in Prester Iohns Court, is a meere fabler.) And Casper Swe^ckfieldDe Quadrup. Silesiae. a Physician testifieth of the common Vnicornes horne, that it is inferiour to Harts horne in efficacie against poysons: and therefore not likely to bee it. I could bee of opinion that the hornes in Venice and other places kept as Iewels, are of the Sea Vnicorne, a fish which hath a horne in the forehead or nose thereof. Linschoten thinkes the Rhinoceros is the onely Vnicorne. That the Rhinoceros is onely male, and the Vulture onely female, as Baubinus sheweth, many Authours conceit, is not only absurd, but impiousGen. 7.2. to hold.
Of the Tygers hath beene spoken, and the harme they doe in Pegu. Nicholas PimentaDe statu Rei Christ. in Ind. Or. reporteth, That the Tygers, Crocodiles, and a certaine Lizzard or Newt (Lerius saw the  like in Brasile) as great and as cruell as the former, doe wonderfull spoyle in Bengala, both by land and neere the shoares. Hee tels of one strange escape of a man in a vessell neere the shoare, assaulted at once by a Tyger from Land, and by a Crocodile from the water; and the Tyger with more swiftnesse and fury ayming at his prey, passed ouer him into the Crocodiles mouth. The admirable swiftnesse of this beast is recorded byLib. 8. cap. 18. Pliny. Authours agree,Lopes. Scal. Ex. 208. etc. That both in Asia and Africa, they rather prey on black people, then on the white Europaeans. A certaine Negro dreaming that he was torne of a Tyger, the next night lodged in a safer place of the ship, but there had his Dreame verified. The Bengalans doe not feare them, that superstitiously they giue diuers names vnto them, thinking if they should call them by the right name, they should be deuoured of them. Gods Prouidence hath yet appeared  in creating a little beast, not bigger then a little Dogge, which no sooner espieth this beast (the most dreadfull of any in the World) but presently assaults him, and with barking makes him run away, both beasts and men conueying themselues into places of safetie, so that sometimes this rauener dyes of hunger.
Muske is made of a certaine beast called Gudderi, which liueth, asM. Polo. lib. 2. cap. 37. Polo sayth, in Thebeth, and hath a kinde of swelling neere the nauell, which once in the Moone sheddeth his muskie bloud: the mostGos de Cruz. Mendoza, Cor. say it is a beast in China, which feedeth onely on a sweet root called Camarus: him they take and bruize all to pieces with blowes, and lay him where he soonest putrifieth, and then cut it out skinne and flesh together, and tye it vp like balles or coddes. Pantogia affirmeth, That it is the stomacke of a beast somewhat greater then  a Cat, which liueth in the Woods, in Countreyes adioyning to China. How-euer, our greatest sweete (wee see) is but rottennesse and putrifaction. There bee in Malacca, Sion
 and Bengala some Goats, whose hornes are esteemed excellent against Poyson, which Linschoten affirmeth of his owne experience.
As for Fowles, they haue Parrots of many kinds: some reckon fourteene, and Noyras more plea^ing in beauty, speech and other delights then the Parrot, but they cannot be brought out of that Countrey aliue. Of Bats they haue as bigge as Hennes, about Iaua and the n^ighbour Ilands, ClusiusClus. Exot. lib. 5. cap. 1. bought one of the Hollanders, which they brought from the Iland of Swannes, Ilha d^ Cer^^, newly stiled by them Maurice Iland; it was aboue a foote from the head to the tayle, aboue a foot about, the wings one and twenty inches long, nine broad, the claw whereby it hung on the trees, was two inches, the pisle easily seene, etc. HereCap. 4. ^hey  also found a Fowle which they called Walgh-vogel, of the bignesse of a Swanne, and most deformed shape.
InCap. 3. Banda and other Ilands, the Bird called Emia or Eme, is admirable. It is foure foot high, somewhat resembling an Ostrich, but hauing three clawes on the feete, and the same exceeding strong: it hath two wings, rather to helpe it running, then seruiceable for flight: the legges great and long: theyDe Bri. part. 5. Ind. Orient. say it hath no tongue, and that it putteth out the pisle backwards, as the Camell: that it deuoureth Oranges and Egges, rendring the same in the ordure, nothing altered. It strikes with the heeles like a Horse, will swallow an Apple whole as bigge as ones fist, yea, it swalloweth downe burning coles without harme,Cornel. Gerardi. and in a contrary extreme, pieces of Ice.
Of the Birds of Paradise, elsewhere is shewed the falshood of that opinion, which conceiue  them to want feet, whereas they goe as other birds, but being taken, the body (for the most part) together with the feet are cut off, and they being dryed in the Sunne, are so hardened and closed, as if Nature had so formed them. This is testified byItinerarium. A. Pigafet. Holland. Nau. Pigafetta, and the Hollanders, and my kind friend and louing Neighbour Master Henry Colthirst, hath had of them whole. Of this, Clusius in his Auctarium hath a large Discourse, shewing diuers kindes of them, a greater and lesse: and sayth that Iohn de Weely of Amsterdam sold one of them, which had feete, to the Emperour, 1605. But I would not herein be tedious. Of the Birds and Beasts of India, Acosta, Linschoten, Clusius, besides Gesner and others, can informe the studious.
They haue Crowes so bold, that they will come flying in at the windowes, and take the meate out of the dish, as it standeth on the Table before them that are set thereat: and are  such vexation to the Buffles, that they are forced to stand in waters vp to the necks, that they may be rid of them. Pyrard tels of the like Crowes in the Maldiues both dreadlesse and numberlesse, and of great trouble which they haue there by the Gnats, Rats, Mice, Dormice, and Pismires noysome beyond credit, as also Snakes and Sharkes. He tels of Pingueys, foules as bigge as Pigeons which so fill the Aire and Earth in some Ilands that they can scarsly set their foot free: their Egges are hatched by the Sands, which are white and subtile like that of an Houreglasse, by reason of the heat. They haue Rats, which the Cats dare not touch, as bigge as young Pigges, which vndermine the foundations of houses in such sort with their diggings, that they sometimes fall to the ground. There are other little red Rats, which smell like Muske. Incredible is the scathe which they receiue in Goa by the Pismires, which with  such huge multitudes will presently assayle any thing that is fattie, or to be eaten, that they are forced to set their cupboords and chists, wherein are their victuals and apparell, with a woodden Cisterne of water vnder euery of their foure feete, and that in the middle of the roome. And if they forget to haue water in the Cisterne, presently these Ants are all ouer, and in the twinkling of an eye (sayth Linschoten) they will consume a loafe of bread. The like Cisternes haue they for their Beds and Tables: and for the Perches whereon they set their Canary birds which else would bee killed by Pismires, yea though it hung on a string from the roofe of the house. The poorer sort which want cupboords, hang their fragments in a cloth on the wall, hauing a circle of Charcoales about it; with this wall to keepe out this small creature, and great enemy. There are other Ants almost a finger long, and reddish,  which doe great harme to fruits and plants. Great is the harme which Moths and Wormes do in mens Clothes and Bookes, which can very hardly bee kept from them. But more hurtfull is the Baratta, which flyeth, and is twice as bigge as a Bee, from which nothing almost can be kept close enough, and are to be esteemed as a plague among them, like to the Pismires, and are commonly in all fat wares and sweet meats, and when they come vpon apparell, they leaue their stayning Egges behind.
The Salamander is saidIcones de Br^ Ind. Or. part. 4, to be common in the Ile of Madagascar, an Iland of Africa, by which they sayle to India. Of SerpentsI. Vert. l. 5. cap. 22. they haue diuers kinds, and very venemous, besides one other kind as bigge as a Swine, which is destitute of poyson, and hurteth onely by byting.  But the superstition of the King of Calicut multiplyeth their Serpents. For he causeth Cottages to be set vp to keep them from the raine, and maketh it death to whomsoeuer that shall kill a Serpent or a Cow. They thinke Serpents to be heauenly Spirits, because they can
 so suddenly kill men. So much hath that old Serpent, both at first, and since, deluded men by this venemous creature. ThereAn. Galu^no. are Hogges with hornes in the Moluccas: in Celebes and Mindanao are Hogges, which besides the teeth they haue in their mouthes, haue other two growing out of their snowts, and as many behind their Eares of a large spanne and a halfe in length.
Of fish they haue great plenty and variety. They haue of Hayent or Tuberon^, which deuoure men, especially such as fish for Pearles. And others bathe themselues in Cisternes, not daring to aduenture the Riuers for them. One Thomas Smith an Englishman, riding before Surate, entring into the water, had the outside of his thigh shared off by one of them: and though he escaped from the fish, yet not from death, by effusion of bloud. Linschoten tels the  like in his ship, that one had his legge bitten off, and putting his hand to the place, was presently depriued thereof: but this is too common. Of fish-monsters like men, and like an Hogge some write: and as monstrous is that, which MaffaeusMaff. hist. Ind. lib. 7. telleth of a Whale, which with the oppos^tion of his huge body, stayed the course of a ship, sayling with eight other ships into India, with so great a noyse and shaking, as if they had fallen on a Rocke. Neyther could the winds, which filled the sayles, further her course. The Mariners, when they saw two Elements of wind and current, so strongly encountred, looked out and saw this Monster, with her sins embracing the sides of the ship, and enterlacing the sterne with her tayle, applying her bodie to the Keele; which contained aboutAn hundred and fiue, Dodrantes. eighty foot in length. They thought presently that some hellish Fiend had beene sent to deuoure them; and consulted of remedy,  at last sent out their Priest in his holy Vestments, with Crosses and Exorcismes: (who like the greater D^uill) preuailed with these weapons; and the Whale forsooke them without further hurt.
There areLins. cap. 48. certaine fish shels, like Scalop shels, found on the shoare; so great, that two strong men with a leauer can scarce draw one of them after them. They haue fish within them. A ship (called Saint Peter) fell vpon sands, sayling from Cochin, and split. The men saued themselues, and of the wood of the old ship built a Caruall, wherein to get the Continent; but in the meanewhile were forced to make a Sconce, and by good watch to defend themselues from certaine Crabs of exceeding greatnesse, and in as great numbers, and of such force, that whosoeuer they got vnder their clawes, it cost him his life, as two Mariners of  the ship told Linschoten.
No lesse strange is that which hapned to Captayne S^ris in his way betweene Saint Laurence and Zeilan, in a darke night when they could not see halfe the shippes length before them, on a sudden they had a fierie gleame, and shining light from the waters, so that they might thereby see to reade. At the first they were afraid of broken grounds, but after found it to bee nothing but certayne shell fish in those waters, whose shels yeelded so bright a lustre.
Crabs heere with vs haue a sympathy with the Moone, and are fullest with her fulnesse: in India there is a contrary antipathy for at full Moone they are emptiest.
They haue Oysters, in which the Pearles are found, which are fished for by duckers, that diue into the water, at least ten, twenty, or thirty fathome. These men are naked, and haue a  basket bound at their backs, which being at the bottome, they rake full of Oysters and durt together, and then rise vp and put them into Boats. They lay them after on the Land, where the Sunne causeth them to open, and then they take out sometime many, sometime few Pearles, as each Oyster yeeldeth, which is sometimes two hundred graines and more. The King hath one part; the Souldier, a second; the Iesuites, a third; and the fishers themselues the fourth: a small recompence for so great a danger, in which many men euery fishing time lose their liues. The Hollanders found Tortoyses so great, that tenne men might sit and dine within one of the shels.


@. II.  Of the Indian Trees, Fruits, and strange Plants.
OF the Indian Plants diuers haue written, both in their generall Herbals, as Pena and Lobel, Gerard, with other Herbarists, and in peculiar workes of this subiect, Clusius, Garcias de Orto, Christopher Acosta, etc. Some also pretending themselues Natures Principall Secretaries, haue found out in these and the like, not onely temperatures, learned by experience, butOswald. Crelliu^ de signaturis Signatures of Natures owne Impression, fitted to their seuerall and speciall vses in Physicke, finding out a strange harmony and likenesse  in the greater and lesser World: but leauing these speculations to better leisure, let vs take a little view of the Indian Trees, Plants and Fruits.

Of their Fruits, Ananas is reckonedPaludanus. one of the best: in taste like an Ap^icocke, in shew a farre off like an Artichoke, but without prickles, very sweet of scent. It was first brought out of the West Indies hither: it is as great as a Melon; the Iuyce thereof is like sweet Must: it is so hote of Nature, that if a Knife sticke in it but halfe an houre, when it is drawne forth, it will be halfe eaten vp: yet moderately eaten, hurteth not a man. Iacas are bigger then the former, and grow out of the body of the tree: they are of many pleasant tastes, but hard to digest.
Of Mangas there are three sorts, they are as bigge as Goose-egges. The first sort hath stones, which the second wanteth: the third is poyson so deadly, that yet no remedy  hath beene found against it. Of the like bignesse is the Caions, yellow, of good sauour, full of Iuyce like Lemmons: at the end (as Apples haue a stalke, so) this Fruit hath a Nut like the kidney of a Hare, with kernels toothsome and wholsome. The lambos exceedeth in beauty, taste, smell, and medicinable vertue: it is as bigge as a Peare, smelleth like a Rose, is ruddie; and the tree is neuer without fruit or blossomes, commonly each branch hauing both ripe and vnripe fruits, and blossomes all at once: Linschoten saith, on the one side, the tree hath ripe fruites, and the leaues falne, the other couered with leaues and flowres, and it beareth three or foure times in a yeere. The Iangomas grow on a tree like a Plum-tree, full of prickles, and haue power of binding. The Papaios will not grow, but Male and Female together: but of these, also the Carambolas, Iambolijns and other Indian fruits, I leaue to speake, as not writing  an Indian Herball, but onely minding to mention such things, which, besides their Country, haue some variety of Nature, worthy the obseruation. For the rest, Gracias ab Horto translated by Carolus Clusius, Paludanus, Linschoten, Christophorus Acosta (writing particularly of these things) and others in their generall Herbals, may acquaint you.
Of this sort is the Indian Figge tree: if it may be called a tree, which is not aboue a mans height, and within like to a Reed, without any woody substance: it hath loaues a fathome long, and three span abroad, which open and spread abroad on the top of it. It yeeldeth a fruit in fashion of the clusters of Grapes, and beareth but one bunch at once, contayning some two hundred Figges at least, which being ripe, they cut the whole tree downe to the ground, leauing onely the root, out of which presently groweth another, and within a moneth  after beareth fruit, and so continueth all the yeere long. They are the greatest sustenance of the Country, and are of very good taste, and smell, and in those parts men beleeue that Adam first transgressed with this fruit.
But of greater admiration is theOf this besides Linschoten see Garcias ab Horto, with Clusius notes. Exot. l. 7. c. 2.6. Coquo tree, being the most profitable tree in the world, of which in the Ilands of Maldiua they make and furnish whole ships: so that (saue the men themselues) there is nothing of the ship, or in the ship, neyther tackling, merchandize, or ought else but what this tree yeeldeth. The tree groweth high and slender, the wood is of a spungy substance, easie to bee sowed, when they make Vessels thereof, with cordes made of Cocus. For this Nut (which is as bigge as an Estridge Egge) hath two sorts of huskes, as our Walnuts, whereof the vppermost is hayry (like hempe) of which they make Ockam and  Cordage, of the other shell they make drinking Cups. The fruit, when it is almost ripe, is full of water within; which by degrees changeth into a white harder substance, as it ripeneth. The liquor is very sweet, but with the ripening groweth sowre. The liquor extracted out of the tree is medicinable; and if it stand one houre in the Sunne, it is very good Vineger, which being distilled, yeeldeth excellent Aquauitae, and Wine. Of it also they make, by setting it in the Sunne, Sugar. Of the meate of the Nut dryed, they make Oyle. Of the pith or heart of the tree is made paper for Bookes and Euidences. Of the leaues they make couerings for their Houses, Mats, Tents, etc. Their apparell, their firing, and the rest of the Commodities which this tree (more plentifull in the Indies, then Willowes in the Low Countryes) yeeldeth, would be too tedious to recite. They will keepe the tree from bearing fruit, by cut^ing  away the blossomes, and then will hang some Vessell thereat, which receiueth from thence that liquor, of which you haue heard. It is the Canarijns liuing, and they will climbe vp these trees, which yet haue no boughes, but on the top, like Apes. This tree hath also a continuall succession of fruits, and is neuer without some.
No lesse wonder doth that treeClusius describeth this tree out of the Relations of Plin. lib. 12. Curt. l. 9. Strabo l. 5. Theophrastus lib. 4. and mentioneth like kinds (if not the same) out of Lopez de Castagneda lib. 7. Ouiedo lib. 6. Lopez or Pigafetta of Congo, etc. Clus. Exot. l^b. 1. c. 1. cause, which is called Arbore de rais, or the Tree of Roots: Clusius calleth it (by Plinies authoritie) the Indian Figge tree: and Goropius (with) more confidence, then reason) affirmeth it to be the Tree of Adams transgression. It groweth out of the ground, as other trees, and yeeldeth many boughes, which yeeld certayne threeds of the colour of Gold, which growing down-wards to the earth, doe there take root againe, making as it were new trees, or a wood of trees, couering by this meanes, the best part somtimes  of a mile: in which the Indians make Galleries to walke in: The Figges are like the common, but not so pleasant.
The Arbore tristeGarcias ab Horto, lib. 2. c. 1. C. Acosta c. 37. sayth it growes most in Malabar. deserueth mention: It growes at Goa, brought thither (as is thought)
 from Malacca: The Hollanders saw one at Achi in Samatra. In the day time and at Sunne-setting, you shall not see a flowre on it; but within halfe an houre after, it is full of flowres, which at the Sun-rising fall off; the leaues shutting themselues from the Sunnes presence, and the tree seeming as if it were dead. The flowres in forme and greatnesse are like to those of the Orange-tree, but sweeter, in Acostas iudgement, then any flowres which euer hee smelled: the Portugals haue vsed all meanes to haue it grow in Europe, but our Sunne hath refused to nourish such sullen vnthankfull Malecontents.
And that yee may know the Indians want not their Metamorphoses and Legends, they tell that a man named Parisatico, had a Daughter, with whom the Sunne was in loue; but lightly forsaking her, he grew amorous of another: whereupon this Damosell slue herselfe,  and of the ashes of her burned carkasse came this tree.
BetteleThe Plant Bettele. is a leafe somewhat like a Bay leafe, and climbeth like Iuie, and hath no other fruit: neither is any fruit more in vse then these leaues: at bed and boord, and in the streets as they passe, they chew these leaues; and in their gossippings or visiting of their friends, they are presently presented with them; and eate them with Arecca, which is a kind of Indian Nut. It saueth their teeth from diseases, but coloureth them as if they were painted with blacke bloud. When they chew it, they spit out the iuyce, and it is almost the onely exercise of some, which thinke they could not liue, if they should abstaine one day from it.
They haue an Herbe called Dutroa, which causeth distraction, without vnderstanding any thing done in a mans presence: sometimes it maketh a man sleepe, as if hee were dead the  space of foure and twentie houres, except his feet be washed with cold water, which restoreth him to himselfe; and in much quantitie it killeth. Iarric cals it Dotur^, and sayth that Pinnerus the Iesuite and his Family at Lahor, were by meanes of this herbe (giuen them by a theeuish seruant) distracted, and the goods then carried out of their house. The women giue their husbands thereof, and then in their sights will prostitute their bodies to their Iewder louers, and will call them Coruudos, stroking them by the beard: the husband sitting with his eyes open, grinning like a Foole, when he returneth to himselfe, knoweth nothing but that hee hath slept.
Another strange herbe is called Sentida, or feeling,Herba Viua. Acost. They haue the like Plant in Guiana. for that if any passe by it, and toucheth it, or throweth sand or any thing else on it, presently it becommeth as if it were withered,  and closeth the leaues; so continuing as long as the man standeth by; but so soone as he is gone, openeth fresh and faire: and touching it againe, it withereth as before. The Indians suppose it will procure loue, and restore Virginitie: A Physician amongst them became mad with studying to find out the nature of this herbe. Pigafetta speakes of another sort, as after shall follow.
But the strangest plant (for so may we terme it) is, that at Goa the hornes of beasts slaughtered are throwne together in one place, lest they should bee occasion of indignation and reproach to any; the shewing or naming of a horne being there ominous: These hornes thus cast forth, after a certaine time, take root, and the roots grow two or three spannes in length.  
GaluanoDiscon. Galu. telleth of a tree in Mindanao; the one halfe whereof (which standeth towards the East) is a good remedy against poyson: the Westerne halfe yeeldeth the strongest Poyson in the World. There is a stone, on which whosoeuer sitteth, shall bee broken in his body. The Tree of Iapan which thriues best with that which kils other Trees, and (in a Naturall antipathy to Nature) is killed with that moysture which quickens others; and that in Ciumbubon whose leaues are said to haue feete and to goe: in their due places shall bee mentioned. But of all the most wonderfull is that Plant of Sumbrero (an Iland not farre from Nicubar and Sumatra) growing on the Sands by the Sea side: which some English (then being there with Sir Iames Lancaster) offering to pull vp, shrunke it selfe into the ground, as hauing sensitiue life and motion; neyther without greater force would it bee brought forth.  The cause they found, that the Roote is a great Worme, which (as the Plant growes into a greater tree) dyes by degrees, or exchangeth that sensitiue into a vegetatiue life. The first growth is out of the mouth of the Worme, being then but a small twigge, full of greene leaues as bigge as a Bay leafe; the Worme in processe of the growth turnes into this tall growing Tree. The Reader may smile, as at Virgils Polydorus, or some of Ouids Metamorphosis, thinking this incredible: but yet behold another change. They plucked vp some of these resisting Plants, to bring them home for rarities (as they did many) stripping off the leaues and barke: and thereby (I know not with what naturall horrour) they after found that as it dryed, it died beneath the name of Death, into a hard stone, like white Corall. Thus haue you a three-fold Retrograde in one thing:Viues de Anima, lib. 1. From that degree of life which hath  locall motion to a Stirpanimans or (...), a sensitiue Plant, which mooueth it selfe but not out of the same place, as Oysters and the like: from thence in a second remooue
 to a meere Plant or Tree: and in a third degre^ to a Tropiditie, and stonie lifelessenesse. Nor doe thou deride this as mostrous, incredible, impossible:The Retrograde of Man. (I leaue the certaintie thereof to the Relators) but examine if in thy selfe thou find^st not a greater and more manif^ld Retrograde in this Storie of Creatures, what fitter to bee obserued then MAN for whom the rest were Created?) in thy selfe. Homo is homulus, degenerate from that Man which God created  after his owne Image and become the Diminutiue of Himselfe: Nay lesse then that, not Homulus  but Mulus, as the Horse and Mule, that hath no vnderstanding: A Mule! that is a profitable beast; but of Men (not the Cretans alone) that of Epimenides and Paul is true,Tit. 1.12. (...). (...), They are euill beasts, yea, euill wilde beasts, yea, euill, wilde, and venemous, (the word  will beare it) Nay Saint Paul proceeds in further degrading this proud Man, (...) bellies,  the worst part of the worst beasts, all bellies like Spi^ers; Nay worse, for their bellies  worke nets to keepe them, but these are slow bellies, idle, nay Idol-bellies; slow except in deuouring,  and therein the Gluttons God: quorum Deus venter. Magister artis, ingenijque largitor Venter; Euen till like Oysters wee haue but sense for sensualitie, for touch and taste; this Pinguis aquiliculus propenso sesquipede extans,Dux Saxons not scarcely suffering vs to moue from the Table: and that also a Great and bigge Prince in our dayes hath had cut with a great in-let for his great belly. The Belly! as well a shapen Deitie, as the Vmbilicus of Iupiter Ammon! But alas the Belly, and what Nature hath placed beneath it, hath placed vs beneath that sensitiue life, which the Belly hath, and with this Plant heere mentioned, wee are Wormes not  Men, Plants not Wormes, (Popuius prima corrupta is Populus) our corruption from our first  state hath made the whole people of Mankinde as a Moorish ill planted Plant: Yea in the Greeke it hath a more fit name,(...) Of another Greeke word (...), a Stone. Durumgenus, Et documenta damus qua simus origine nati, Virg. (...), our retrograde is into a hard stone. So vaine a thing  is Man.


@. III. Of Spices and Drugges.
 PEpper (whereof there are diuers sorts) groweth at the foot of Arecca, or some other Tree, on which it climbeth, as a Betele orHieron. da S. Stephano. Iuie; growing in bunches like grapes, halfe a spanne long, and as bigge as ones finger, greene like Iuie when it is gathered, and in fiue or sixe dayes drying in the Sunne becomes blacke.
CinamonGarcias ab Horto. l. 1. c. 15. is the inner barke of a Tree, as bigge as an Oliue; with leaues like Bay-leaues, and fruit like an Oliue: The drying of the barke maketh it roll together. Within three yeeres after, the tree yeeldeth another barke, as before. In Seylon is the best. They of Ormuz call it Darchina, that is, wood of China: and selling it at Alexandria, call itQuasi Amom^m ex Sina delatum. Cinnamomum.
GingerGinger. groweth like young Reedes, or Gladiolus, with a roote like a Lilly: it is plentifull  in Malabar.
ClouesCloues. grow in the Moluccos on trees, like Bay-trees, yeelding blossomes, first white, then greene (at which time they yeeld the pleasantest smell in the world) and last of all red and hard, which are the Cloues. They are so hot of nature, that if a payle or tubbe of water should stand in the Chamber, when they clense them, or any vessell of Wine or other moysture, in two dayes the Cloues would sucke it out and drie it. The same nature is of the vnspunne Silke of China.
The Nutmeg-tree,Nutmegs. is like a Peach or Peare-tree, and groweth most in Banda and Iaua. The fruit is like a Peach, the inner part whereof is the Nutmegge, which is couered and interlaced with the Ma^e or flowre, and ouer that is the fruit like a Peach, as I haue seene  them conserued. When the fruit is ripe, the first and outermost part openeth, as it is with our Walnuts, then the Mace flourisheth in a faire red colour, which in the ripening becommeth yellow.
Cardamomum is of three sorts; the Indians vse it in their meates, and commonly chew it in their mouthes, as being good against a stinking breath, and euill humours in the head: it is much like to Panike.
Lac.Lac is a strange drugge, made by certaine winged Pismires of the gumme of Trees, which they sucke vp, and then make the Lac round about the branches, as the Bees make  honey and waxe. The raw Lac is of a darke red colour, but being refined, they make it of all colours, and therewith vernish their Beds, Tables, and vse it for other ornaments, and for hard Waxe. So saith Paludanus; they beate the Lac to powder, and so mixe all manner of colours vpon it, as they list, and make thereof such rolles as are heere sold for hard Waxe.

IudicoIndico. or Annil growes on small bushes, like Goosebe^ry bushes, and beares a Seed like a Cabbage, as is before obserued, cut vp, and after long rotting, ^rodden by Oxen, and ground. Linschoten sayth, it is sowne as other Herbs, in due time pulled and dryed, and then made wet, and beaten, and then dryed againe, and prepared; first it is greene, and after blue.
OfSanders. Sanders there are three sorts, white, yellow, and red. In Tymor, an Iland by Iaua, are whole Woods of Sanders: the trees are like Nut-trees, with a fruit like a Cherry, but vnprofitable; onely the wood (which is the Sanders) is esteemed.
SnakewoodSnakewood. groweth in Seylon, and is good against the stinging of Snakes and other poyson, a Medicine learned of the beast Quit, (which being in continuall enmity with Snakes, herewith healeth their bytings.
The trees ofCalamba. Lignum Aloes are like Oliue trees, but somewhat greater: the innermost  part of the wood is best, with blacke and browne veines, and yeelding an Oyly moysture: it is sold in weight against Siluer and Gold. There is anotherPala d' Aquilla kinde, wherewith they burne their dead Bramen^s. The best, which they call Calamba, growes in Malacea, and is vsed much for Beads and Crucifixes. Monfart sayth, the Portugals pay a hundred Crownes a pound for it to make their Beades.
Opium.Opium is the Iuyce of the heads of blacke Poppie beeing cut: a dangerous drugge, vsed much in Asia and Africa, which makes them goe as if they were halfe asleepe: they suppose I know not what coniunction and efficacy both of Mars and Venus therein: but being once vsed, must daily be continued on paine of death, which some escaped in AcostaesAcost. and Arom. company  by the helpe of wine. Bangue is another Receit of like vse, especially with slaues and souldiers, makes them drunke merry, and so to forget then labour.
CiuetCiuet. or Algalia, is the sweate of the Ciuet Cat, and growes in the outermost part of the Cods, and is hote and moyst.
BenioinBenioin. is a kind of Gumme like Frankinscence and Myrrhe, but more esteemed: it growes in the Kingdome of Siam, Iaua, Sumatra, and Malacca. The tree is high, full of branches with leaues like those of the Lemmon tree: They cut the tree, and from those slits proceedeth this Gumme: which is best when the tree is young, and is called Benioin of the sweete smell. The old trees yeeld white, the young blacke. Of Frankincense wee haue spoken in Arabia: it is also a Gum, the best on those trees that grow on hils and stony places, Myrrhe  is a Gumme also brought out of Arabia Foelix, and the Abexine Coast.
MannaManna. is brought from the Vsbeks Countrey behind Persia, and reckoned to Tartar^^^ ^^d is a dew that falleth on certaine trees, and hangeth on the leaues, like Ice on the Ty^^ of houses. It is gathered and kept in glasse Vials, and ^^ch vsed in India.
CamphoraCamphora. is the Gumme of certaine trees in Borneo and China, as great as Nut-trees, sweating out from the midst of the same. TamarindTamarind. groweth on a tree as great as a Plum-tree, with leaues like Mirtle, the flowers white like Orange flowers. The leaues of the tree turne alwayes toward the Sunne, and when it goeth downe, they shut together and couer the huske. The fruit is about a finger long, crooked, with shels, wherein are kernels as bigge as a beane, couered about with that which they call the Tamarind. Of Mi^obolanesMirobolanes. are fiue sorts almost  like Plummes. SpiconardSpiconard. is sowne and growes on plants about two or three spannes high like Corne, with great veines, wherein the Spiconard groweth. CubebusCubebus. growes like Pepper or Iuy against a tree, the leaues like Pepper leaues and the huskes; but euery graine hath a stalke of it selfe: But if I should here recite the Indian Leafe, the Galanga, Canna Fistula, with the rest: I should tire the Reader with an Apothecaries Bill. These (as the rarest or chiefe) I haue chosen so (as it were) to recreate our Reader with a walke, and houres view in this Indian Garden, being before full cloyed with our tedious Narrations of their Superstitions. I might adde heere a Discourse of Gemmes, as Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds, etc. But it becommeth not my pouerty to talke so much of Iewels. Monfart tels that the King of Biznega hath a Rock of Diamonds, in which he keepes fifteene thousand men at worke, reseruing all the  greater to himselfe, so that none are sold but smaller, except by stealth. Hee sayth, hee saw one with the Great Mogoll as bigge as a Henne Egge, purloyned from this King, and cost the other little lesse then a Million. It waygheth foure score and eighteene Mangelins, euery Mangelin fiue graines. TheBezar-stone. Bezar-stones are likewise taken out of the Maw of a Persian or Indian Goat, which the Persians call Pazar. And in the Countrey of Pan, by Malacca, they finde within the Gall of an Hogge a stone, of greater force against Poyson and other Diseases, then that Pazar-stone. It is thought that these Stones doe proceede of the pasture whereon these Beastes feede. The Amber is found as well in other places as in India.Garcias ab Horto in Clus. E^ot. l. b. 7. c. 1. Vid. Seal. Ex. 104. Garcias thinkes it to bee the nature of the Soyle, as Chalke, Bole-armenike, etc. and not the Seed of the Whale, or issuing from some Fountayne in the Sea, as others  hold. Clusius tels a probable opinion of D. Marel, that it was an excrement gathered in the Whales belly.

But of these and of inumerable other both sensitiue and vegetable creatures the Reader in our Pilgrims or Voyages now published, may obserue from others eyes much more then here is place to expresse.



CHAP. XIII. A generall discourse of the Sea, and of the Seas in  and about Asia.

@. I. Of the true place, forme, greatnesse, and depth of the Sea.
AFter our long perambulation of the Asian Continent, the Sea inuironing doth sollicite our next endeuours, that the Reader might there refresh his wearied  sense, with a new succession of Natures varieties, and Humane vanities. And first, while our Barke be made readie to ship vs ouer to some of those Ilands, let vs (as it were on the shore) take view of this, so strong, so weake, so constant, and so vnconstant watery Element. That the Earth and Sea make one Globe, we haue elsewhere shewed in the History of their Creation. In which, the Earth being (as it seemeth) at the first forming of it, more perfectly Spherical, and wholy couered with Waters, by the power of that Almighty Decree and Word (Let the waters be gathered into one place, that the dry Land may appeare) both the Waters (asAugustine* Aquinas, etc. some gather) were more condensate, which before were more subtle, and therefore occupied more roome; and the EarthDamas. lib 2. de Orth. fid. c. 10 Vid. Clauium in I.S.B. and Brerewoods Enquiri^, c. 13. was in some places lifted vp, in others depressed with deepe Furrowes and Trenches to make roome and  conuenient receptacles for the Sea; and withall f^^ matter yeelded for the eleuation both of Mountaynes aboue the ordinary height of the Earth, and of the Earth and Continent also in the higher places, whence the greatest Riuers deriue their Originall, in comparison of the Lowes and Maritime parts, where they empty themselues into the Sea. This is the proper seate of the Element or Water, called Aqua, quast aequa,Isid. Orig. l. 13. c. 12. of the equall and plaine face and superficies thereof, or as Lactantius with a further fetch obserueth, a qua nata sunt omnia, because hence all things are bred and nourished. Now because Waters are eyther without Motion, as in Lakes; or of an vniforme Motion, as in Riuers; or diuers, as in the Sea; the HeathenAesch. Scholiastes. ascribed a Trident or three-fold Scepter to Neptune, their supposed Sea-god.
That the Earth and Sea haue one and the same Centre, both of Grauity and Greatnesse, appeareth by this, that the parts of the Earth and Water falling from a high place, without  other impediment, haue the same direct descent: a piece of Earth also falleth perpendicularly into the Water, with equall and right Angles. And that the Water naturally inclineth to a roundnesse, appeareth in the small drops thereof, which gather themselues into that forme, and by the easier discerning things on shore from the tops, then from the hatches of the ship in the^rVid. I. de Sa^. Bosc. Clau. Murulam, etc. Sea: likewise by the eleuation or depression of the Pole and Stars, no lesse in sayling, then land-trauels, to the North or South: also in preuenting or lengthning the Sunnes light by sayling East or West, as before hath beene obserued in the Spaniards and Portugals, meeting at the Philippina's, and differing a whole day in their reckoning, the Portugals losing by meeting the Sunne in their Easterne course, that which the Spaniards get by following  him in a Westerne. Yea, euen in one dayes sayling this may be manifest,Record. cast. l. 4* as Record instanceth in a ship sayling West from Is^land, in one of their dayes of twenty houres getting halfe an houre, and in the next day returning with like swiftnesse, loseth as much of the Sunne. Yea in Riuers of very long course, besides that descent (before mentioned) from higher to lower passages, someEras. Reinholt. vid. Keck. Problem nautica and Dan^. tract 3. Pbys. Ar^st. de Cael. l. 2 c 14. obserue a kind of roundnesse or circular rising in compassing the Globe, which else must need^ be exceedingly difformed in the Riuers of Nilus, Amazones, and others which runne neere an eighth part thereof.
The Sea is great and wide, saythPsal. 104.25. and 26. the Psalmist: and at first couered the whole earth like a garment, till for mans vseGen. 1.9. the dry land appeared, which for mans abuse was againe in the dayes of Noah couered. And had not GodPsal. 104 9. set the Sea a bound which it cannot passe, it would (so  some translate it) returne to couer the earth for euer. It is hisIer^m. 5.2^. perpetuall decree, who commanded, and it was made, that though the waues thereof rage, yet they cannot preuaile; though they roare, yet they cannot passe ouer. And thus many of the ancient and later Interpreters of Genesis
 doe auerre, that the Earth is indeed lower then the Waters, as in the beginning of t^is Worke is obserued, as if God did by a kinde of miracle in Nature, bridle and restraine the t^mpestuous force of the Sea, Rerum omnium inualidissima (to vse Basils words) debilissimaque arena: with Sand the weakest of all creatures. Thus held Aquinas, Carthusianus, Catharinus, and others. Which opinion being granted, how easie were it for the Sea to enclose the Earth in her watrie mantle, and againe to make a Conquest of the drie Land, hauing such forces of her owne, and such re-inforcements from the Ayre and the Earth it selfe? Her owne powers, euen by order of Nature and proportion of the Elements, cannot but seeme dreadfull: in which, as the Ayre exceedeth the Water, and is it selfe exceeded of the Fire; so the Water to some seemes no lesse to surmount the Earth, as the lowest and least of the Elements.  And what Armies of exhalations doth the Sunne daily muster in the great Ayrie plaine, which would succour their Mother in such an attempt? Besides that, euen the Earth, as it is euery where compassed of the Sea, doth compasse in it selfe so many Seas, Lakes, Riuers, in the vppermost face thereof, as professed partakers; and the inward bowels thereof haue daily in^elligence, and continuall conspiracie with the waters, by those secret pores and priuie passages, whereby it commeth to passe, that albeitEccles. 1.7. All Riuers runne to the Sea, yet the Sea is not filled. And were it possible that so many worlds of waters should daily and hourely flow into this watrie world, and that such a world of time together, and yet the Sea nothing increased, but tha^ (as Salamon there saith) The Riuers goe to the place from whence they returne and goe? that is, they runne into the Sea, and thence, partly by the Sunnes force, eleuated  and restored in Raines, and other Meteors, partly by filling the veynes of the Earth with Springs, doe both wayes returne againe in Riuers to the Sea. ThisVid. Zanc. de O^er. and G.B.B. Rel. Arist etc. appeareth by the Dead Sea, and by the Caspian, which receiue many Riuers without open payment thereof to the Ocean: and at the Straits of Gibraltar, the Ocean commonly hath a current in at one end, and the Euxine Sea at the other, besides abundance of other waters out of Europe, Asia, Africa, and yet is no fuller.
Psal. 107.24.Many indeed are the wonders of the Lord in the deepe, and this concerning the height, depth, and profunditie thereof one of the highest, deepest, and requiring the profoundest skill to search. That the waters are gathered on swelling heapes in round forme, compassing the Earth, is already proued; which to a vulgar capacitie may seeme to enforce a height of the  water aboue some parts of the Earth: but seeing that the earth and waters haue one Center, and height is properly to bee measured by distance from that Center; it seemeth vnlikely that the water should be higher then the Earth: or altogether equall to the height thereof, in whose Channels and concauities it is contayned. And though the Sea swelleth, and lifteth vp it selfe into that forme which best agreeth to that Globe which is compact of it and the Earth: yet is it not capable (being a l^q^id fluible body) in the greatest depth and widenesse, of such eleuations as wee see in high and Mountaynous Regions, whereby the Earth seemeth to exceed the due and iust proportion of her owne Globositie, and thereby no lesse to excell the highest eleuation (as wee may tearme it) of the Sea, then the Cliffes and Shores doe those Waters which approach them. And what needs a conceit of miracle in the very  ordinary constitution and conseruation of Nature? though all Nature, if wee regard it as a Creation by supernall power, bee nothing else but miracle. Some indeed dreame of I know not what proportion of the Elements, wherby they would haue the Water to exceed the Earth, as before is said: and it is true that the vpper face and vtter superficies of the Waters (for ought that is knowne to the contrary) is as greatScalig. saith twice so great. as that of the Earth. But if wee compare the depth of the Waters with the Diameter of the Earth, we shall find that in most places the one is not so many Fathoms as the other is Miles. Yea whoeuer soundeth at such depth? And whereas the Diameter of the Earth is by some reckoned 6872^/11. Miles, and by some more, who euer cast Line and Lead into the Sea to measure a thousand Fathom? Yea, inScal. Exerc. 38 Scaligers opinion, the Earth is so much greater then the Water, that if the Mountaines  were cast downe into these watry receptacles, and the Earth brought into a perfect roundnesse, there would no place in it be left for the Water. RecordRec. Castle. l. 4 recordeth not so much as he, yet holds the Earth almost ten thousand times as great as the Sea and all other waters. And if wee receiue the Iewish Tradition, mentioned by our Apocrypha4. Esdr. 6.4^. and 47. Esdras, this may bee more probable: for hee saith, that (euen in the vtter face of the Globe) the Waters were gathered into a seuenth part, and sixe parts of the Earth kept drie. Some imagineT. Lid. disq. de Or. font. a bottomlesse depth, passing quite thorow the Earth, through which the Moone being in the other Hemisphere, causeth the heightning of the Tides, no lesse then when she is present in ours; Which gaue no small helpe also in their conceit in the generall Deluge: which if it be true, addes a greater proportion to the Sea then wee haue obserued. But because little reason, and no experience  can be shewed for this Assertion, I will not insist in refutation. But that Deluge being caused by breaking vp the Fountaines below, and violent Stormes from aboue, confute
 that opinion that the Sea should be higher then the Earth, which then might haue effected the Floud without either of those former causes.
But why doe I drowne my innocent Reader, with my selfe, in these Depths of the Sea? which some measure by the height of Hills; othersBrerewood Enquir c. 13. resemble those extraordinarie Land-heights to extraordinarie Whirle-Pooles: but seeing the Sea is Tenant to the Earth, which hath (as before we haue said) remoued it selfe in some sort, to make way and roome for it, the more ordinarie height and eleuation of the one, may seeme to answere the more ordinary depth and descending of the other. These bottomes of the Sea haue also their diuersified shape and forme, as it were of Hillockes, Mountaynes, Valleyes, with theThe Banke towards New-found Land is as a large hilly Region of the Sea, See l. 8. c. 4. Accliuities and Decliuities  of Places, as in the Shelues, Shallowes, Rockes, Ilands appeareth. And as the Land is not onely higher then the Sea at the shore, so is it apparant, that in remote places from the Sea, the Land doth (besides the exorbitant swellings of Mountaynes) in the ordinary leuell exceed the height of Maritine regions, which thence receiue those Riuers which require descent all the way of their passage, which in some is one thousand in some two thousand miles. And therefore is it likely also that the Sea answers in like proportion, it being obserued to grow shallower neere the shoare, and differently deeper in the farther recesse of the Maine.


 @. II. Of the Saltnesse and Motions of the Sea.
THe saltnesse of the Sea some ascribePatric. Pancos. l. 24. Ita enim ab initio factum est mare sicut Coelum and Terra. Maria autem sunt aquae amarae. De motu and salsed. maris, vid. Keckerman. Prob. Naut. Scal. Exerc. 77. Du Bartas 3. Day. Arr. Mont. Nat. Obs. Lid. Disque. Bot. Relat. Mar. to the first Creation; some, to the sweat of the Earth, roasted with the Sunne; some, to the saltnesse of the Earth, especially in Minerals of that nature; some, to adust vapours, parly let fall on the Sea, partly raysed from it to the brinks and face thereof; some, to the motion of the Sea; some, to vnder-earth or vnder-seaLid. Disq. fires of bituminous nature, causing both this saltnesse and the motion also of the Sea; and some, to the working of the Sunne, which draweth out the purer  and finer parts, leauing the grosser and b^ser behind: as in this little world of our bodies, the purest parts of our nourishment being employed in, and on the body, the vrine and other excrements remaining, doe detaine a saltnesse.
I will not determine this question, as neither that of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, which (someAppolonius Phil. lib. 5. say) is the breath of the world; some, the fires aforesaid boyling in and vnder the water; some, the waters in holes of the earth, forced out by Spirits; some, the meeting of the East and West Ocean; some ascribe it to theSilius Fertque. refertque. fretum Luna, etc. Moone, naturally drawing water, as the Load-stone, Iron; some, to the variable light of the Moone: a variable light they all giue vs. They that send vs to God and his Decree in Nature, haue said what is the true cause, but not how it is by Naturall meanes effected. Certaine it is, that the Ocean and the Moone are companions in their motion: vncertaine whether the Ocean hath a naturall power  in it selfe, or from the Moone, so to moue (which is made so much the more doubtfull, by reason that they follow not the Moone in all places of the word alike. Vertomanum writeth, that in Cambaia the Tides are contrarie to the course they hold in these parts; for they encrease not with the full, but with the wane of the Moone: and so the Sea-crabs doe likewise. In the Iland of Socotora, Don Iohn ofDon Iohn of Cast. M.S. Castro obserued many dayes, and found (contrary both to the Indian and our wont) that when the Moone riseth, it is high Sea, and as the Moone ascends, the Tide descends and ebbeth, being dead-low water when the Moone is in the Meridian, and this operation hee found continuall. With vs also our highest T^des are two dayes after, and not at the very Full and Change. About Vaygats Stephen Borrough  found it to flow by fits, very vncertaine. ScaligerExer. 52. saith, that the full-Moones at Calicut cause the encrease of the water, and at the mouth of Indus (not farre thence, in the same Sea) the new-Moones. But what exceeding difference of the Tides doe wee find in the Downes, and other places on our owne Coasts, both for time and quantitie? that at once in the compasse of ones sight, there should bee both floud, ebbe, and these differing in degrees: and that on some places of our Coast it should rise one fathom, in some two, in the Thames three, at, or neere Bristoll ten, and on some part of the French coast, neere Saint Malos fifteene, whereas our shoare ouer against it riseth but two. The like differences may bee obserued between^  the Tyrrhene Sea, and that on the opposite coast of Barbary, the one swelling, the other not at all heightned: in the East and West Indies I could instance the like, not mentioning those currents which hinder all courses of Tides. Further the Floud continueth in some places seuen houres, in some foure, in most sixe. In the Straits of Sunda some haue obserued that it flowes twelue houres, and ebbes twelue. InSome say Aristotle drowned himselfe heare, for not finding out this scorer. Negropont it is said to ebbe and flow seuen
 times a day; and Patritius affirmeth, that himselfe obserued at Ausser in Liburnia in a handmade Strait of Sea-water, the same to happen twentie times in a day. Againe, wee see these Tide-motions differ, according to their daily, weekely, monethly, and as some adde, halfe yearely and yearely alterations. All which varieties cannot be attributed to one simple cause, neither to any vniuersall, whether Sunne, Moone, or Natiue heat of the Sea, or any the like: although wee must needs acknowledge (which we cannot know) one principall cause, hindred or altred by manifold accidents, and therefore producing effects thus diuersified. Other motions also may be obserued in the Sea, as that namely which is continuall (and if wee call the Tides the breathing, this may be tearmed the pulse of the Sea, whereby the waters alway wash the shore falling on and off, couering, and presently vncouering the feet of such as stand by, which hath force to expell, all Heterogenean or differing natures, as drowned carkasses,  wrackes, and the like. This (as that of the Tides) Patritius, Peucorus, Lydiate, and others, attribute to a kinde of boyling, which (as in a vessell of seething water) causeth it thus to rise and fall, and to expell the drosse and things contrary. But the heate which causeth this boyling one ascribes to the Sunne, another to fires in the Sea, another to the naturall heate of the Sea engendring spirits, and causing rarefaction and motion. Patritius doth not onely aue^re this, but that the Sea is as a sublunarie Planet, mouing it selfe, and moued by the superiour bodies to effect the generation of things: for which causeOrp hym. Orpheus calls the Ocean Father of Gods, Men and other things. The saltnesse thereof is (in his opinion) the instrument of this motion, and the neerest inward and most proper cause of marine mouings, as in the two MexicanCortes. Narrat. Lakes appeareth, the one whereof is salt, and ebbes and flowes, which the other  being fresh, doth not. This saltnes (saithVid. Pat. Pancos. 27, 28, 29, 30. he) with greater heat ingendreth more spirits in moysture: the cause of greater Tides he thinketh to be the shallownesse, and narrower shores, the force of the Ocean thrusting the same most forwards where it findes interruptions and indraughts: the certaintie of the motions hee ascribes (according to his Philosophie) to the soule of the world, mouing this, as other Planets. For my censure, it shall bee rather on my selfe then these opinions, where silence rather then boldnesse becommeth.Prou. 17. vlt. Euen a foole, whiles hee holdeth his peace, is accounted wise. And to borrow the words of a subtill Disputer,Scal. ex. 52. Psal. 107. Quod vbique clamare soleo, nos nihil scire, maxime conuenit huic disquisitions, quae maris tracta motum. Let this also bee arranged amongst the wonders of the Lord in the deepe, rather to be admired then comprehended.  
I might heere speake of other Sea-motions, either particular or accidentall; as that in the open Seas betweene the Tropikes,Acost. hist. Ind. vncertaine whether it may bee termed an Easterly winde, or some impetuous violence, caused by the superiour motions which draw together with them the inferiour Elements: likewise those currents in diuers coasts, as at Madagascar on the African, and in the great Bay on the American shores. From other accidents arise other motions, caused by the windes in the ayre (which somewhere haue their set seasons) by whirle-pooles, or rather contrarie currents, meeting in the Sea by Capes, Indraughts, Riuers, Ilands of the land: by the conceptions and trauelling throwes in the waters, in bringing forth some imminent tempest, and the like.
I might speake of strange Currents in many Seas vpon the coast of Africke, neere to Saint  Laurence, and Iohn de Noua, and Mayella. Captaine Saris hath related that the currents detayned him a long time, euen almost to desperation of getting out: and one of them so dreadfull, that it made a noise like that at London Bridge, with a fearefull rippling of the water; the more, the further from land, and there where they founded an hundred fathom depth, as it were proclaiming open defiance to winde and sayle (notwithstanding their puffing threats and most swelling lookes) in foure and twentie houres carrying them a whole Degree and nine Minutes from the course which vnder full sayle with the windes assistance, they intended.


@. III. Of the Originall of Fountaines, and other Commodities of the Sea.
I Might adde touching the Originall of Fountaines; which both Scripture and reason, finding no other store sufficient, deriue from the Sea, how they are from thence conueyed by secret Channels and concauities vnder the earth, and by what workmen of Nature thus wrought into new fresh waters. Scaligers experiment to proue  the Sea-water at the bottome fresh,Ar. Mont. Nat. Obs. pag. 210. Scal. ex. 46. by bottles filled there by cunning Diuers or otherwise, is by Patritius his experience, as hee saith, found false. And this freshnesse of the springs, not,
 withstanding their salt originall from the Sea, may rather be ascribed to percolation and straining thorough the narrow spungie passage of the earth, which makes them leaue behind (as an exacted toll) their colour, thicknesse and saltnesse. Now how it should come to passe that they should spring out of the earth; being higher then the Sea, yea, out of the highest Mountaynes, hath exercised the wits of Phylosophers; some ascribing it to a sucking qualitie of the thirstie or spungie earth, some to the weight of the earth pressing and forcing the waters vpwards, some to the motion of the Sea continually (as in a Pumpe) thrusting forwards the water, which expelleth the weaker ayre, and followeth it till it finde an out-let, whereof, both by the continuall protrusion of the Sea, and for auoyding a vacuum or emptinesse (which Nature  abhorreth) it holdeth continuall possession: some finde out other causes. And Master Ladyate in a Treatise of the Originall of Springs, attributeth the same to vnder-earth fires, which no lesse by a naturall distillation worketh these waters vnder the earth, into this freshnesse and other qualities, then the Sunne and heauenly fires doe by exhalations aboue. Yea, such are his speculations of these hidden fires, that hee maketh them the causes of Windes, Earth-quakes, Minerals, Gemmes, fertilitie, and sterilitie of the earth, and of the saltnesse and motion (as is before said) of the Sea. But loath were I to burne or drowne my Readers in these fierie and watrie Disputes: let vs from these speculations retire our selues to the experimentall profits and commodities which this Element yeeldeth.
Concerning the commoditiesVid Ambr. and Basil in hexaem. Thod. serm. 2. de prouid. etc. of the Sea, as the world generally, so the little models of  the world, the Ilands (whereof this of Great Britaine is iustly acknowledged the most excellent of the world, sometime accounted another world) haue great cause to celebrate and acknowledge the same. It is a Wall of Defence about our shoares; Great Purueyour of the Worlds commodities to our vse; Conueyour of the surquedry and excesses of Riuers; Vniter (by traffique) of Nations which it selfe seuereth; an Open Field for pastimes of peace; a Pit^^ed Field in time of warre, disdaining single personall Combates, and onely receiuing whole Cities and Castles, encompassed with walls of Wood; which it setteth together with deadly hatred and dreadfullest force of the Elements, the Fierie thunders, Airie blasts, Watrie billowes, rockes, shelues and bottomes of the Earth, all conspiring to build heere a house for Death, which by fight or flight on land is more easily auoyded (and how did it scorne the Inuincible title of the Spanish Fleet in 88. and effect thus much on our behalfe against them?)  TheVid. Ambr. hex. l. 3. c. 5. Isid. Orig. lib. 13. Sea yeeldeth Fish for dyet, Pearles and other Iewels for ornament, Varietie of creatures for vse and admiration, Refuge to the distressed, compendious Way to the Passingers, and Portage to the Merchant, Customes to the Prince, Springs to the Earth, Clouds to the Skie, matter of Contemplation to the minde, of Action to the bodie: Once, it yeeldeth all parts of the World to each part, and maketh the World (as this Treatise in part sheweth) knowne to it selfe. Superstition hath had her Sea-prophets which haue found out other Sea-profits, as for the purging of sinnes: and the Roman Diuines causedIul. Obseq. de prodig. Hermaphrodites to be carried to the Sea for expiation, the Persian Magi thought it pollution to spit or doe other  naturall necessities therein. But of these in diuers places.


@. IIII. Of the varieties of Seas, and of the Caspian and Euxine.
THe Sea is commonly diuided into the Mediterranean and Ocean: and vnder that Mid-land appelation are contained all the Seas and Gulfes that are seated within the Land, as the Arabian, Persian, Baltike, Bengalan, and especially such as the Sea of Sodome and the Caspian, which haue no apparant commerce with the Ocean:  but principally is that Sea called, Mediterranean, which entring at the Straits of Gibraltar, is both larger then any of the rest (contayning aboue ten thousand miles in circuit) and abutteth not on one onely, but on all the parts of the elder worl^, washing indifferently the shores of Asia, Africke, and Europe.
The Seas beare also the names of the Countries, Cities, Hills, Riuers, and Lands, by which they passe, or of some other accident there happened; as the Atlantike, or Germaine Ocean, the Adriatike, the redde, white or blacke Seas, the Sea of Ladies, the Euxine, by a contrary appellation, for their in hospitalitie.
 But to contract our speech vnto Asia, wee finde the Sea prodigall of his best things, and of himselfe vnto it, clasping, with a louely embrace, all this Asian Continent, saue where a little Necke of Land diuides it from Africa; and no great space, together with Tanais, from Europe. Yea; as not herewith satisfying his loue to this Asian Nymph, in many places he insiuates himselfe within the Land by Gulfes or Bayes, twining his louing armes about
 some whole Countries: other where (as it were) by hostile vnderminings hee maketh Seas farre from the Sea; and hath yeelded so many Ilands, as rather may seeme admirable then credible.
Of those Seas banished from communitie and societie with the Ocean, are that Sea of Sodome, largely described in our first Booke. Many other Lakes also, as of Kitaya, Van, Chiamay, Dangu, Guian, and the like, as great or much greater, doe no lesse deserue the name of Seas: but the most eminent of all the rest is the CaspianVid. Ortel. Scalig. ex. 51. or Hyrcan Sea, called in these dayes diuersly of the places thereon situate, as the Sea of Bachu, etc. the Moores call it (as they doe also the Arabian Gulfe) Bohar Corsun, that is, The Sea inclosed. It hath beene diuers times sayled on and ouer by men of our Nation, passing that way into Tartaria,Ant. lenk. Hak. To. 1.  Media, and Persia. The first of whom was Master Anthonie Ienkinson, 1558. who affirmeth, that this Sea is in length about two hundred leagues, and in bredth a hundred and fiftie, without any issue to other Seas: the East part ioyneth with the Turkemen Tartars, the West with the Chyrcasses and Caucasus, the North with the Nagay Tartars, and Volga (which springing out of a Lake neere Nouogrode, runneth two thousand miles, and there with seuentie mouthes falleth into this Sea) the South hath Media and Persia. In many places it hath fresh water, in others brackish, in others salt, as our Ocean. If wee hold the Sea naturally, or by selfe-motion or by exhalations, salt: then the freshnesse may bee attributed to the abundance of fresh Riuers, which all come running with tributes of their best wealth to this seeming close-fisted Miser, which (for ought the world can see of his good workes) communicateth  with no other Sea, any part of that abundance which the Riuers Volga, Yaic, Yem, Cyrus, Arash, Ardok, Oxus, Chesel, and others many, bring into his coffers. And yet is this Vsurer neuer the richer, Nature it selfe holding a close conspiracie to dispossesse him of his needlesse treasures. Yea the Riuers themselues (his chiefe Factors and Brokers) in the Winter time grow cold in alleageance, and frozen in respect wonted dutie: or else are detayned by a greater Commander, the Generall of Winters forces, Frost, who then closeth and locketh vp both them and him in Icie prisons, till the Sunne taking a neerer view of this incroaching vsurper, by the multitude of his Arrowes and Darts chase him out of the field, and freeth this Sea and Riuers from their colde fare and close dungeons, wherewith Ice their hard Gaoler had entertained them.Ch. Bur. ap. Hak. and in a M. S. which I haue seene. Christopher Burrough relateth that from the middle of Nouember  till the midst of March, they found this frozen Charitie of the Caspian to their cost: being forced with great perill and paine, to trauell many dayes on the Ice, and leaue their ship in the Sea, which there was cut in pieces with violence of the frost. And yet is Astracan on the Northerne shore, (where Volga and the Caspian hold their first conference) in sixe and fortie degrees and nine minutes, from whence this Sea extendeth beyond the fortieth degree Southwards. The freshnesse of the Riuers make it thus subiect to frost, which hath no power ouer the salt waters of the Ocean, as by most LearnedMerula Cos. l. 3. c. 5. Stuck. in Ar. etc. men is holden: which appeareth in the Baltike and Euxine Seas, which holding not so full commerce with the Ocean, and filled with fresh Riuers, are made an easie prey to that Icie Tyrant, whose forces the more open Seas, with their salt defence easily withstand; and although from the mouthes of  Riuers, Bayes, and Shores, hee brings whole Ilands of Ice into those watrie Plaines, yet euen vnto the Pole, so farre as hath beene discouered, the Sea with open mouth proclaimeth defiance, and enioyeth his Elementary freedome.
The Euxine Sea which is diuided from the Caspian by an hundred leagues of land, hath this reason of the freezing ascribed by Disarius inMacrob. sat. l. 7. c. 12. Marcellinus Comes. an. 401. Macrobius, that the fresh waters which flow from so many Riuers, being lighter then those on the Sea, swimme on the top, and are subiect to frost, which the Sea-water is not. And this force of the fresh waters is common to most great Riuers, as Plata, Zaire, and others: and in the Euxine it is obserued of Phasis byAr. Periplus Pont. Eux. Arrianus. The thawing of those Frosts is the cause of those fogges and mysts, which so much infest these Seas, and are so great a hinderance in all Northerne Discoueries. And hence in likelyhood  came the Prouerbe of Cimmerian darknesse, rather then from that Hansem which Haithon mentioneth (a place of ^ hundred miles, compassed with a wall of pitchie darkenesse, whence sometimes the crowes of Cockes and like sounds are heard, but none dare enter) or other like fabulousVid. Scal. ex. 259. conceits of the Poets. From these darke mysts the Euxine is called also Mare Maurum, or the blacke Sea; it was in old time called the Sarmatian, Cimmerian, Taurican, Caucasean, Phasian, Pontike, and what other titles, peoples, hils, riuers, or speciall occurrents fixed on it. Of the description thereof, Arrianus hath written a whole Treatise, and Stuckius hath largely commented thereon, andIn Parergo. See also Gyllius, Marcianus, Ouid. de Ponto, Ammianus, etc. Ortelius hath bestowed good paines in that argument; to whom I referre the Reader. Arrianus was employed in this Discouerie by Adrian the Emperour, beginning at Trapezond; where he set vp Adrians Image, and  where before that was a Temple dedicated to Mercurie and Philesius his Nephew. He sayled from thence, descrying and describing the Coasts, Riuers, Cities, about this Sea. In Phasis
 hee obserueth the lightnesse of that water, fresh on the top, salt in the bottome, where it is mixed with the Sea, or rather slideth ouer it. They had heere a Law, That none might carrie water into Phasis; and if they had any in their ships, they must at the entrence of this Riuer cast it foorth, otherwise fearing an vnluckie and dangerous Nauigation. The water of this Riuer (hee saith) will last vncorrupt ten yeeres. This Phasis, Aeschylus calleth the limite of Europe and Asia. At the left hand of the entrance was set the Image of the Phasian Goddesse, seeming by her Cymball in her hand, and Lyons drawing her Charioa, to bee none other then Rhea. There also (as a holy Relique) was shewed the Anchor of the ship Argo, which because it was of Iron, seemed to our Author to be counterfeit,Counterfeit Reliques. especially there being the fragments of  an Anchor of Stone, which seemed more likely to be that of the Argonautes, so much chaunted by the Poets. Other monuments of Iason he found none.
But to looke backe to the Strait or Thracian Bosphorus,Dous. Itiner. Gill. de Bosp. Thracio, l. 1. hee there nameth the Temple of Iupiter Vrius. Dousa and Gyllius report the pleasantnesse and fertilitie of these parts. Heere did Iason sacrifice to the twelue Gods, and built a Temple to them. Apello had sixe Temples neare the Straits, the most ancient at Chalcedon, giuing place to none of the Oracles, two at Bizantium, and the other neere thereunto. But with these and manifold other antiquities, Gellius can best acquaint the more leysurely Reader. Of all the Cities along this shore, I cannot but mention Heraclea, where were obserued the deuotions of Iupiter Stratius his Altars,Plin. l. 16. c. 44. and two Oakes, planted there in his honour by Hercules. This Citie was also made famous  by the Legend of Hercules, descending to Hell, of Cerberus, Acheron, and the like.Memnon de statu Herac Pont. Of this Citie Memnon wrote a large Historie, some parts whereof doe yet remaine. Cotta after a strait siege subduing it to the Romanes, among other spoyle seized vpon the pyramidall statue of Hercules, (whom hee would haue serue him in a thirteenth labour) exceeding in sumptuousnesse, greatnesse, elegance: neere to which was his Club of solid Gold, as was also his Lyons skinne and his Quiuer. Many monuments and offerings he carried out of the Temples. Both Memnon and Aelyan tell of Dionysius sonne of Clearchus King of Heraclea,Aelian. varl. l. ^. c. 13. which grew into so grosse and vnwonted degree of fatnesse, that it made him vnfit, not for State-affaires onely, but for necessarie functions of life, especially in his sleepe. From which to awaken him, this remedy was deuised, to thrust long Needles into his flesh, which whiles they passed thorow  that new-come flesh and fatnesse, were no more felt then of a stone, till they came to the more naturall flesh of his body. When he sate in Iudgement, he had a kind of Cupbord which had the rest of his body, leauing his face onely open to be seene. Marcianus Heracl^otes,Mar. Her. g^^ one of this Citie, had written a Periplus or Circumnauigation of these and other Seas. But least I seeme frozen in these colder Narrations, or to haue lost my selfe in these Cimmerian mysts, I will get me out of this Sea, and obserue the principall Ilands adiacent to Asia. For if I should after all these Discourses of the Sea, enter into a new, of the huge Whales and other varieties of Fishes and Monsters, inhabitants of the Sea, which is thought to haue creatures resembling in some sort all those of the Land, both Men and Beasts: I should grow tedious;Gesner de Aquatil. vid. Olaum Mag. etc. and Gesner with others haue done it alreadie. I shall finde more due place for the strangest in some other  parts of this Historie.



CHAP. XIIII. A briefe Suruey of the Ilands adioyning to Asia: also, some fancies of the Sabbaticall Riuer, and  inclosed Iewes.

@. I. The Ilands from Iapan to the Persian gulfe.
IF wee should shippe our selues for the Discouerie of the Ilands in the Northeast Seas of Asia, wee were like to finde cold entertainment.See his Nauig-written by himselfe, Hak. Tom. 1. Sir Hugh Willoughby, with his Company, lost themselues in this, being frozen to death.  Stephen Burrough after attempted, and found out (scarse worth the finding) Vaygats and Noua Zembla. As bad or worse hath beene the successe of Pet, Iackman, and others, both Dutch and English. And the Russians reports to H^berstein, are in some things so fabulous (as of their Slata Baba,Sigism ab Herb. and of men dying euery Nouember, and reuiuing in Aprill following) that a may well suspend his credite to the rest.
 What Balakus in his letter to Mercator, Hesselius in his late Maps of these parts, or any other haue written, will bee but meane Spokes-men, to procure any Reader with vs in this North-east Discouerie. Steering therefore another course, and coasting another way to the East and South parts of Asia; let vs take a briefe suruey of that World of Ilands in those Indian Seas, reseruing a more full Description of the chiefe of them to the Chapters following: and then proceed to a more leysurely view of the Arabian, and some of the Mediterranean Ilands. And first in this course, we are encountred with the Iland, orOf the Ilands of Asia. Benedetto Bordone, and T. Porcacchi haue written large Treatises of this Iland-subiect. Ilands rather, bearing the name of Iapan; the principall whereof are three: of which, more afterwards.
Some mention (beleeue it that list) neere to Iapan, certaine Ilands of Amazons, with which the Iaponites yeerely haue both worldly and fleshly traffique: and when a Ship commeth  from Iapan, so many women as there are men, come to the shore, and leaue each a paire of shooes, with her marke; which who so taketh vp, is her Paramour. These are seconded by the Ilands of China, which doe (as it were) hedge and fence it in; of which, there is little in Authors worthy mentioning. In Macao, or Amacao, the Portugals haue a Colonie; but the chiefe Iland of China is Anian, in the Gulfe of Cauchin-China.
Further from the Continent, from Iapan Southwards, are many Ilands, called by the names of Lequio,Lequio. the greater, and the lesse, rich in Gold: nigh to the same is Hermosa: and next to these, the Philippinae, so called ofP. Bentii. tab. Philip the second, King of Shaine, by whose charge and charges they were discouered in the yeere 1564. long after that Magellanus had lost his life in the discouerie of these parts. Some make this name hold some proportion to  the Spanish Ambition, calling all the Ilands Philippinae, which are betweene New Spaine and the Gulfe of Bengala: in all, after their account, eleuen thousand: whereof, onely thirtie are subiect to the Spaniard; as Thomas a Iesu hath obserued. But of all these afterwards: for here wee but mention them.
They begin their reckoning at Noua Guinaea, where first wee see Cainam. The next Banda;Banda. which name is proper to an Iland so called, and common also to her neighbours, Rosolarguin, Ay, Rom, Neyra, in foure degrees to the South, which alone in the world areG. Bot. Ben. said, by some, to bring foorth Nutmegs and Mace. The men heere are Merchants, the women attend to Husbandrie.
The Ilands del MoroMoro. abound with Rice and Sagu (the pith of a Tree which yeeldeth  Meale) whereA. Pigafetta. are wild Hennes, which sit not on their Egges, but burie them a good depth vnder the sand, where the Sunne hatcheth them. They haue no Kine, but a Fish of like lineaments, which they take in their Nets.
Gilolo,Gilolo. hath a Mahumetane Prince, and is a great Iland; the people are Men-eaters.
Amboyno,Amboyno. is the name of many Ilands, rude both in soyle and people, which eate their owne Parents when they are old. Dauid Middleton in a written Discourse of one of his Indian Voyages, mentioneth an Iland amongst or neere these of Amboyno, called Bangaia, the King whereof is a Gentile. A Hollander heere obtayned such sway, that none durst displease him. Hee had two houses full of the Daughters of the Inhabitants which best liked him, besides many Slaues of both sexes. His life is meerely Epicurean: hee will dance and sing and  be drunke two dayes together: nor will hee be commanded by any of his Countrey-men. Hee is Collector or Treasurer to the King of Ternate in those parts, and sends him what hee can spare. At Banda the Hollanders would not suffer the English to trade: and euery where else, both East, and West, and North, and South (as may be instanced in the particulars) if force or fraud by slaunders raysed on our people can effect it, they testifie that gaine is more precious to them then the loue of our Nation. Neere to the Ilands last mentioned are the Moluccae, fiue in number (others reckon more) Ternate, Tid^r, Mo^ir, Macbian, and Bachian, famous through the world, as being Natures Store-house of Cloues.
Their worship is directed to the Sunne, Moone, and other heauenly and earthly Creatures. The King of Tidores chiefe Priest came aboord the Consent, of which Ship Dauid Middleton  was chiefe. In the Moluccas are found those admirable Birds of Paradise, or as the Portugals call them, fowles of the Sunne. TheSelebes. Selebes abound with Gold, abandoned of goodnesse, peopled with Idolaters and Men-eaters. The Ilands ofMoratay. Moratay are more Northerly, where Battata-roots is their Bread, their neighbours fare in the Ilands of Tarrao, Sanguin, Solor and others.
In those Ilands, which more properly beare the Philippine title, Mindanao is of very large circuit, and hath diuers famous Cities: Tend^ia, for her excellence, was by the first Discouerers called the Philippina. Luzzon incompasseth a thousand miles, in which the Spaniards haue built a Towne, called Manilla, and haue thither carried Cattle for breed. This Citie standeth in fourteene degrees and a quarter.  
Borneo is reputed as bigge as Spaine, richly attended with many Ilands of smaller circuit. It hath a Citie of the same name, founded on Piles, in the salt water, with sumptuous buildings
 of hewed stone, couered with Coco leaues. The King is a Mahumetan. At Sagadana in this Iland, there is an English Factorie.
The greater Iaua is by Scaliger called an Epitome; of Summe of the world; rich in many commodities. The Cabal is a wilde beast in this Iland, whose bones doe restraine the bloud from issuing in wounded parties. The South part is Gentiles, as the countries within the land; but towards the shore they are Mahumetans. Touching the les^er Iaua, there is some controuersie which should be it. The StraitsNathaniel Martin. of Sincopura are dangerous, not aboue a Musket shot ouer; there are two ledges of Rocks on either side at the entrance, and within sunken rocks.
Betwixt Malacca and Samatra, Nature hath (as it were) sowed that Field of waters with  Ilands; the principall of which is Bintam. Samatra, within the Countrey is Ethnikes:In our Nauigations you h^ue the voyage of Franci^ Pyrard, out of whole large storie of these Ilands, wee haue not been niggardly to bestow the principall obseruations on our Reader of their number (supposed 12000.) Customes, Creatures, Cocos, etc. towards the Coast are Moores; an Iland large, rich, and populous, diuided into many Kingdomes.
The Gulfe of Bengala is (as it were) guarded with a double ranke of Ilands, which Neptune hath set as Garrisons of those Seas. But these all are not worthy the honour due to Zeilan, called in old times Taprobana, which name others apply to Samatra. From thence, alongst the coast of India, are seene few Ilands of any greatnesse: but further into the Sea are the MaldiuaPyrar^ saith of Male, the principall Iland and tha^ Diues signifieth a heape of Ilands., so called of Maldiua, one of their number, whose name signifieth a thousand) Ilands; (Hieronymo de Sancto Stephano, numbreth them betweene seuen and eight thousand) some of which are diuided by larger Seas, some by smaller armes; the Ocean somewhere  with his greatnesse threatning to swallow them, and in other places as curious of his delightfull search, stealing rather, then forcing a separation, prouoking the passengers to communicate in his sports; who sometimes, helped with some ouer-growing Tree, can leape from one Iland to another. Yet hath not Nature, thus diuersifying their situation, yeelded them diuersitie of her riches, sauing that it seemeth here shee hath chosen her chamber for the Palme, or Coquo-nuts, which in other places shee hath, in comparison, but scattered; here, stored, that by this store the people might supply all their other wants. Yea, besides the Land-Coquo, there groweth another vnder the water, bigger then the former; a speciall Antidote for poyson. The Inhabitants are addicted to subtletie and sorcerie: and in the Ilands next to the Continent, Moores beare sway; in the rest, Pagans. Other Ilands, of smaller  reckoning, we reckon not. Diu hath long beene famous for the warres therein, vainly attempted by the Turke and Indians against the Fortresse of the Portugals.


@. II. The Persian Gulfe, and of the Passage downe Euphrates thither, the Sabbaticall streame, and inclosed Iewes.
 THe Persian Gulfe hath left some remnants of Land extant: the chiefe is Ormuz, a famous Mart, which the Moores there maintayned, vnder the gouernment of a Moore, after made tributarie to the Portugall; which Nature hath made barren; Industrie, plentifull: the more fertile Element yeelds barrennesse and sands; the barrenner bringeth in a double wealth, Pearles, and Merchandise.
Iohn Newbury, which sayled downe Euphrates to this Sea, and so to Ormuz (visiting Bagdet by the way, which he saith is twentie or fiue and twentie miles, Southward from old Babylon) testifieth of the women in Ormuz, that they slit the lower part of their eares more then two inches, which hangeth downe to their chin. This our Countrey-man dyed in this Trauels, hauing trauelled to Constantinople, into the blacke Sea, and Danubius, and through  the Kingdomes of Poland and Persia, the Indies, and other parts of the World. But for the description of the passage downe the Riuer Euphrates to the Persian Gulfe, I knowMonfart saith, he went from Aleppo in a Carauan of 10000. men, which trauelled al by night, guided by the starre through the Desarts. 3. dayes to Nane or Euphrates. The vsuall way, is to Bir, etc. none which hath done it so exactly, as Gasparo Balbi, a Venetian, which that way passed to Ormuz and India; who relateth the same in the Diarie of his Trauels: sometimes the Trunkes or Bodies of Trees, vnder the water of this Riuer, conspiring dangerous attempts; sometimes Zelebe, and other ouer-hanging Mountaynes, threatning ruine, and euen now seeming to swallow them in their darke-deuouring jawes; sometimes the violence of some steeper Current, as it were hurling them into a Whirle-poole; alway the Arabians ready attending for prey and spoile. One Citie, or rather the carkasse of a Citie, whereof onely the ruines are remayning, stands on the left hand of this Riuer, greater  in his opinion then Cairo in Egypt: the Mariners affirmed to him, That by the report of the old men, it had three hundred threescore and sixe gates: from morning to noone, with the helpe of the streame, and foure Oares, they could scarcely passe one side thereof.
 This is called Elersi, perhaps that which was anciently called Edessa. Hee speakes of the Caraguoh, inhabiting as they passed, which agree neither with Turkes, Moores, nor Persians, in their Sect, but haue an Heresie by themselues. Hee trauelled more then one whole day by one side of old Babylon: from Felugia to Bagdad, though the ground bee good, yet saw hee neither Tree nor greene Herbe, but all barren, and seeming to retaine some markes of the Prophesies threatned by Esay against this place. They which dwell heere, and trauell from hence to Balsara, carrie with them Pigeons, whom they make their Letter-posts to Bagdad, as they doe likewise betweene Ormuz and Balsara. The coasts of Persia as they sayled in this Sea, seemed as a parched Wildernesse, without tree or grasse: those few people which dwell there, and in the Ilands ofIn Lar, saith Monfart, is the strongest and best furnished Castle of the Persian. Lar and Cailon, liue on flesh, being in manner them selues transformed  into the nature of Fishes; so excellent swimmers are they, that seeing a vessell in the Seas, though stormie and tempestuous, they will swimme to it fiue or sixe miles to begge almes. They eate their fish with Rice, hauing no Bread; their Cats, Hennes, Dogges, and other Creatures which they keepe, haue no other dyet. In the Iland of Bairen, and those ofSee their names in Balby cap. 14. Gonfiar, they take the best Pearles in the world. In Muscato, threescore miles from Ormuz, they dare not fish for them, for Fishes, which are as cruell to the Men, as they to the innocent Oysters. They hold, that in Aprill the Oysters come to the top of the water, and receiue the drops of Raine which then fall, wherewith they returne to the bottome againe: and therefore fish not till the end of Iuly, because that substance is not before ripened and hard. In sayling from Ormuz to Diu, he saith they passed ouer a Bay of a hundred and thirtie  leagues of water, white like milke. I haue seene an Extract of a Chronicle, written by Pachaturunuras,Pach. Chron. which raigned in Ormuz three hundred yeares agoe; testifying, that one Mahomet being King of Amen in Arabia Foelix, pretending title to Persia, built a Citie on the Continent of Hormuz; which his posteritie held in succession of many generations. It happened that King Cabadim flying from the King of Creman, came to Iarum, that is, a Wood; so they called this Iland, which is almost all of Salt, the Riuer being brackish from a salt Mountaine in the middest thereof, and the sides of the Riuer white salt. Yet there then grew thinne Woods. Heere he built Ormuz; which Albuquerk made tributarie to the Portugals, being Lady of the Ilands thereabouts, and principall Staple of Merchandize for those parts of the world. OdoricusOdoricus Bal. c. 9. speaketh of the intollerable heate in those parts: and Balby testifieth,  that neere Balsara, many persons die of the extremitie of heat: which happened to foure of their company; which forced by heat and wearinesse, sate downe, and with a hot blast of winde were all smothered. OrmuzSee the Relation thereof in our Voyages. I haue also a Storie or Chronicle of their Kings written by King Pachaturunxa in Arabike. is lately taken from the Portugals by the Persian.
In the Discourse of these Asian Seas and this Persian, among the rest, I thought it worthy relating, whichL. de Vrreta, Hist. Aethiop. l. 1. c. 6. Luys de Vrreta, in his Aetheopian Historie, telleth of a certrine Iew, though perhaps but a tale (for a lyer, such as hee hath beene euicted in his Aethiopian Storie, loseth his credit, where he speakes truth) yet euen tales serue for mirth being intermixed with serious histories, branded that they may be knowne for Rogues or Iesters. Be it as it will; he tels that this Iew trauelling alongst the shoare of this Persian Sea, by some In-lets and Armes  thereof, which embay themselues within the Land, saw the Sea loftie and swelling, by force of the Windes and Tides, seeming to threaten the higher Elements, but euen now ready to swallow vp the Earth, roaring out a loud defiance in such sort, that the poore Iew was amazed, and dreadfully feared therewith: and this continued the space of some dayes, whiles the Iew trauelled thereby. But on the Saturday and Sabbath, Superstition commanded the Iew; and Nature (the Hand-maid of Diuinitie) enioyned the angrie Elements to rest; a suddaine calme followed, as if Waues and Windes would accompany the Iew in his deuotions, and had forgotten their former furie and wonted nature, to remember the sanctification of this Day. The Iew hauing heard before, that there was a Sabbaticall Riuer (which some place in Aethiopia, some in Phoenicia; others, they cannot tell where) in a credulous fancie perswades himselfe,  that this Arme of the Sea was that Sabbaticall Streame, and that he now saw the experiment of that relation with his eyes. Fancie had no sooner affirmed, but Superstition sware to the truth, and Credulitie tickles him with gratulation of Diuine fauour to himselfe, that had liued to see that blessed sight. Rauished with this conceit, hee fills his Budget full of the Sand, which is of a more grosse and cleauing nature, then in other places, and carrieth it with him as a great treasure vnto the place of his habitation. There hee tells his Countreymen, that now the Messias would not be long before he came, for now he had found this signe thereof, the Sabbaticall Riuer; shewing this Sand in proofe thereof. Credit Iudaeus Apella, the Iewes beleeue quickly all but the truth, especially in Portugall, whither he came with this report. Many thousand moued by his words, remoued their dwellings, and selling their substance,  would needs goe into these parts of Persia, by the Sabbaticall Riuer to fixe their habitation; there wayting for their promised Messias. One, and a chiefe of this superstitious Expedition,
 was Amatus Lusitanus, a Physician of great note, accounted one of the most learned of his Profession, and a Writer therein; and Iohn Micas, a Merchant of great wealth. They passed through France, Germany, Hungary, their company (like a Snow-ball) encreasing as they went, with the addition of other Iewes of like credulity. When they came to Constantinople, there were of them, in many Bands or Companies, thirty thousand. Cabas^i Bassa, the Turkish Commander, thought to gaine by this occasion; and would not suffer them to passe ouer the water into Asia, without many hundred thousands of Duckets, except they would passe on horse-backe. This example was soone both spred and followed of the other Bassaes and Commanders in Asia, as they went; their wealth and substance being euery  where so fleeced, that they came into Syria, much lessened in numbers, in estate miserable and beggerly; new Officers euery where, as new hungry Flyes, lighting on these wretched carkasses (so I may call them:) some they whipped, some they empaled, some they hanged, and burned others. Thus were these miserable Pilgrimes wasted: and Don Iohn Baltasar was present, when Amato aforesaid being dead with this affliction, his Physicke bookes were in an Out-cry to be sold at Damasco, and because they were in Latine, no man would buy them, till at last another Iew became Chapman. Micas, one of the wealthiest men which Europe held, dyed poore in an Hospitall at Constantinople. And this was the issue of their Pilgrimage to the Sabbaticall streame, which they supposed to finde in this Persian Gulfe, where wee haue too long holden you the Spectators of this  Iewish Tragedie.
And yet let me intreate your patience a litle longer, in considering the occasion of this error. We haue elsewhereL. 2. c. 5. mentioned this Sabbaticall Riuer: now you shall vnderstand that the Iewes generally haue drowned their wits therein. RambamElias Thisb. Rad. Sambation. Eldad. Dan. ap^ Gen. 2. Esd. 13-40. cals it Gozan. Genebrard alleageth many R. R. testimonies of it: but of all and of all, let Eldad Danius his tale which Genebrard hath translated) find some fauourable entertainment; the rather because one of our Apocryphall Authors seemes to weaue the same webbe, which as the worthier person, deserueth first examination. Esdras therefore (so wee suppose him, and this is not all his Iewish Fables) reporteth, that the ten Tribes which Salmanasar led captiue, tooke counsell among themselues to leaue the multitude of the Heathen, and goe forth into a further Countrey where neuer  Mankind dwelt: that they might there keepe their statutes which they neuer kept in their owne Lord. And they entred into Euphrates by the narrow passages of the Riu^^. For the most High then shewed signes for them, and held still the floud till they were passed ouer. For through that Countrey there was a great way to goe, namely, of a yeere and a halfe: and the same Region is called Arsareth. Then dwelt they there vntill the latter time. And now when they shall begin to come, the Highest shall stay the Springs of the streame againe, etc. Here you see no lesse Miracle then in Iordan, or the Red Sea, for their passage: which seeing it was through Euphrates, yee will pardon our Iew for searching it neere this Persian Gulfe, especially seeing his good Masters the Rabbins had increased this Tale, with the Inclosure of these Iewes from passing againe into our World; not by the continuall course of Euphrates, as Esdras insinuateth, but by the Sabbatising of the Sabbaticall streame, which by Eldads description is two hundred cubits ouer,  full of sands and stones, without water, making a noyse like thunder as it floweth, which by night is heard halfe a dayes Iourney from it. On the Sabbath it is continually quiet and still, but all that while ariseth thence a flame, that none dare enter, or come neere by halfe a mile. Thus the fire (if not the Religion of the Sabbath) then detaynes them no lesse then the stony streame on the weeke dayes: and what stony heart can refuse them credit? Yet doth not hee and Esdras agree of the Inhabitants, both deriuing them from the tenne Tribes; but Eldad challengeth no lesse antiquitie then from Ieroboam, who contending with Rehoboam, the godly Catholike Israelites refusing to fight against the house of Dauid, chose rather to attempt this Pilgrimage, and so passing the Riuer Physon (for the Scriptures had  forbidden them to meddle with Egypt, Ammon or Amalck) they went and they went til they came into Ethiopia. There did the foure Tribes of Dan, Nepthali, Gad, Aser settle themselues, which continually war vpon the seuen Kingdoms of Tusiga, Kamtua, Koha, Mathugia, Tacul, Bacma, and Kacua (fie on the simplicity of our Geographers, which know not one of these, no better then Esdras his Arsareth:) they haue a King whose name is Huziel Math^el, vnder whom they fight, each Tribe three moneths, by course. The Tribe also of Moses (for they imagine his children claue to their Mothers Religion, which was a Madianite or Ethiopian) is turned to their truth: and they all obserue the Talmud, the Hebrew Tongue, the Ordinances  of the Elders, and suffer nothing vncleane amongst them: Yea, no Vtopian State comparable to theirs. He tels the like tales of the other Tribes. But how came he thence to tell this newes? Truely I wonder no lesse then you: yet he saith he goe to the Sea (forgetting that before he had compassed his Countrey with the Sabbaticall streame) and there was taken captiue, and by his leanenesse escaping the Canibals (else our fat Storie had beene deuoured)
 was sold to a Iew, of whom perhaps this forged Tale procured his redemption. Howsoeuer; the Tradition holds, both for these inclosed Iewes, and that Sabbaticall streame, that it should be sought here-a-wayes, or found no where. The reciting is sufficient refuting to a reasonable vnderstanding; and yet, the Iewes are not onely besotted with these their inclosed brethren, imagining their Messias may bee amongst them, although they know not whether to ascribe this transportation to Salmanaser, or to Alexander the Great, or to the dayes of Ieroboam: but Christians also tellOrentius in Geog. of them about the Pole, and they know not where. And I haue seene a printed Pamphlet of their comming out of those their Inclosures in our times, with the numbers of each Tribe. Yea, Postellus, Boterus, and many other deriue the Tartars from them:Brerewoods Enquiry, cap. 13. which dreame, they which please may reade at large confuted by Master  Brerewood. It was about the yeere 1238. when Eldad came from thence into Spaine.
If any lust to haue another Guide for the Sabbaticall streame, Master FullersFulleri Miscellanea, l. 1. c. 9. learned labours will giue him good directions. He saith it is the same which Brocard in his Description of the Holy Land, calleth Valania: hee also correcteth the vsuall Translations of Ptolemey and Iosephus (learned CasaubonCasab. Exercit. 15. adu. Bar. is of his minde) and addes other things ridiculous enough out of the Rabbines, out of whose muddie Lakes this Riuer floweth to enclose the fabulous Iewes aforesaid.
If any maruell why in a Discourse of the Sea wee adde this, I answere, that wee cannot finde the Land whereto it is due: and therefore one absurditie must follow another. But let vs proceed.  


@. III. Of the Red Sea, Sir H. MIDDLETONS taking, and of Rhodes and Cyprus.
THe Red Sea, or Arabian Gulfe, seemes vnwilling to be the Oceans subiect: so many small Ilands doth she continually muster in resistance, besides her vndermining the the Sea with her shallow Channell, conspiring the destruction of many heedlesse  Mariners, that here will aduenture as tenants to the Sea in their mouing houses. Once (by a mightier hand) was it helped to preuaile against the Seas force, to discouer a dry Land in the middest thereof, and with her watery erected wals to guard th^se new passengers, till the same hand reuersed it, or rather rewarded the then empty belly thereof with the prey of so many thousand Egyptians. Babelmandel, Camaran, and Mazua are accounted amongst the chiefe of these Isolets: Suachen hath most souereigntie, being the Seat of the Turkish Bassa for Abassia.
Arianus in his Periplus of the Red Sea, and Agatharchides in a Treatise of like Argument, mention not many Ilands therein: Orine, Alalaeae, Catacumene, and that of Diodorus in the mouth of the Strait. Don Iohn of Castro hath written an exact Treatise (from his owne experience)  of these Seas and Ilands, which Master Hakluit hath in a written Copy; out of which we shall obserue more in our coasting about Afrike. Thomas Iones, who was in the Ascension in this Sea, speaketh of twelue or thirteene desolate Ilands, where they found refreshing with Cokos, Fish, and Turtle-doues, whereof one may with his hands take twenty douzen in a day. The Straits are a mile and an halfe ouer, but now not chained. Mokha is the chiefe Staple of Indian Commodities, which passe that way to Cairo and Alexandria.
This Moha or Mokha is eighteene leagues within the Bab, and hath beene often visited byIns. l. 7. c. 11. English ships; but in the yeere 1610. they dealt treacherously and barbarously with Sir H. Middleton and his Fleete, both here and at Aden. Aden hath beene of great trading a great Citie, now ruinated, neither shops of any account within it, nor shippes of Merchandize  without, adorning the same as in times past. Neither doe the Turkes deserue better, who tooke it by treachery at first,Dam. a Goet Diens. Oppug. Nic. Downton. S.H. Middleton. hanging vp the King comming to visit them, and keeping (or rather losing and lessening) it still by like treachery. Thus dealt they with Captaine Downton his Company, in colour of Trade surprising twenty, and making them prisoners: and yet worse was the Generall dealt with at Moha. The Aga, after much protestation of loue: and vesting him publikely to testifie the Grand Signiors Grace in cloth of Gold, giuing leaue to set vp their Pinnasse, with many offices and offers of kindnesse, on the eight and twentieth of Nouember suddenly assaulted the English, killed eight, knocked downe the Generall, and tooke him with eight and fortie of his company: and Master Pemberton also with nine of his Men. They attempted presently to surprise the Darling with three great Boates full of  Souldiers, where they found the Trumpeter asleepe, and slue him with another. The decke vpon occasion of romeaging that day for Quick-siluer, was couered with victuals; none
 of the companie fearing, or prepared for offence or defence. Happily one threw forth a barrell of poulder, and disturbed them with fire, which when their Captaine Emer Bahare cryed to cut the ships cables, made them mistake and cut the Boat-ropes, so driuing away, leauing their Captaine and sixe and twentie more behinde to the slaughter. And with a Peece they gaue present warning to the Trades Increase, Sir Henries ship, so that their villanie succeeded not by Sea, their intent being to become Masters of all.Rehib Aga his pride. Moha, the Port of Mecc^. The next day Sir Henrie Middleton with seuen more, all chained by the necks, were brought before the Aga, who sternely demanded how he durst come into their Port of Moha, so neere their holy Citie of Mecca, being the Port and Doore thereof: adding that the Bassa had order from the Great Turke to  captiuate all Christians in those Seas, although they had His Owne Passe? He pressed the Generall to write to the Ships, that they should come on shore (out of the water into this fire) and not preuayling, caused Him to be taken out of his chaine and coller, and clapping a great paire of fetters on his legs, and manacles on his hands, separated from the rest of his companie, laid him in a dirtie dog-kennell vnder a paire of staires. At night the Consull of the Bani^ns intreated some mitigation, so that he was remoued to a better roome, but lodged on the bare ground, continuing in this miserie (They hoped meanewhile for want of water and victuall to obtayne the ships) till December 20. Order then came from Ieffar Bassa, to bring them to Zenan or Sinan, chiefe Citie of Yeoman or Ayaman. Then being re-examined as before, His Irons were knocked off, and with foure and thirtie more English hee was sent thither,  the Turkes themselues pitying their manacles, and some of them doing them fauours; Master Pemberton made a strange escape.
Zenan is ninescore miles from Moha North North-west, in 16. 15. There they arriued januarie 5. being their Diuano or Councell day, conueyed as in great pompe and triumph one by one. The Generall was carried vp into the Castle to a roome twelue steps high, where two great Men tooke him by the wrists, and led him to the Bassa, sitting at the vpper end of a long Gallerie couered on the floore with Turky carpets, and when hee came within two yards of Him, he was staid, the Bassa with frownes demanding his countrey, and other questions like those of the Aga. Then was he with foure or fiue more committed to the Keepers ^ouse* the rest to the common prison, clapped in Irons, where they had with their small all^wance  starued, if the Generall had not rele^ued them by the meanes of some of the Turkes themselues, by promisesHe promised the Riha or Lieutenant 1500 Venetian peeces. A Moore of Cairo, and Hamet Waddy, the Bassaes Merchant, and others were their friends, and other meanes become their friends. On Ianuarie 17. arriued nineteene more of those which had beene betrayed at Aden. On the 11. of Februarie, they were all freed of their Irons, whereas (they heard) their intent had beene to cut off the heads of the chiefe, and make slaues of the rest: and at last with faire promises returned to Moha in the beginning of March. And on the 11. of May the Generall made his escape by this deuice: He sent to the ship for prouisions as for longer stay, and especially for Wine and Aquavit^, which hee gaue bountifully amongst his Keepers, so that at noone they went home to rest their laden braines. The Agae himselfe also was gone that day on pleasure out of towne. Th^^ the English (hauing some tolerable libertie since their returne) carried one emptie Tunne  to the shore, and an other after it in which was the Generall, the rest of the companie being appointed by sundrie wayes to meete there at the Boat which was appointed to come from the ship; and thus they got aboord, a few onely staying longer, and therefore left behinde. But these with other their goods by force were rendred to them, hauing recouered their ships. The treacherous Aga was remoued, Id^r Aga placed in his roome: and since, Ieffar Bassa is also reported to haue lost his head.
In their way to Zenan they were much annoyed with cold in the Mountaynes,Cold in Arabia. Zenan the chiefe Citie. the ground ^uery night couered with a white frost, and the Ice in one night a finger thick. The Citie is bigger then Bristoll, hath a wall of mud, Orchards and Gardens within the same: there are many women and children kept as Hostages, to secure the Parents and Husbands allegeance.  The way is by ragged Mountaynes (especially betweene Tayes and Zenan) and hath many Ce^sers or Innes by the Grand Seignior erected for the case of Trauellers. Their returne from Zenan was on the nineteenth of Februarie, eighteene miles to Surage, where the people ar^ poore, clothed from the waste to the knees: The twentieth to Damane (twentie miles) a Towne consisting of fiue Hamlers ioyned; a plentifull place. The next day they trauelled till after mid-night, and came to Ermin, fifteene miles. The two and twentieth, they went fourteene miles; and the three and twentieth staid at Naquellamare a common Inne. On the Hill there is a Castle, the Gouernour an Arabian; No Turke may passe this way without  Passe and Licence, the Arabs in the most places ruling, and the people not brooking the Turkish insolence. The foure and twentieth, they tooke vp Asses, but the people tooke them away againe notwithstanding the Bassaes warrant: they went fifteene miles. The fiue and twentieth, sixteene miles to Rabatanim Censor. The sixe and twentieth, as farre beyond to Merfadine. The seuen and twentieth, to Tayes a Citie halfe as bigge as Zenan, with a mud
 wall and a Castle. On the first of March sixteene miles, to Fufras. The second eleuen miles, to Asanbine. The fourth to Mousa, seuenteene miles. Hereabouts and at Tayes is store of Indico. The fift they came to Moha. The Countrey is populous all the way: and because it is so little knowne, I haue particularly related this iournall. On the fift of Ianuarie is great resort of people to Fufras, in deuotion towards one of their Saints there buried, and thence they goe together to Mecca.
MohaMoha. is a towne vnwalled, very populous, seated close to the Sea, a salt, sandie, barren soile: the Aga had beene as they say Catamite to Ieffar Bassa, as the other at Aden also. At their returne he feasted Sir Henrie, and called for the Alcoran, kissed it, and swore that hee bare him no ill will. Hee might rather haue sworne by their ships: for that was the Deitie  that he most feared.Assab Road. These in this time found a good Road, called Assab, for their refreshing in the Abex or Habesh shore, the King of Roheita (a towne neere the Bab) kindly entertayning them. At this Assab-road they had wood and water enough, but brackish; with other prouisions at reasonable rates. On the shore they are Mahumetanes, within land Christians. This King came riding pompously on a Cow to the English, when Generall Saris was the^^ with fish-shels hanging for a iewell on his forehead. The better sort speake and writ^ A^bike,See of these l. 7 c. 11. the vulgar another language. But this is African; and so may we reckon So^otor^ (...) those two Ilands which confront it; OfGi. Bot. Ben. which one (they say) is the habitation of M^^, and the other of Women, which sometimes haue entercourse one with the other, but the A^^ (Natures inexorable and heauy Hand-maid) not suffering any long abode to each, but in the^^  owne alotted portion.
Loth am I to looke any further into that boysterous Sea, and therefore leauing all that huge Tract of Afrike, as compassed by a sudden thought, but vnsaluted, wee shall finde other Asian Ilands in the Mediterranean. And because being now wearied, the Archipelago would be too tedious a passage for vs, neither are there many Ilands worth naming in Propontis, or the Euxine, we will speake a little of Rhodes and Cyprus, and then remember how long we haue forgotten our Readers patience.
The former of those contayneth about an hundred and twentie miles: fertile in soile, and of most pleasant aire, caused by that loue which Phoebus beareth to it* there neuer passing day, in which hee doth not, in his bright and shining apparell, salute it. And for this citie  happily was that huge Colossus of brasse (g^lded ouer, and reputed the most wonderfull of the Worlds seuen Wonders) here dedicated to the Sunne (though some ascribe it to Iupiter) the workmanship of Chares Lindius, of threescore and ten cubits,This inscription was in the basis, as Meursius translates it: Rhedo Colossum his quater cubi^is decem Superbientem Lindius fecit Laches, which wordes shew both the Author Lindius Laches, and the height foure, score cubits. Meursius in translat. Constant. or as others tell, an hundred and fortie three feet, but it selfe told fourescore cubits in height, which, falling by an Ea^thquake, the Oracle forbade the Rhodians to erect againe. But nothing forbade Mabias, it Muaui, the fifth Caliph, after his seuen yeeres warre about Constantinople (as saithConstant. Porphyrogenitus de ad imp. cap. 21. Theophanis Chronicon Co^stantius, out of Theophanes) inuading this Iland, to carry away nine hundred (Constanti^^^ numbreth many more) Camels burthens of this brazen carkasse.
The Temple of Liber was here enriched, with many presents of the Greeks and Romans, to both which the Citie of Rhodes was had in friendly and honourable regard. Much was  their force by Sea in ancient times, and for two hundred yeeres space it was the seate of the Hospitular Knights, which now reside in Malta; driuen thence by mightie Solyman.
These Knights had also, by purchase of King RichardOf his taking Cyprus, besides other Chronographers see Richardus Canonicus Trin. London. in vita R^ch. 1. cap. 48. and 50. the first of England, the Ilands of CyprusAdrian. Roman. Theat. Vrbium, lib. 2. Of the moderne commodities, see M. George Sandys, lib. 4., dedicated by the Poets to Venus, to whom the Inhabitants were too much addicted, as appeared by their Temples and other vanities in her honour. At Paphos shee was worshipped in the likenesse of a Nauell; and round thereabouts (by the Deuils working) it rayned not. Trogus writeth, That the Cyprians prostituted their daughters (before they married them) to Mariners on the shore. We haue seene at Rome (saith R. Volateranus) the attendants of Queene Carlotta, neuer a whit better then those ancient.
Of Cyprus thus reporteth Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 4. It is ennobled by two Cities,  Salamis and Paphus; the one famous for Iupiters Images; the other, for the Temple of Venus. It is so plentifull in all things, that it needes no helpe of other Nations, and of her owne abundance is able to set forth a ship, from the Keele to the Top-saile, with all prouision, furnished to the Sea. Neither grieue I to tell it; the Romans more greedily then iustly, made themselues Lords thereof. For Ptolomie the King being Confederate with vs, was proscribed without any fault, but the defect of our Treasurie, who therefore poysoned himselfe, and the Ile became tributarie. Sextus Rufus saith as much. Amasis was the first, if we beleeue Herodotus f, that euer conquered Cyprus, and made it tributarie. He also saith (lib. 4.) That the Cyprians were partly from Salamine and Athens, partly from Arcadia, partly from Cythnus, from Phoenicia, and from Aethiopia. Plinie affirmethHerod. Thalia., That it was sometime  the seate of nine Kings, and was diuersly named, as Acamantis, Cerastis, Aspelia, Amathusia,Ortel. Theat. Macaria, Cryptus, and Colinia. It was such a Forrest of TreesPlin. l. 5. c. 31., that when as their shipping
 and Mines were not able to waste them, it was made lawfull for any man to fell and destroy them, and for his labour to possesse the land which he had so cleered. Bartholomaeus Saligniac^^ sayth, he saw flying fishes in the Sea about Cyprus, which in the Atlantike Ocean are common: he saw also a Ramme in Cyprus with seuen hornes.


HONDIVS his Map of Cyprus.
map of Cyprus, Southern Europe, with inset maps of Lemnos, Chios, Lesbos, Euboea, Cythera, and Rhodes, South Europe
CYPRUS


In the time of Constantine it was forsaken of the Inhabitants, as before forsaken of the Elements, which refused to water with any drops of raine that Iland (sometime called Macaria or happy) the space of seuenteene yeeres together, or as others haue it, sixe and thirtie, repeopled from diuers parts by Helena, the Mother of Constantine,Quadi Geographia. and remayning to the Greeke Empire, till that Lion of England made it a prey, and the Knights purchase, who  sold it to Guido Lusignun: whose posterity failing, the Venetians succeeded, till SEYLIM the Second, minding to erect a Religious Hospitall, to testifie his magnificence,In Hak. Voyages the taking of Famagusta, etc. is la^gely related, Tom. 2. P. Contarenus de bello Turc. and Ven. beganne with an irrelig^^us foundation. For whereas their holy Lawes will not suffer any thing to bee dedicated to holy vses, which their owne Sword hath not conquerd, hee brake league with the Venetian, and robbed them of this Iland, which they are thought, not with the iustest title, before to haue possessed. But it is high time to bethinke vs of our Indian shore, whence we haue taken so large a prospect: where we are stayed to be transported into the chiefe of those Ilands there to take a more leisurely view of their Regions and Religions. And if any be desirous to reade the ancient names and descriptions of the Seas and Ilands about Asia, Marcianus, Heracleotes, and Sculax Carnandensis haue written especiall Treatises  thereof, which Dauid Hoeschelius hath published in Greeke, very profitable to the learned Students of the ancient Geographie, as are the workes also of Isidorus Characenus, Artemidorus Ephesius, and Dicaearchus Messenius, which he hath ioyned with them.




CHAP. XV. A larger Relation of some principall Ilands of Asia, and first of the Ilands of Iapon.

@. I. A Preface touching the Iesuites, and a description of Iapon, with  some of their strange Customes.
THe Iesuits haue not more fixed the eyes of the World vpon them in the Westerne parts, then they haue fixed their owne eyes on the Easterne: heere seeking to repaire, with their vntempered-Morter, the ruines of their Falling Babylon; there laying a new foundation of their after-hopes: heere, by their Politike Mysteries and Mysticall Policies, endeuouring to recouer; there, by new Conquests to make supply to their losses: heere, for busie intruding into affaires of State, suspected by their owne, hated by their Aduersaries; there, by seeming to neglect Greatnesse,  and to contemne Riches, of the mightiest are not feared, whiles Others beleeue, obserue, and admire them. Both heere and there they spare not toMat. 23.15. compasse Sea and Land, to winne Proselytes; euery of their Residences or Colledges, being as so many Forts to establish this new Romane Monarchie, but with vnlike aduantage, encountring there with Reason (or rather with the carkasse of Reason) attended with Ignorance, and Superstition, whose Owlish eyes cannot endure the enteruiew of Truth, though darkened with those Cloudes, wherewith they ouer-cast it: Heere, with Truth, yea, the Soule of Truth, true Religion; whose Shield of Faith, and Sword of the Spirit, these (the stronger part of the strongest Gate of Hell) cannot preuaile against. A Spanish Faction of Spanish humour and successe, more easily conquering a World of the naked Americans, and effeminate Indians, then keeping all they had in Europe.  Such are the armes of the one, and the preaching of the other. Yet would I faine be thankful to the one and the other,Benefit by the Spaniard and Iesuite. the first for furthering Geographic with knowledge of a new World; the other, for making a possibility of a better World to some, whereas otherwise there was a generall desperation of all.
Neyther are the wounds of Popish Superstition so absolutely mortall, as the Ethnike Atheisme(...), Ephes. 2.; theOf the wants of their Conuersions, see T. a Iesuite: and the Epistles of Xauier, Baptista, Montanus, etc. one hauing no foundation at all; the other shewing the true foundation: although their Babylonish slime euen heere supply the roome of better morter, besides their stubble, hay and wood built vpon it. Better a mixed truth, then a totall errour: and a maymed Christ, then none at all. But howsoeuer they bee beholden to them for their Diuinitie, it were inhumanitie in vs, not to acknowledge a beholdingnesse to them, for that they giue vs  the knowledge of many peoples, although in all their Discourses this caution is necessary, not to yeeld them a Catholike and vniuersall credit, where we any way may spie them dawbing the wals of their pretended Catholike Church. In relating their Miracles, and such like, we will remember they are Iesuits: in other things not seruiceable to Rome, we will heare them as Trauellers, when lying doth not aduantage them, nor hurt vs. But as the labours of the Iesuites may euery where breed shame to our negligence in a better quarrell: so in Iapon it is most of all admirable, that the furthest part of the World should be so neere to their industry. And that you at last may bee acquainted with Iapon, wee will borrow of them to pay your hopes, by this long introduction suspended.
Maffaeus (who hath translated and set forth more then thirty of those Iaponian Epistles)  in the twelfth Booke of his Indian History, doth thus describe it. Besides other lesse, three principall Ilands beare the name of Iapon; which theMercator thinkes Iapon to be the Aurea Chersonesua which agreeth not with Ptolemey l. 7. c. 2. who placeth it vnder the line. first and greatest more particularly challengeth, and contayneth in it three and fifty Kingdomes or Principalities; the chiefe City whereof is Meaco: The second is Ximum, diuided into nine Signiories: The third, Xicoc, quartered into foure Lordships, so that there are in all of this Iaponian Dominion, three score and sixe Shires, or pettie Kingdomes. The space of Land is measured two hundred leagues in length, in bredth some-where ten, in other places thirtie, betweene the thirty and thirtie eight degrees of Latitude: Eastward from China. (Our Countrey-man William AdamsAdams in a Letter which was brought home by the last Indian Fleet, bearing date from Firando, Octob. 23. 1611. which now liues there, and hath done these many yeeres, and therefore hath better meanes to know the truth; placeth it from the 35. to the 48. degree of Northerly latitude:  the length East and by North, and West and by South, for so it lyeth, is two hundred and twenty English leagues that way, and South and North two hundred and three score leagues,
 almost square.) The soyle is not very fertile, subiect to much Snow, the ayre wholsome. The bowels of the earth are stored with diuers Mettals; the Trees are fruitfull, and oneA strange Tree. wonderfull, in that it abhorreth moysture, and if happely it bee moystened, it shrinketh and becommeth withered; which they remedie by plucking it vp by the rootes, and after it is dryed in the Sunne, to set it in drie sand; if a bough bee broken off and nayled on againe, it groweth.
They haue two high Mountaynes, one of which casteth foorth flames, and in the toppe thereof the Diuell vseth to shew himselfe in a bright Cloud to some, that (by long fasting) haue prepared themselues to this sight: the other, called Figeniana, is by some leagues  higher then the Cloudes.
They much esteeme a tall personablenesse: they plucke off the haires on their head (Children before; the common people halfe way; the Nobilitie almost all) leauing but a little growing behind, which growes long and is tyed vp on knots, to touch which, were to offer great indignitie to a man.
They can endure much hardship: an Infant new-borne in the coldest of Winter, is presently carried to the Riuer to bee washed: their education is hard: yet are they neate: they v^e forkes (as the Chinois) or stickes, not touching the meat with their fingers, and therefore need no Naperie: they sit on Carpets, and enter the roomes vnshod, their Tables are a hand high, some eighteene inches square, curiously wrought, to each Guest one, and changed at euery  new seruice or change of meat.
Frois saith (speaking of Feasts) they haue three of them at the beginning of the Feast set before each guest with diuers gilded Dishes in each of them, and as many at the end: And in greater solemnities more.
They vseL. Armerda, much the powder of a certaine Herbe called Chia, of which they put as much as a Walnut-shell may containe, into a dish of Porcelane, and drinke it with hot water. At the departure of Friends they will shew all their most precious Houshold furniture, the best whereof they employ about the heating water, or other vses for this Herbe, which is of precious account with them.
The women in Iapon which wanted meanes to bring vp their Children,Mel Nunnes. with inhumaine  butcherie did depriue them, being new-borne, of that life, which not long before they had communicated to them. Their Houses are most of wood, because of often Earthquakes: and some of stone. Temples and Monasteries they haue for both Sexes; and more had, till Nubu^anga destroyed them. Their Language is one, and yet exceedingly diuersified, according as they differ in State or Sexe: or as they speake in praise or dispraise, vsing a diuers Idiom.
They vse Characters in writing and Printing, as in China. Their Swords are of a most excellent temper. Their Customes differ in many things from other men.Customes in things indifferent are comely or vncomely, pro more loci, Blacke is a festiuall colour, White a funerall: their meates, drinkes, perfumes, are as dissonant to ours. Their Teeth are coloured with blacke, as beauties liuery borrowed of Art, which wee by Art would auoyd. They mount on the right side of the Horse. They sit (as we rise) to entertaine  a friend. They giue to the sicke persons, salt things, sharpe and raw: they vse Pills, neuer let blood: we contrary (as in other rites) either to other ridiculous.
All their Nobles are called Toni: amongst whom are diuers degrees: all of them holding their all in capite, to finde so many Souldiers to the warres, at their owne costs. Generally the whole Nation is wittie: pouertie is a disgrace to no man, Reproches, Thefts, Periuries, Dice-play are hatefull: very ambitious they are in all things, respectiue to their credite, full of courtesie each to other, neuer brawling, no not at home with their housholds. The inconstancie of that State learneth them by vse to prepare for, and to welcome euery State.
They are exceedingly subtill, hypocriticall and double-dealing: they are also of cruell disposition, not to their enemies alone, but sometimes will assay the goodnesse of their blade  and strength of their arme, on some innocent body; and in case of distresse, they esteeme it a credit to preuent the sentenceSometimes this is the sentence thus to kill themselues or at least a mitigation of the sentence; so esteemed there, as with vs the beheading of great persons condemned to a death more ignominious. of Law by bloody execution done on themselues, which they vsually doe in ripping vp their brests a-crosse, a seruant or friend attending to smite off his head: and if it bee a Man of any sort, his friends and followers in like manner with their owne hands plucke out their bowels to testifie their loue. The Gouernours haue absolute rule ouer their inferiours: yea, in euery priuate Family, the authoritie extendeth to life or death.
The people (saith Adams) are exceeding courteous and valiant; they are gouerned in  great Ciuilitie (no Land better) with seueritie of Iustice. They are very superstitious, and of diuers opinions.



HONDIVS his Map of Iapan.
map of Japan, East Asia
IAPAN I.




@. II. The Voyages of some English to Iapan, and their abode there.
THis our CountrymanW. Adams his strange voyage and aduentures. went chiefe Pilot of a Fleet of Hollanders of fiue Saile, 1599. and wintred in the Magellan Straits from Aprill to September. Neere to the Ile of Saint Mary in seuen and thirtie degrees in the South-sea, the ship wherein hee was, and another of the Fleet lost their men in fight with the Indians. They sayled thence to Iapan, and sought the North-Cape (which is false placed in Maps) in thirtie degrees, but found it in 35@. In this voyage from Saint Mary hither, they were foure moneths and two and twenty dayes: and then there were but sixe besides himselfe that could stand vpon their legs.  They anchored neere Bomage: and two or three dayes after a Iesuit from Langasack came aboord them. The King of Bungo befriended them with house-roome, and refreshing for their sicke; but three of their company dyed the next day, and three after; onely eighteene were left. The Emperour sent fiue Gallies or Frigats for them, about fourescore leagues distance: and demanded of them many questions touching our Countrey, and the termes of Warre and Peace in which it stood with others. Then was he commanded to prison, and two dayes after conuented againe, and demanded the cause of his Voyage. The Iesuits and Portugals informed against them as robbers of all Nations, and vsed their best friends to their worst designements: so that euery day they looked to bee crossed (or crucified, which is there the vsuall death of malefactors.) But the Emperour answered, they had not hurt him: and after long imprisonment,  he was suffered to returne to his Ship, and restitution of the goods (before seized on) commanded, but without effect because they were dispersed. They had fiftie thousand Rials
 giuen them. This Citie was called Saca, two leagues and a halfe from Ozaca. From thence they were remoued to Quanto, an hundred and twentie leagues Eastward, neere to Eddo, where the Emperour resided. They could not obtaine leaue to goe where the Hollanders traded, but were allowed each man two pound of Rice a day, and eleuen or twelue Ducats a yeere In processe of three or foure yeeres, the Emperour employed Adams in making him a Ship after the fashion of ours, which,He was no Shipwright, as he could, he did, which wan him fauour and a larger annuitie: Hee after built him another an hundred and twentie tunnes: and by this meanes, and acquainting him with some principles of Geometry, and the Mathematikes, grew in such fauour, that the Iesuits and Portugals (his quondam enemies) were now glad to vse him as a mediatour in their suits to the Emperour: Hee hath now giuen him a Lordship,  with eightie or ninetie Husbandmen or Slaues, to serue him, a fauour neuer before done to any Stranger. He could neuer obtaine leaue to returne home to his wife: but the Emperour was contented he should write for a Dutch and English trade to be there established yeerly. They haue there (saith he) an Indies of money: a good attractiue to bring them thither. And thither since both Hollanders and English haue resorted. The first English ship that there arriued, was the Cloue, anno 1613. Generall Saris aduenturing from Bantam thither by the Mo^^^as, and after an intricate passage amongst Rockes and Ilands, (which he feared would haue inclosed him without possibilitie of Egresse) through an open Sea he arriued at last at Firando. He was well entertayned there by King Foyen and his Nephew the young King, who comming aboord, began their Complements of Salutation at the feet, putting off their shooes;  and joyning their hands, the right within the left, moued them to and fro before their knees. They were entertained with a banquet and musicke to their good content. No sooner were they gone, but multitudes of their Gentrie came aboord with their Presents; but to preuent danger they obtayned a Gardiano from the King. Daily they were oppressed with multitudes to gaze on the Ship and her beautifull Sterne: and some women seeing the Pictures of Venus and Cupid, hanging in the Generals Cabin, fell on their knees thereto, whispering (for they durst not openly professe it) that they were Christianos; and this Picture they tooke to bee that of Our Lady and Her Sonne: such a ridiculous Image (scarsly an Image) of truth is there in Images, called Lay-mens bookes, indeedIerem. 10.8. Doctrines of vanity, andHab, 2.18. Teachers of lies:  whence it is an easie discent toIoh. 4.22. Yee worship yee know not what. After that the King came aboord againe with his Women, which there sang and played on Instruments, obseruing time; and that by booke, as it was pricked, but with harsh musicke to English eares. Hee gaue him the choyse of diuers houses to hire for his abode: but little sale might be made, the people not daring to trade till the Emperours License was obtayned. Sixe weekes he stayed here expecting the comming of Master Adams before named, with whom he after passed to the Court eight hundred miles further. First, from this Iland by water to Ozaca, thence to Surunga or Sorungo, where the old Emperour resides. He was well prouided of necessaries for his Water-passage by the King of Firando, and for his Land-iourney also, with Men and a Palankine for Himselfe, and a spare Horse, and one and twenty other horses for his men, raken vp (as with  vs Post-horses) by the way. The third day after they were come to Sorungo, they were admitted to the Emperours presence in his Castle, where they ascended on certaine stayres, and came to a matted roome, in which they sate a while on the matts (after the Easterne fashion) wayting the comming of the Emperour, to whom they were anon admitted, and deliuered His Maiesties Letter vnto Him, which He tooke and layd vpon his head, and with promise of speedy dispatch, willed them to repaire to their lodging after their tedious journey. Thence they went to Edoo where the Prince keepes his Court, and found honourable entertainment. Surungo is as bigge as London with the Suburbes, but Edoo is both a greater and fairer Citie, all, or most of the Nobilitie, hauing there their faire Houses, gilded, and making a gallant shew. The old Emperour wisely makes way to his Sonnes succession, almost putting him into present  possession of the State, by the greater Court and Pompe heere, then at Surunga. The Princes Secretary is Father (and therefore of greater experience) to the Secretary of the Emperour. The Prince is aboue fortie yeeres old. He returned to Surunga,I haue published the forme of them in Captaine Saris his Voyage, tom. 1. l. 4. c. 1. The Iaponian Alphabet of 20. the Malayan (which Ca. Saris could speake) of 24. Let^^rs. and had Articles of Trade granted (which the Secretary aduised they should propound as briefely as might be, the Iaponians affecting breuitie.) These * I haue seene in the Iaponian Character, seeming to differ from that of the Chinois in forme, but like for paper, and manner of writing with pensils (taking the Inke from a stone whereon it is mixed with water) the lines downewards, multiplyed from the right hand to the left; sealed with a redde print of Inke, and not with Waxe. Some say the Iaponians haue letters; Captaine Saris brought diuers of their bookes, which seeme rather to be Characters then Letters as farre as I can guesse, vnlike to the Chinois, yet  with like art of Printing, the Pictures in their bookes not comparable to the Art in ours. He heard that they had but twenty Characters, which must be vnderstood of Letters: for Characters standing for entire words cannot easily be numbred, as in China we haue obserued.

Being returned (after the view of Meaco) to Firando, He there setled a Factorie of English Merchandise,This trade still continueth. See Prings voyage etc. in my Voyages. leauing Master Cockes with some others of our Nation there in Trade, Himselfe returning from Bantam. Since this, some Intelligence hath beene receiued from Master Cockes, as wee shall obserue in due place: and others haue beene employed in this Iaponian Trade: whither the Chinois resort with many Iunkes, notwithstanding their mutuall hatred, the Iaponian ready to kill that Man which shall call him a Chinese, and the Chinois so hating all Trade with Strangers, that themselues heere reported, that fiue thousand had lately beene slaine by the King therefore, and the Officers put out of their places; the new Officers neuerthelesse for bribes permitting These this Egresse. And this may serue by the way to answer suchA Question moued by some, whether any Iesuites haue beene in China. as will by no meanes beleeue that the Iesuites haue set foot in China, because  the Chinois dare not for any summe carry a Stranger thither, and protest that none are admitted, no nor any Iesuites there seene. For all this I easily beleeue; the Iesuit^s also acknowledge; and therefore in many yeeres (euen after the Mart was permitted in Canton to the Portugals) could not bee admitted, till great importunitie after many many repulses on the one side, and on the other side bribes, preuayled; especially for These, as not seeming dangerous, so few in number, so sacred in profession, so farre in habitation, so Admirable for Arts, so liberall in the Giuing Art, (which goes beyond all the Seuen Liberall) and at last, after many yeeres pressing with Presents vnto the King Himselfe, and those so acceptable as in that Story is mentioned. The Chinois at Bantam knew it not, and no maruell: for these were Merchants neere the Coast, from which the Iesuites had their Residences very remote:  Their China fashion of keeping much within; going abroad with their faces couered with Vailes, Fannes, and chayre Curtaines; and so few in such a Sea of people, might easily escape their sight. Somewhat thatSup. l. 4. c. 1. and 19. especially the last @. before by vs related, more the Iesuites owne Histories, can cleere this point, which I heere mention, because diuers in speech and writing so confidently affirme that none of the Iesuites are or haue beene in China: when as yet in so many forreine Ports they meet with China-Merchants, all trading on perill of their liues, if briberie preuented not seueritie. But I will not kindle that fire of contention in these Relations, which betweene those Nations so easily flameth, the Chinois and Iaponians. The Emperour sent his Letter to his Maiestie of Great Britaine, as did also the King of Firando, with promise of much kindnesse to His Subiects: which with many other Rarities of this and the  rest of Captayne Saris his Voyage and Actions in the Red-sea,Cap. Saris his Iournall commended. Sinc. at Bantam, the Moluccas and other Places, I haue in my bookes of Voyages now published, to which, and other Iaponian voyages there added I referre the more Studious.


@. III. Of the Gouernment and Courage of the Iaponers.
YEe haue heard that in the Empire of Iapon are sixtie sixe Signiories or petty Kingdomes, all subiect to one Monarch. Touching their ancient Kings wee can say little:  but as it seemes in these last eight hundred yeeres, They haue had much Ciuil-warre, each labouring to make Himselfe Lord of as much as he could. The three last haue beene the greatest which Iapon in many ages hath seene: The first of these was Nabunanga a great Tyrant, a greater was Quabacondono his Successour, both in Tyrannie and Empire, who from a Cutter of wood climbed to the Imperiall Soueraigntie. Hee had a Nephew,Al. Froi^. 1595. whom Hee caused to be made Quabacondono, contenting Himselfe with the Title of Taicosama; but growing in jealousie of this Rising Sunne, soone brought Him to a Set, enforcing Him to crosse or kill Himselfe with other of his Companions, after the Iaponian manner. Before his Death, hauing no Children but one Infant, He sent for Gieiaso Lord of eight Kingdomes, and committed to Him as Protectour, the Administration of the Kingdome; adjoyning  as Counsellers, foure other great Princes, and fiue other of His owne Creatures, that these Decem-viri might rule the State in the Minority of his Sonne. For further securitie He tooke an Oath of these and all the Nobilitie, and married the Neece of Gieiaso to this young Emperour, being about two yeeres old. Hee also made marriages betwixt others of the Nobilitie, to hold them in concord. But these bonds were too weake: for soone after the Nine Counsellers or Gouernours brake out against Daifusama (so was Gieiaso now called) whom Taicosama had appointed chiefe of the Tenne: and this fire beeing smothered, kindled the second time into a greater flame, which brought all Iapan into combustion: wherein Daifusama being Conquerour, added many Kingdomes to his owne, and at last the Empire also, which was all this while entituled vpon Firoi, or Fireizama,  or Findeorizama, the Sonne of Taicosama. Daifusama vsurping the Empire, changed his Title into Cubo. Captaine Saris calls him Ogoshasama: perhaps a later Title.
 He holds more Kingdomes in his hand then any formerly: fifteene beside those that Taicosama held: this being their policy to keepe some Signiories immediatly subiect, and make others Tributary. This Emperour fortified at Gieudo or Edoo in his Kingdome of Quanto, employing three hundred thousand continually in his works from February to September:Ex Iap. 1606. 1607. where now his Sonne resides as apparant Heire to this Monarchy. Fireisama, Sonne of Taicosama. keepes at Ozaca: where by later Intelligence from Master Cockes, wee vnderstand that there haue resorted to him of Exiles, Male-contents and others, eighty or a hundred thousand, against whom Ogoshasama gathered an Army of three hundred thousand, the issue of which warre we haue not yet heard,Dec. 10. 1614. but onely that Ozaca (a City as bigge as London within the wals) is burned.
All Iapon sometime obeyed one Prince, called Vo, or Dair^,Maff. l. 2. who at length addicting himselfe to his priuate delights, and putting off the burthen of ruling to his Officers, grew in contempt: and at last euery one seized on his owne Prouince, whereof you haue heard there are threescore and sixe, leauing the Dairi a bare title, and a Heralds Kingdome, to giue termes of honour at his pleasure, whence he rayseth great reuenue, otherwise subiect (excepting his Title) as are all the rest, to the Lord of Tensa, (so they call the noblest Kingdome adioyning to Meaco.) ThisCos. Turrian. Vo, or Dairi descendeth by succession from the ancient Kings, out of which he is chosen, and is honoured as a God. He may not touch the ground with his foote, which if he doe, he is put by the place, neuer goeth out of his house, seldome is seene of the people. He sitteth in his seat with a Bow and Arrowes on one hand of him, on the other a Dagger. If he should kill any, or if hee shew himselfe an enemy to peace, hee is depriued as well as if he had trodden on the ground. All great men haue their Factors with him to procure new Titles of honour, the only fewell of his greatnesse. The King of China giuing Royall Ensignes to Taicosama, perswaded him to depose and abolish the Dairi, which he liued not to effect.
They haue another generall Officer or chiefe Iustice, which denounceth war, and in peace, giueth sentence on matters in controuersie. But these are but the Instruments of the Lords of Tensa, as are also the Bonzij. These are their Religious, among whom one is supreme in cases spirituall, by whom all their old Holies are ordered, and all new are confirmed or dashed. The Tundi (which are as their Bishops) are by Him consecrated and confirmed, although their nomination be by Lay-patrons. He dispenseth with them in diuers Priuiledges and Immunities: he enioyeth great Reuenue and Soueraignty, and is aduanced hereto by money and kindred. The Tundi giue Priestly orders, and dispense in smaller matters, as eating flesh on daies prohibited. They are subiect in spirituall things to these, in secular affaires to their Kings and Ciuill Magistrates. Through their diuisions and many wars they were much infested with Robbers and Pyrats, till Quabocondonus, in stead of so many Tyrants, erected One, and became vniuersall Monarch of Iapon. Betweene him and the King of China hapned warres about the Kingdome of Coray, which the Iaponites left vpon his death; and the Chinois also, as caring for no more then they already had. Many of them still are Pyrats, very much feared, and not suffered to land in any place. Captaine Dauis had experience of their daring spirits to his cost; for hauing taken a ship of them,Sir Ed. Michelborne. and not possessing himselfe of their weapons, because of their humble semblance, they watched opportunity, and slue him; and thought to haue taken their takers, and made themselues Masters of the English ship; hauing a watch-word or token for those aboord their owne ship, to murther the English there. Dangerous had this Fray prooued, had not the murthering Peece, with almost a cleane riddance of them, cruelly decided the quarrell. Yet would they not desire their liues, and pulled the Pikes of such as had wounded them, thorow their bodies, to reuenge it with their Swords.
This is generall to the Iaponians, call it fortitude or desperatnesse, or cruelty, or in some  respects all of them. Quabacondono the Nephew of Ta^cosama before mentioned, feemed to delight in bloud and butchery, and obserued as an ordinary recreation, at set times to haue condemned persons brought before him, in a place purposely inclosed and framed to this inhumanity; in the midst of which was a faire Table, and thereon those wretches were set in what posture he pleased, so to try his arme, art, and blade in this beastly caruing of humane bodies: sometimes also setting them for markes to his Peece or Arrowes; sometimes exenterating women, to open and curiously to search the closest Cabinets of Nature; alway prouoking vengeance to repay him in his owne Coyne. For old Taicosama hauing a young child, of his owne bodie, studied how to remoue this Quabacondono. It is a custome in Iapon that the Fatherr growing old, resigne their Signiories to the Sonne or Heire: The Lords of Tensa  (which title includes the Iaponian Empire) adde another ceremony, to visit that Sonne now in possession, so to acknowledge a kind of subiection, all the Lords in the Empire doing the like, in publike solemnity. This time was appointed, and Quabacondono prouided all variety
 of cheere for entertainment, a thousand choyce Wayters to attend, and thirteene thousand of their Iaponian Tables, little bigger then our Trenchers: but all was disappointed by Taicosamas iealousie, refusing to come. After that, He picked quarrels with him, and caused Him to goe to theCoia is a city consecrated to Combodassi a Bonzi the first author of their letters Many Bonzij attend his Holies, and the Princes are all there buried, or a tooth of them a^ the least. P. Bert. tab. Aug. 15. 1595. Monastery of Coia, (a receptacle for Exiles.) Quabacondono in this distresse shaued his hinder-locke and beard, changing his name to Doi. The Bonzij gaue Him entertainment at Coia (as to other Exiles) without any respect to his present Title, or late power. A few dayes after came a Mandate from Taicosama, that they should all plucke out their bowels after the Iaponian custome. First began an Honourable seruant, who, hauing ^ut himselfe open acrosse the brest, was by Quabacondono, (after reuerence done to him) beheaded, and then Others in order after the same manner: the fift was Quabacondono, whose head, after  hee had ripped vp himselfe, was strooke off with the same Sword which hee had vsed before in his butcherly recreations. And lastly, he that had smitten off his head, committed execution vpon himselfe: the Bonzij presently burning all their bodies in the same place. One of this company was offered by Taicosama his liberty, which hee refused, chusing kindly to dye with him, who in life had vsed him kindly.
The like executions followed in others, one of which was the mightiest Lord in Tensa, who being slaine, his Son but 16. yeeres old, had his life offered: but sending word to Taicosama, he could not liue without reuenge of his Fathers death, went presently to a Temple in Meaco, and before the Idoll Fotoco disembowelled himselfe. Of all Quabacondonos wiues and their followers, one and thirty chiefe women, and three of his children little Infants,  were carried in Carts to the place of execution, where the Executioner presently presents them with Quabacondonos head, that death might first enter at their eyes, which by a bloudy hand soone possessed all the other members: Their bodies were all laid in one Graue, ouer which Taicosama raysed a Temple with Inscription; The Temple of Traytors. After other wiues and children of the other Nobles executed, hee demolished to the ground the Palace which Quabacondono had built, with the City by him founded, consisting of little other then three hundred Noblemens Houses: this being the Iaponian policy, vnder shew of attendance, to keepe the Grandes at the Court, so to bee secured of their persons and practices. I haue beene the longer in this Relation, to shew the Iaponian tyranny in this example: whereof it were easie to giue you many. The poorest, if sentence of Death bee determined  on them, will (if they can haue knowledge and meanes) preuent it with this (accounted honourable kind of death) crossing themselues. And whensoeuer any man is executed, presently euery man rusheth in, and tryes his Catan or Sword on the body of the Dead, thus shred into gobbets, not a piece left bigger then a mans hand. This Captaine Saris saw done on a woman, and her two Paramours at Firando, whom shee had appointed to visit her; but one comming sooner and before the other was gone, they quarrelled (to draw a Sword in a Garrison Towne, and adulteryYet is adultery common. are both death) and they were all thus executed. The like for stealing, one for a little bagge of Rice, another for a piece of Lead not worth aboue sixe pence. Their doores stand open (so little doe they feare Theeues) and they make ordinary through-faires thorow other mens houses.Crosses in Iapan. Crucifying is common, the bodies still hanging,  and putrifying by the high-wayes: their Crosses haue two crosse timbers fastned to the maine Post which is set into the ground, the one for the expansion of the hands, the other of the feet, with a shorter piece in the midst to beare vp the weight of the body. They bind them thereto, and runne a Launce into the right side of the crucified, sometimes two acrosse. Headding is vsuall, which in Solemnitie is thus performed: one goes before with a Mattocke, another followes with a shouell; a third with a boord or table contayning the crime, which also hee himselfe following next, holdeth in a sticke, to which is fastened a paper made like a Vane, the end whereof is in his hands tyed behind him, by which cord the Executioner leades him, on each side a Souldier with his Launce resting on him; at the dismall place without shew of feare hee sits downe, and holds out his head presently wiped off, others  mangling him as is said.
M. Cocks.Since Captaine Saris his returne, the King of Firando is dead, and three of his followers crossed themselues, their bodies were burned and enioyed the same Sepulchre with his. And the Mint-master a Great man with this olde Emperour, hath already promised thus to dye with Him.Women actors are in Iaua and diuers places of the East Indies. I could leade you from these Tragedies to their Comedies, which in Iapon are common, and that by common women, which are to bee hired of their Pandar or Owner for this, the Bed, or attendance at table to fill your drinke: but it is Note-worthy that the Pandar, being dead, is by a bridle made of Straw put in his mouth, drawne about the streets, and cast on a dung-hill or some open place to bee deuoured of Beasts or Fowles. This hinders not but these Hydras heads multiply. Sometimes Great Men at their Great  Solemnities will themselues in person personate the Acts of their Ancestors: This Captaine Saris saw the King of Firando with the chiefe Men doe whiles hee was there, all the Towne
 and Neighbour-hood sending their Presents, and comming to view the same, and not the meanest but admitted to meate in the Kings presence.Insanae structurae I could from hence conduct you to the monstrous buildings raysed be Taicosama, employed night and day one hundred thousand men at worke. I could present you with the pompous entertainment of their great Solemnities, this being a tyrannicall policy to cause Gentry and Nobility of this stirring Nation thus to impouerish themselues with all possible brauery, that so their hands might bee too short for State practices. But with remembring these things I should forget my principall  scope: Let vs therefore take view of their Religion.


@. IIII. Of their Sects and Bonzian Colledges.
THey haue many Sects, some reckon them twelue; all truely agreeing, in disagreeing with truth: some of them Epicure-like denying Gods Prouidence, and the Soules Immortality. They hold that a man hath three soules, which one after another come into, and depart out of the body. Few of their Bonzij will openly teach this Doctrine, but labour to hold the people in awe. Amida and Xaca they preach, as Sauiours, and to bee  worshipped. Some of their SectsIcoxuana secta. doe beleeue an eternall life, and promise it to all such as call vpon these supposed Deities, as Saints which sometime led so austere a life for the sins of Mankinde, that for a man to vexe his minde, or macerate his body for his owne sinnes, or to doe good workes, would not onely bee superstitious, but offensiue and derogatorie to their merits.
And here the kind-hearted IesuiteFranc. Gasp. is panged with a fit of Charity to yoke the Lutheranes with them; as if the sufferings of Iesus were but the Superstitions of Amida, as if eyther the sufferings of man, imperfect, borrowed, dutie, could bee; or the sufferings of God could not bee meritorious; or as if the Lutherans denyed Christian contrition (whose affect  i^ Indignation,2. Cor. 7.11. effect (selfe reuenge) as they doe Popish Confession and Satisfaction. These Gods they call Fotoques. Other Gods of a lesse mould, they call Camis, which haue their charges and peculiar Offices, for Health, Children, Riches, etc. as among the elder (that I trouble not the queasie stomackes of the later) Romanes. These were Kings and Noblemen, or Inuenters of Artes, of whom they they haue as true tales as Homer of the Legend yeeldeth.
Taicosama that dyedAn. Do. 159^. Franc. Pasiu^^ Lud. Frois. a few yeeres since, (the first in which these many later ages took the title of a King, which, together with the Crowne, hee receiued of the King of China) ordayned before his death, that his body should not be burned after the wonted manner, but closed in a Chest, and, in a sumptuous Temple, for that purpose built,Al. Valigna^^ his Image should  be enshrined, and worshipped with the title of Scinfaciman, or new Faciman, the name of their Mars or Wa^like God; which was also done. Hee had appointed by Will the forme of that Temple which should bee built vnto him, which by those Decem-viri was done. Captayne Saris saw it, hauing on each side fifty stone Pillars, very stately for matter, Arte, and scite, seated on a Hill. The people called him the principall Cam of their Cams at the first erection; his corps was there intombed, and his Statue erected for their Superstitious worships. Thus he, which in his youth had vsed to cut wood and carry it into the Market to sell for his daily sustinance for his valour promoted in Military Honours, at last became the greatest Monarch that Iapon had seene in eight hundred yeeres; and not contented with humane greatnesse, would aspire to that diuine, whereof hee himselfe had beene a derider in others.  His name before was Faxiba, called after Quabacondonus; the highest title next to the Dairi, and signifieth the chiefe of the Treasure: next borrowing a Kingly stile from China, would (mad folly!) on his Death-bed bequeath God-head to a Man, and Immortalitie to a carkasse: when hee could no longer hold out his pride, cruelty, and other wicked courses, which made his presence dreadfull, his memory detestable. Nabunanga was his predecessor in his State and Impiety, arrogating diuine honour to himselfe,Lud. Fro^^ but destroying the Temples of their Gods, together with the Temple-keepers, the Bonzij. This appeared as Frenoiama, a famous Vniuersitie of those Bonzij, nine miles from Meaco, wherein eight hundred yeeres past, a Iaponian King had erected three thousand and eight hundred Temples, with houses adioyning for the Bonzij: allowing to their maintenance the third part of the  Reuenue of the Kingdome of Vomen. Hence proceeded their orders and gouernment in affaires both of State and Religion, being a Seminary of Lawes and Superstitions. But these Temples in time diminished to eight hundred, and the Bonzian Discipline as much empayred,
 and altered from Austeritie (in some) to Wantonnesse, (in others) from Arts, to Armes.
The Bonzij tooke part with Nechien, enemy of Nabunanga, who enraged hereat, made truce with the one, to destroy the other. The Bonzij not preuayling by their suing for peace, fortified themselues for warre in the Temple of Quanon their God of health and long life, much frequented with Pilgrimes from all parts, much solemnized with their pompous Processions (like in all parts, if yee beleeue the Iesuite, to their Corpus Christi Solemnity) which grew the more famous, for that these were but the preamble to the like pompe in Gibon Festiuall at Meaco. But all preuayled not with Nabunanga, who destroyed both Temple and Priests with fire and sword, burning foure hundred other Temples for company, in the  yeere 1572. At Meaco he burned twenty of these Bonzian Cloysters of the greater sort, besides fourescore lesse, and in one of them threescore Bonzian women or Nunnes, whose Deuotion was employed in begging for the reparation of the Temple of Daibud. Amongst the rest, as the Grecians had their Mercury with his Caducaus, so the Iaponians haue their Iizu with his Trident, to conuey soules departed into their alloted eternall residences: The Bonzij his Chaplaines by lots enquired whither they should remooue him; hee commanded it, and they with great solemnitie performed it, but out of a place, which then escaped, to anotherOut of the Frying pan into the fire. wherein, and wherewith he was burnt. Facusangin was another Bonzian Academy, adorned with many Colledges, which he destroyed. Xuanguen the King of Cainochun shaued his head and beard: and professed himselfe a Bonzi, and not only attyred himselfe in their Habit,  but thrice a day did performe their Superstitions, hauing six hundred Bonzij to his followers. He writ to Nabunanga, intituling himselfe the Patron of those Religions: the other in his answere stiled himselfe the Tamer of Deuils, and Enemy of Sects. But after that he would bee a God, soone did he cease to be a man; the immortall God, hating Corriuals, by his owne subiects destroyed his life, riches, and memory. These Bonzij are for the most part Gentlemen, whom their Parents (hauing many children) for want of mayntenance thrust into Cloysters; Shauen (as you haue heard) and Shauers, couetously pilling and polling the people of their money by many deuices, as by selling them Scroles to keepe them (by the Deuill) from hurt of Deuils after death: borrowing of money here,^al. Gagus. to repay with great interest in the future World; giuing the Creditor a Bill or Scroll of their hands for security: by telling  of things stolne or lost (which they doe by Inchantments, calling a Deuill into a child, who being so possessed, answereth their questions) by selling their blessings and curses, like Balaam. Some by vow (the most) liue vnmarryed: as the Bonzian women.
Another Sect called Ianambux^s, before their admission into that Order, liue two thousand or more together on a high Mountayne, for the space of threescore dayes macerating themselues with selfe-inflicted penance; the Deuill in diuers shapes meane-while appearing to them. And after this they are receiued into that damnable Fellowship, distinguished by white flockes hanging downe their neckes, curled haire, and blacke hats, and so wander from place to place, giuing notice of their comming by a little Bell. Another Sect, called Genguis, dwell on some high Hill, blacke of complexion, and (as is supposed) horned, marrie Wiues of their  owne kindred, passe ouer great Riuers by the Deuils helpe, who on a certaine Hill, at times appointed, appeareth to them: of whom by the name of Amida he is worshipped. In another Hill he was wont to appeare to his deuout followers, whom then hee would lead, as they thought, to Paradise, indeed to destruction. They say that a Sonne, not able to perswade his Father from this passage to Paradise, secretly followed him with his Bow and Arrowes, and when the Deuill appeared, shot and wounded a Foxe, whom he followed by the bloud to a Lake wherein he found many dead mens bones. They haue another Vniuersity in Iapon called Coia, whose Bonzian Students are of the Sect of Combendaxis, supposed the Inuenter of the Iaponian Letters.Vid. Claud. Duret. He in his old age digged a foure-square Caue, into which hee conueyed himselfe, affirming that hee then dyed not, but after some Millions of yeeres  would returne in the dayes of one Mirozu, which then should be a most worthy King in Iapon. About his Sepulchre burne many Lampes, sent thither from diuers Nations, with opinion that such as enrich that Monument, shall themselues here be enriched, and in the other life by Combendaxis patronized. In the Colledges here liue sixe thousand of those Shauelings: from whom women are restrayned vpon paine of death. At Fatonochaiti, the Bonzij trayned vp witty and proper youths in all ^rickes of subtlety and guile;A Connicatching trick. acquainting them with Genealogies of Princes, that so they might counterfeit to bee the sonnes of such or such great men, and borrowing money on that credit, might enrich their wicked Colledge: till the sleight being found, they were killed of the Inhabitants.
There be that worship the Sunne and Moone, who haue an Image with three heads, which  (they say) is the vertue of the Sunne, Moone, and Elements.Cos. Tur. These worship the Deuill, in visible shape appearing to them, with many and costly Sacrifices. Some Bonzij play the
 Physicians, which burne certaine papers, in which are written the sentences of Cam and Fotoch: which papers being burnt, they put the ashes in drinke, and giue the same to cure diseases, and (with lyes) to turne away lyes and fraudulent dealing.
Some hold Xacas booke in such veneration, that without it they hold it impossible to bee saued. Other Bonzij haue beene in other ages in high reputation of holinesse; butGaspar Vilela. one especially, not a hundred yeeres since, the author of the sect called Icoxos: the Ruler or Generall of which sect is openly wicked, but so adored of the people, that if he but looke on them, they will salute him with teares of ioy, praying him that all their sinnes may bee pardoned, and therewith giue him no small quantitie of their gold. His yeerly festiuall is so honoured  with thronging of the people, that in the entrie of the Cloyster many are trodden vnder foot, which yet is of the blinde people accounted a happinesse, many willingly yeelding themselues to be killed in that presse. And in the night, whiles his prayses are sung, there is a great howling and lamentation. Nequiron was author of the sect Foquexan.
There is an Image or Colossus of Copper in the way from Ozaca to Sorungo, called Dabis, made hollow, sitting vpon his heeles, of huge greatnesse: and yeelding a great sound if any hallow in the hollow thereof, as some of Captaine Saris his companie did. At Meaco he obserued one Temple as great as the body of Paules westward from the Quire, with a stone roofe, borne vp on as high pillars. Hee saw an Idoll greater then the former, reaching vp to the top of the arch. That of Dabis was in their way to the pilgrimage of Tenchadema, where  Master Adams told him that hee had beene. There they euery moneth present the Deuill with a new Virgin, instructed by the Bonzij to aske him certayne questions, which he in humane shape appearing, answereth; hauing the carnall vse of her body, if some Bonzi make not the Deuill Cuckold, as in our Egyptian Relations yee shall find of Tyrannus.
Some of their Bonzij professe a militarie discipline, as the Knights of Malta. The profession called Neugori was instituted by Cacubau (who is therefore deified) in which some intend their prayers, whiles others fight, and others performe their taske of making fiue arrowes a day. Their gouernment is an Anarchie; euery one obeying and commanding, the meanest person amongst them hauing a Negatiue in all their consultations: And nothing is agreed on till all be agreed. In the night they often kill one another without remorse, and yet (such is  their Religion) this Sect holdeth it a sinne to kill a flye or any liuing thing. Amongst the Bonzij thereLaurent. Iapon. are two principall men, which if vnder their hand-writing they giue their testimoniall to other of their Orders, it is as conferring a Degree, yea a kinde of Canonization. For thence-forward they sit in a chaire, and are adored, and appoint to other Students their taskes of meditation. One of these, puffed vp with vanitie and arrogance, professed to know what he was before he was borne, and what should become of him after death. Valentine CaruaglioValent. Car^. ^ap. commutatio. in relating the death of some principall Nobles, which withstood Daifusama the present Emperor, speaks of a certaine Bonzi, which neuer stirres out of doores but vpon such occasions; who accompanied with many of his Sect, after other hallowing ceremonies did giue them a certaine booke to kisse, and laid it on their heads, wherein they reposed much  holinesse, and worshipped it as a god: but one of them, named Augustine, reiected him, crying out hee was a Christian, and therewith tooke out a picture of Queene Catharine of Portugall, sister to Charles the fifth, in which were also represented the holy Virgin, and our Lord, and with great reuerence laid it three times on his head, and so resounding the names of Iesus and Maria, was beheaded. This I mention to let you see the Iaponian Christianitie. Some of the Bonzij are diligent Preachers, with great zeale and eloquence declaring the goodnesse of their Amida, and exhortation to call vpon him.


 @. V. Of their Feasts, their bloudie Pilgrimages and Confessions.
MEaco their chiefe Citie is chiefe also in superstitions, hauing had (if report lye not) on the Hill neere to it seuen thousand Cloysters or Abbies: one of which is so famous, that the Kings in their Warres will vow great summes of gold, and after victorie pay the same there: the people also in distresse make it their sanctuarie, where the Deuill by visions deludeth them. In August they celebrate the Feast of Gibon  with Pageants: fifteene or sixteene Chariots couered with silke, goe before, in them are children with Minstralsie. Euery Chariot is drawne with thirtie or fortie men, and followed by their peculiar Companies or Trades: and after them Chariots of men armed, which all passe by the Temple in the morning. In the euening, two Litters come forth, carried by men; the one of the God, the other of his Lemman; then followed the third of his Wife,
 with which the men runne vp and downe in such a confused manner, as may signifie her iealousie. Here the people weepe and pray to their goddesse, whom yet with a contrary deuotion they comfort: and lastly (as if by the peoples mediation) the Litters are ioyned together, and carried into the Temple. In the same moneth they haue their feast of All-soules, in which they light many lamps at their doores, and all night walke vp and downe the Citie: and many suppose at a certaine place they meet with the walking ghosts of their deceased friends, and after welcomming ceremonies, they set victualsBaites in the iour^^y to Paradise. before them, at least in that place, where hauing a little attended, they inuite them to their houses. The reason of this refreshing they alleage the long iourney to Paradise, which in lesse then three yeeres space cannot be passed, and therefore they haue neede of heartning. Two dayes this feast lasteth,  in which they clense their graues, and giue presents to the Bonzij. In March they haue festiuall Playes, in which many meet in the afternoone painted with the Images of their gods on their shoulders: and parting themselues into two rankes, the boyes beginne with stones, the men continue the fray with arrowes, poles, and swords, alwayes with the death of some, and impunitie of the doers. The fourth moneth is a kind of Lent, or deuouter season,Nic. Trigaut. in which euery day in the weeke the Bonzij preach twice or thrice a day in the prayses of Xara.
At Sacai in Iuly they keepe the feast of Daimaogin, to whom many Temples are dedicated: in which the Idoll is carried with much pompe on horse-backe, followed first by the Bonzij, then the Nobilitie, after them certayne Witches, whom armed troupes of Souldiers  follow. Then commeth the Litter of the God, all gilded, carried by twentie men, answering each other in certaine Hymnes; the people worshipping.
L. Frois.They beleeue diuers Paradises, into each of which their peculiar gods carry their owne worshippers: And some make ouer-hastie iourneyes thither on this sort. Hee watcheth certayne dayes, and then out of a pulpit preacheth of the contempt of the world. Others betake them to be his companions, and some giue their almes. On the last day hee maketh an Oration to his fellowes, who all drinking wine goe into their ship, carrying a sithe to cut vp all the brambles in their way; and putting on their clothes, stuste their sleeues with stones, and hanging a great stone about their necks to helpe them the sooner to their Paradise, hurle themselues into the Sea. And great honour is done to them being thus dead. I saw one (saith  Vilela) that had seuen of these companions, which with their great alacritie, and my great amazement, did this. But they which worship Amida, obserue another rite. Being weary of liuing, they put themselues in a strait hole of the earth, receiuing breath onely by a reede, and so continue fasting and praying till death. Some in honour of a certayne Idoll, doe cast themselues downe from an high Tower, where this Idoll is placed, and after their death are reputed Saints. OthersPet. Alcaceut. sayle to their Paradise (as before) but when they haue launched into the deepe, make holes in the ships keele for Death to enter, and the Sea to swallow both it and them. Diuers also crosse and disembowell themselues before their Idols; for with such sacrifices their gods are pleased.
Iosephus AcostaIoseph. Acost. Histor. Indiae, lib. 5. cap. 25. tells of a strange Confession, which is obserued in this order. There are  (saith he) in Ocaca very high and steepe Rocks, which haue pikes or points on them aboue two hundred fadome high. One of which, higher and more terrible then the rest, daunteth and terrifieth the Xamabusis (which are certayne pilgrimes) to looke vp vnto it: vpon the top of the point there is a great rod of Iron of three fadome long, placed there by a strange deuice: at the end of this rod is a ballance tyed, whereof the scales are so bigge, as a man may sit in one of them. And the Goquis (which be Deuils in humane shape) command those pilgrimes to enter therein, one after another, not leauing one of them.All this is represented to the eye in pictures by Theodoret de Bry. Americae part 9. Then with an Engine or Instrument, which mooueth by meanes of a wheele, they make this rod of Iron to hang in the aire; one of the Xamabusis being set in one of the scales, which (because there is no counterpoise in the other seale) presently hangeth downe, and the emptie one riseth to touch the rod aforesaid,  whereupon the ballance hangeth. Then the Goquis telleth the poore pilgrime that hee must confesse all his sinnes, that hee can remember, with a lowd voyce, that all may heare: Which he presently doth, some of the hearers laughing, some sighing. At euery sinne mentioned, the other scale falls a little, till that hauing told all, it remaynes equall with the other, wherein the sorrowfull penitent sits. Then the Goquis turnes the wheele, and drawes the rod and ballance vnto him* and the pilgrime comes forth, and another enters till all haue passed. If any concealed any sinne, the emptie scale yeelded not: and if when hee was vrged to confesse, he grew obstinate, the Goquis cast him downe from the top, where in an instant, he is broken in a thousand peeces. A Iaponian, who had seuen times made triall hereof, being conuerted to Christianitie, reported this. But the terror was such (said hee) that few would  conceale any thing. The place is hereof called Sangenetocoro, that is, the place of Confession. Thus much Acosta, whom as I thanke for the storie, so I would a little trouble (for hee would
 more patiently heare and beare, then some of his hotter brethren) with a question concerning Confession. And if the question come too late, yet the Societie liueth (and will longer then a better thing) in to a Colledge of whom Iapon hath brought vs, as their names here testifie.
The question is, whether euery Residence of the Iesuites bee not a Songenotocoro of Ocaca, that is, a place of Confession (so doth Sangenotocoro signifie) of which wee may exclaime (...), and if you will (...), the one for the cruell terrour wherewith it filleth the Conscience, and the latter for the fleshly filthinesse wherein Ocaca is not blamed: but theirOur Chaucer in the F^iars Prologue. Cor. Ag^ippa de vanet. ^. 64* and many of the Papists hemselues confesse thus much of their Confessionists. Alu^r. Pelag. Gu^nd. Iac. de Graf. etc. See Whites way to the Church pag. 219. and Iohn Nic. Pilgrimage. Poggius, etc. Churches haue beene Stewes, and Confession the Bawde. But to let this passe, and consider the former. What Racke or Rocke can Ocaca yeeld like to this, which theConcil. Trid. Sess. 14. cap. 5. Can. 67. Councell of Trent  hath framed, that full confession of all mortall sinnes (loe here the Racke) euen the very thoughts against the two last Commandements, with the circumstances of the sinnes, is necessarie by diuine ordinance vnto all which haue sinned after Baptisme; and (loe here the Rock) Anathema to the gaine-sayers. Tush, your coyne is not cu^rant, although you yeeld it profitable, and comfortable, and satisfactorie to the offended Church, except you yeeld all necessarie, all diuine. Diuines shall I call you, or Goquis, Deuils in the flesh, that make a hell in the spirits of men? that with your debita praemeditatione, and with your omnia and singula peccata, etiam occulta, etiam circumstantias, circumuent poore Christians, and put them in an Ocacan ballance ouer hell-mouth, there to fall, without such fauour as to be broken in p^eces. Goe Cardinall, and writeBellar. tom. 3. lib. 3. de Poenitentia totus. whole volumes for the proofe hereof, yet would I rather choose  to enter the Sangenotocoro-scale; then your Confession-schoole. Easie it may bee indeede to scared Iesuiticall consciences, that account Treason Religion; yea pleasant and delightfull to such Statists, to haue Kings vpon the knees of their bodies, to powre out before them the secrets of their soules, and (they are wiser then SalomonProu. 25.3. which esteemed it vnpossible) to search out the Kings heart. But to such as haue businesse enough to know and rule themselues, and doe indeed make conscience of euery dutie, what intolerable anguish is here prepared? when mans heart, besides that it is wicked and deceitfull aboue all, who can search it? is like an vntamed Heifer, who can rule it? Had I not need alway to haue a Priest at mine elbow, to whom to shriue me?Ier. 17.9. Who knoweth the errours of his life? and who knoweth when hee hath made his due premeditation, to examine them? This made Bellarmine vse the difficultie of ConfessionBellar. de Poenit. lib. 3. c. 12.  as an argument of the diuine Institution thereof. It is so difficult (saith hee) that no power of Man or the Church could haue imposed it, and therefore it was diuine. I will not say, who instituted the ballance of Ocaca, and yet it was a hard thing, and neuer the like heard of? I say, that the Gospell imposeth not such hard things (this were to bring vs back to the Law) but prescribeth anMatt. 11.30. easie yoke, and a light burthen: easie to such as loue not their ease, light to such as like and delight in it. But this, euen to those that dote vpon it, and deuote themselues to it, is not onely hard, but altogether impossible? Witnesse Bellarmine himselfe, Quid enim molestius, quid onerosius, quam vt cogantur etiam viri principes, Regesque potentissimi, sacerdotibus qui and ipsi homines sunt, peccata sua omnia detegere, quamuis arcana, quamuis turpia? etc. Witnesse experience in suchSheldons Motiues in the Preface. as haue tried it more neerely then Bellarmines Controuersies  would giue him leisure, yet liuing in continuall disquietnesse, and torment of their Consciences, in the vse of their Sacrament of Confession, receiuing no rest day nor night, as seruing gods, who cannot giue it them. These are the wordes of Sheldon (happily brought out of that darknesse, wherein, and whereof hee was a Priest and Minister, to a cleerer light) who out of his owne knowledge addeth; That it is not imaginable what inconsolable liues, some, that are frequent in the vse of Confession (as necessarie to saluation) doe leade: there is no stonie heart which would not pitie them, knowing their torments. But lest any man thinke, that some Goquis hath hurled me out of the scale of my Historie, to fall and split my selfe vpon these Iesuiticall rocks, I will returne to our Narration of the  Iaponites.


@. VI. Of their Idols, Temples, Funerals.
I Haue mentioned too many of their Idols alreadie, Amida, Xaca, Faciman, and others: I might here adde their IdollL. Alm^^d^. Casunga, of whom they begge riches. A Iaponian  1611. found one of his Images by change, whereupon he promised to himselfe store of wealth, but soone after, all that hee had was seized on by the Gouernour; this caused him to cast this Idoll out of doore, and (as the Iesuites say) to become their Scholer. I might annexe Tamondea, Bosomondes, Homocondis, and Zoiolis: to which foure, their superstitious opinion committeth so many heauens in custodie; Canon and Xixi, the
 sonnes of Xaca, Maristenes, Tirigis, and others, would be too tedious to report. OrgantinusOrgantinus. telleth. That whiles vpon a time the Feast of this last was solemnizing, a showre of stones rayned with such violence, that the companie, to the number of twentie thousand, betooke them to their heeles. But Amida is most worne in their lips; beggars asking and begging in his name: chapmen in buying and selling, sounding and singing it, the Bonzij promising saluation to all that inuoke it. Admirable are the TemplesL. Frois. for matter and workmanship erected to him; one neere to Meaco is an hundred and fortie elles in length, with a huge Image of Amida, hauing thirtie Images about it of Souldiers, besides Aethiopians and Deuils, yea Windes and Thunders figured, and a thousand Images of Canon (on each side of the Temple fiue hundred) all in like, but monstrous shape, with thirtie armes, two onely holding proportion  to his body, the brest adorned with seuen faces; all the Images and other furniture so glittering with gold, that it dazeleth the beholders eyes. Almeida describeth a Temple of theirs in Meaco, called Cobucui, which had three Porches, with so many Cloysters, and other pieces of stately and costly workmanship. Two mightie Colosses or statues of Lions, were set as Porters at the doore. In the middest of the Temple were set Xaca and his sonnes about him. There were threescore and ten pillars of Cedar of such height, that (as the Register booke of the Temple testified) each of them cost fiue thousand ducats. These and the walls were painted, the roofe artificially framed: a hall for the Bonzij fortie elles long and twelue broad of like workmanship with the Temple: whereunto were annexed their chambers, an  hundred and fourescore in number, a Librarie full stored with bookes; Bathes, Butteries, Kitchins, huge Caldrons an elle deepe, to heate their water for drinke, which they neuer drinke cold, neither in Summer nor Winter; Parlors foure and twentie, with lights burning in them all night. Before it, is a Fish-poole fiftie elles square, full of fish, which none may touch. It is sixe hundred yeeres since the foundation of this Temple. The pleasant and spacious walks before the Temple of Casunga, planted with loftie Cedars and Pines, watered with a goodly streame, arched with a double row of pillars, adorned with fiftie Lanternes on each side, of solid metall couered with gold, and curiously wrought, which burne all night; the large Monasterie of Bonzian Nunnes, which being aboue fiue and fortie yeeres old, deuote themselues to these holies; the Q^ire not to be entred by any but certaine Religious, which there sit in  garments of silke: the^e with other like might tempt my pen to bee tedious. And so might the Temple of Fachiman in the same Groue, more costly and curious then the former, and another without it consecrate to Dai, which hath two giantly Porters of stone fourteene elles high, fourescore and eighteene pillars of wonderfull height, and three elles and a halfe in compasse: it was built seuen hundred yeeres since, and was twentie yeeres in building. A Tower or Steeple of wood is borne vp with thirtie pillars, in which did hang a brazen Bell, the mouth whereof was two elles, the compasse sixe, the depth three and a halfe, the thicknesse aboue thirteene inches. There are many Deere and Doues consecrated to the Temple, which goe into mens houses, no man touching them. Their walkes set with Orange Trees, and other their rarities of Art and Nature, they which would further learne, let them resort to Almeida our Author. One Temple is dedicated iust by, to a Lizard, (which they  make Author and Patron of learning) without Altar or Image in it. Hee that readeth of the huge workes of Taicosama, holding sometime an hundred thousand workmen in labour at once, may present to his imagination the incredible buildings which those Tyrants by so many slauish hands, can raise. Their busie wits appeare by their curious questions to Iohn Fernandus, of the nature of the Soule, of Angels and Deuils, etc. and some of themEd. Syluius. seeing the absurdities of the Bonzij, worship nothing at all. The Bonzij, as the Iesuites report, raysed slanderous rumours of them, to be eaters of mens flesh, and causes of the warres and plagues which their gods prouoked by this new Sect sent amongst them: theyPet. Alcaceua slandered the new Conuerts as miserable Apostataes, which became Christians, because they would not be at the charges of their Idolatrie. The IesuitesNic. Trigaut. tell of a great woman possessed  with a Deuill, which said that he was a Foxe, for some iniuries offered by the Maide, thus dealing with the Mistresse. There were in those parts store of Foxes, multiplyed by their superstition, not daring to hurt any notwithstanding their great harmes, because, forsooth, they were the Deuils instruments to punish them. Yet in this case the Wizard being consulted, counsayled to take a Foxe without hurting him, (which with a trap was done) and to giue him all kinde entertaynment with most delicate foode and vsage, so to pacifie the Good-wifes angrie Daemon, who yet (like a Deuill) with faire entreatie grew worse. Hereupon another famous Wizard was called, who writ a long scroll, binding himselfe in the Deuill-Foxes name to free the woman, subscribing with his bloud; which scroll hee hanged on the Foxes necke before taken: which being neatly trimmed and shauen by a  Barber, and painted (as their women, being of pale complexion, vse) was let goe, and the Deuill intermitted his tortures awhile, but after reiterating the same, The womans
 husband caused all the Foxes thereabouts to bee slaine, for this perfidiousnesse: and a third Wizard cured the Mistresse, by coniuring the Diuell into one of her Maides.
They are very curious and ambitious in setting foorth their Funerals;Their Funeral^ thus briefely: The friendsL. Frois Epist, assemble in their best array to the fire: the women of his acquaintance goe forth in white raiment, with partie coloured veyles on their heads, and their Maidens attending: their chiefe women are carried in Beds, or Litters of Cedar. After them follow the Men in sumptuous habite: next comes the chiefe Bonzius of his Sect in his Pontificalibus, carried in a costly Bed, attended with thirtie other Bonzij in their Linnen vestments. Then one in Ash-coloured garments (for that is also a mourning colour) with a long Torch lighted, sheweth  the Corpse the way to the fire: followed with two hundred Bonzij singing to the Deitie which the dead had chiefely obserued: others beate on a Bason till they come at the fire: others carrie paper-baskets full of painted Flowers, which they shake out by the way, as a token that his soule is gone to Paradise. Eight Bonzij draw Banners on the ground, in which is written their Idols name: tenne Lanternes, with the same inscription, are carried with lights burning. Two follow with Torches vnlighted, wherewith afterward they kindle the fire. Many come after in Ash-coloured habite, with three-square Caps on their heads, with the name also of their Diuell therein written, which name another beareth written in a Table with large letters of Gold. After all these (did you thinke you had lost him?) comes the Corpse sitting in a Bed, in white, borne by foure men, his hands ioyned in a praying gesture.  His Children are next, the eldest carrying a Torch to kindle the fire. Lastly, comes the multitudes with such Caps as wee spoke of. After an houres hallowing their Holies by all this multitude, and three times compassing about the inclosed square place, in which (besides tables for viands) the fire is made, the chiefe Bonzij in an vnknowne language mumbleth ouer an Hymne, and lighting a Torch, doth thrice brandish it about his head (thereby signifying that the soule is without beginning or end) and then casts it away. Two of his Children take it vp, and after a triple ceremonie (the body being layd thereon) kindle therewith the wood: on which they hurle costly woods and Oyle, and so burne the carkasse to ashes. Which done the Children, making incense, adore their Father, as now assumed to the heauenly societie, and richly reward the Bonzij. Next day they returne and put the reliques of this Corpse,  ashes and bones, into a gilded vessell, which is hanged in the house, there to receiue like exequies, and afterwards with no lesse ceremonie buried; euery seuenth day, and seuenth month, and seuenth yeere, his Children renuing their deuotions. The poorer spend herein two or three hundred, the rich as many thousand Ducats. In the Obits of Great Persons, the Lords and men of Ranke assemble themselues, and are called euery man by name to doe honour to the Image of the deceased, with incense as in sacrifices. After so much wickednesse of men, let vs adde somewhat of the admirable workes of God in Iapan.


 @. VII. Of the strange Earthquakes and Tempests in Iapan, with some other Obseruations.
ON theL. Frois Relat: de Legat. Ciuens. Addeth many other strange effects hereof in Bungo and other places. Vid. and Pet. Gomez. two and twentieth day of Iuly, in the yeere 1596. it rained Ashes round about Meaco, couering the ground as if it had beene Snow. Soone after it rained both there and in other places, red sand, and after that, as it had beene, womens haire. And not long after followed an Earthquake, that hurled downe Temples and Palaces (wherein Taicosama had then newly employed night and day an hundred thousand workemen, to his exceeding cost, and their intollerable slauerie) which with their ruines  destroyed thousands: sixe hundred gilded Images in the Temple of Ianzusangue were cast downe, and broken in pieces, as many remaining whole. It brought vp the Sea a great way vpon the maine Land, which is carried backe with it into the Sea, not leauing mention that there had beene Land. So was the Citie Ochinofama swallowed. Famaoqui, Ecuro, Fingo, Cascicanaro; the neighbour-Townes attended her in this new Voyage and became Sea. The Ships in the Hauen found no more fecuritie, but were also deuoured. The like happened in the yeere of our Lord, 1586. to Nagafama, a place frequented with Merchants, which the Sea before had enriched, then with an Earthquake deuoured, the Earth in many places opening such wide mouthes, that a Caliuer-shot could scarce reach from the one side to the other, belching out of that yawning such a stinke, as none were able to passe by. The Earth  and Sea not onely shooke with feare, but bellowed out such roaring cries vnder that blow of their Creators hands, as did make the accident more dreadfull. Yet was all soone forgotten, and Taicosama tell to building of new Palaces.

Francis Fernandes writeth, that in the way from Malacca to Iapan they are encountred with great stormes, which they call Tuffons, that blow foure and twentie houres, beginning from the North to the East. and so about the Compasse: these happen in Iune and Iuly. It is there colde in Nouember, December, Ianuarie, and Februarie, because of continuall North and North-west windes. Whiles Captayne Saris was there, a terrible Tuffon blew downe the houses in Firando, turning them ouer with the fire in them; which must needs haue fired them, but for (as strange an accident) so much Raine comming withall A Bonzi pretended to haue beene told by their God or Deuill, that such a Night their Towne should bee burnt: this made such Out-cries euery night, the Diuell still prouing a lyar, that they could not sleepe. That Tuffon sunke diuers Iunkes, and did much harme to the Hollanders  wharfe, bringing vp the Sea so terribly that it made the Earth to shake. And yet the yeere after worse harme was related from Edoo by Master Cockes: this faire Citie all ouerflowne, and the people forced to flee into the Mountaynes: the waters taking possession of those gilded Houses, and the windes carrying away all the Tiles of the Kings Palace stately builded in His new Fortresse, these Tiles all gilded, but now none to bee found. The Pagans ascribe this to the Charmes of the Iesuites lately banished; the Christian Iaponians, vnto that persecution. Their women are as white as with vs: but not well coloured, which they supply with Art. There are women at Firando, which liue in their Boates, and take Fish by diuing in eight fathom deepe: their Eyes are red by this diuing, they easily this way knowne.  They haue three sorts of Siluer. It is with little cost reduced to the Spanish puritie. Their houses are floored with Mats, and they fringed with Silke, Gold or other stuffe. The Iapanders confirme and subscribe their compacts and bonds with their Blood. Their Siluer is in bars, their Gold coyne in long forme.
Hee that listeth further to bee acquainted with Iaponian affayres, may resort to the Epistles of the Iesuites, which besides these I haue named are many: and of that societie are not many lesse then two hundred in this Iland,Gab. Matosus 1603. Eman. Acosta. which also is now become an Episcopall Sea. Some Cities are become whollyFran. Cabralis Pet. Gomes. Christian, if wee beleeue the Iesuites, abandoning all their Ethnike Paganisme and Idolatrie: would God no leauen were mixed with their Christianitie. Peter Martinez their first Bishop tels of aboue twentie thousand  in a yeere conuerted to Christian Religion: whereas in China they haue found small successe, notwithstanding that theyEmen. Iesseria. there promised to themselues a more plentifull haruest then in any other Nation. The first of them was Xauier (one of Ignatius first companions, and like to haue beene canonized before him too) which dyed in China, 1552. and lyeth buried at Goa: of which Arias Blandonins, and the Iesuites tell many strange things. But the first finding of this Iland is by Galuanus ascribed to Anthonie Mota and his fellowes, 1542.
But before these M. Polo writeth of this Iland, which hee callethPol. l. 3. Xepangu, whither Cublai the great Tartarian Can, in the yeere 1264. sent two Captaynes to conquer the Iland. The windes (as angry with the Tartarians, and taking part with the Ilanders) raised so stormie a Sea, that (when there were now thirtie thousand of their Companie, landed  in a little Iland) they were forced to put off to Sea, and scattered with tempests. The Ilanders set foorth a Nauie to take those Tartarians, which so confusedly ordered that enterprise, that the Tartarians found meanes to make themselues Masters of their enemies Nauie, and therewith to sayle away.
Marcus Paulus reporteth like things of their Idolatrous Religion, as you haue heard: of Idols with heads of Oxen, Hogges, and Dogges, and other deformed shapes: and some with many hands, as a testimonie of their great power. The enemies which they tooke in warre, not able to redeeme themselues, hee saith they did eate in solemne Feasts: hee addeth, that in the Iaponian language Mangi was called Cin; as now it is Cina or China.
I haue presumed to adde a piece of a Letter of Quabacondonus to the Viceroy of India,  which after other things, hath these words: Iapan is the Kingdome of Chamis, whom wee esteeme to bee the same with Scin, which is the beginning of all things. This Scin is the substance and very being of all things: and all things are one and the same with Scin, and into Scin are resolued, which in Scina is called Iutto; and in Tescincu Bupp^. In the obseruation of the Lawes of this Chamis, consisteth all the politique gouernment of Iapan, both inward and outward, etc.
Betweene the Sects of Amida and Xaca happened a late grieuous quarrell. Anno 1609. Both Sects number great multitudes,Ioan. Rodrigues. Nic. Trigaut. and are said in times past to haue numbred betwixt them three thousand Colledges or Monasteries in the Mountaynes not farre from Meaco.  Their originall was from Sijenoyama a Towne in the said Hilles: those of the Amidan Sect were called Fandoxus, the other of Xaca Foquexus. Now it happened that one of
 these Foquexus, transported with zeale, in a Sermon of his had rayled on Amida, and his Sectaries, which by one of them was soone answered: whereupon followed a challenge of Disputation betwixt them, which came to the eares of Cubo, who followed Amida. Hee commanded that both of them should come to Yendo, or Edoo, to trie the matter before Him: where the Foquexus feared the Emperour (the rather because hee had shewed the bitternesse of his zeale against one of Cubos Sonnes, which, hee said being lately dead, was now damned for being of Amidas Heresie, and rode vp and downe all Iapan without rest, appearing heere and there.) And now could hee speake but halfe words, beeing surprized with his feare, a passion which is the betraying of the Succours that Reason offereth.  Cubo commanded that hee should bee stripped of his Bonzian habite in a publike Congregation by other Priests, together with his Companions, laden meane while with insolent words and blowes. After this, they and eleuen more of their Sect (aboue twentie in all) were bound, and ledde vp and downe this Citie, and other the chiefe Cities of Iapan, in which before hee had Preached. Lastly, all of them were carried backe to Miaco and Carted, the Preacher had his Eares and Nose cut off, the rest theirRodrig. saith, their eares cut off and not their nose, but both to the Preacher and that 21. houses or Monasteries were therefore desolate. Noses: and the matter taken vp by the King of Fingo which followed Xaca, obtayned this Conclusion, that all the Foquexus should by their publike writing confesse, that the Founder of their Heresie, which first taught the worshippers of Amida to bee damned, was an Impostor, and that Xaca neuer had taught so.
 Thus hath this Emperour dealt with the Iaponian Sects: nor is hee equall to the Iesuites Christianitie. For in Yendo (so the Iesuites call that Imperiall Citie of the Prince, Ours Eddo and Edoo) Proclamation was made that None of the Nobles should become Christian. And many inferiour Kings persecuted the same, specially Michael an Apostata, the King of Arima, which had before vsed bad meanes to remoue his Father, so to become his vntimely Successour. This his Father Iohn had a little before beene employed against the Portugals Ship of Macao. The reason was, some quarrels at Macao betwixt the Portugals and Iaponians, who being seuerely enquired into by the Portugall Magistrate, fledde home, and acquainted Cubo with the businesse. Hereupon this ship arriuing in Iapan at Nangasach, Hee sent this King of Arima against them; in which fight the Portugall Ship long preuayling,  by casualtie was fired, and by themselues casting fire into the Gunners-roome, blowne vp, to the losse of a Million of goods. This Iohn vsing indirect meanes to obtaine part of the Kingdome of Fyen, his hopes increased by the marriage of the Emperours Neece to his Sonne Michael, notwithstanding his former wife. The issue was,Ann. 161^. that whiles the Father entertayned one policie, the Sonne had two: the one for that Land of Fyen, the other to supplant His Father (who seemed to forget the Iaponian custome, in their age to relinquish the Gouernment to the Sonne or Successour.) This at last hee effected by his Fathers banishment first, and soone after his death, and now becomming of his wiues Religion,Lit. 1613. persecuted the Christians, and banished the Iesuites. Hee burnt or roasted rather eight of his Subiects, after Saint Lawrence his example. And the Emperour himselfe hath much distasted the Iesuites.  The reason is not mentioned by the Iesuites. But Captayne Saris then in Iapan, affirmes, that a Ship of the Portugals comming from Macao, Ogashasama sent to haue some rarities bought for his vse: The Gouernour (I know not whether it were the King of Firando) moued the Iesuites to effect the Emperours pleasure; They said they were Religious men, this belonged to the Captayne of the Ship. Hee being sollicited, said it belonged to the Master: the Master was asked, and answered, The Iesuites ruled herein. Thus was the businesse wound in a Circle, (they seeking it seemes to heighten the price) and the Gouernour to whom the Emperour had sent, accused the Iesuites as beeing vnder the Cloake of Religion, Merchants. Hereupon He caused their Temples to be pulled downe, and all remoued to Nangasacke and prohibited any Masse-saying within fiue leagues of the Court: which whiles some  presumed in their zeale to transgresse, saying Masse in an Hospitall of Lepers within that Compasse, they were Crucified therefore. Captayn Saris in his journey to Sor^nga met with some of their Churches thus taken downe, diuers Iunkes being laden with them. For such is the Iaponian building with joynts in their Timber, and without nayles, that it may easily be remoued. The Reliques of these crucified persons were reserued as great Holies: as great Follies, I should haue said. And since, Master Cockes hath written that the Iesuites are all banished Iapan, and their Churches puld downe and burnt. The Iesuites had some goodly Colledges, as at Meaco, one as large as theThat part within the walls. Tower-Hill, whither the Children resorted daily to their Schoole.
And before these dayes the KingsHen. Cuyckius. of Bungo, Arima, and Omur sent their Embassadours  to the Pope (then Gregorie the thirteenth) with Letters of deuotion to his Holinesse,And. Schottus. and had audience in the Consistorie the three and twentieth day of March Ann. 1585. This was the Iesuites policie (saithLins. l. 1. c. 26. Linschoten) to make the Iaponites to know the magnificence
 of Europe, and by that meanes principally to enrich themselues with Gifts and Priuiledges. Howsoeuer; the Iaponites thought themselues hereby much obliged to the Pope, as by the Letter of Don Sancio, the King or Lord of Omur, and Protasius of Arima to Pope Xistui 1590. appeareth. But for a farewell to these Iaponian Iesuites, I like their being there so well, that I could wish all of that societie were Preaching in that Iland, or acting the Scripture-stories vpon the Stage (whichArias Sanctius Bap. Montanus. is one way of instructing the Iaponites) or, if you like that rather, a whipping themselues in their vaine-glorious Processions (which is another of their Iaponian Lectures) that so they might in some measure expiate the crimes of their European brethren; or any way else, so that our Europe were well ridde of such vermine.  
Coray is a hundred leagues from Iapan by Sea, which is so troublesome, that in the fiue yeeres warres betweene the Iaponites and the Corayans, it swallowed aboue fiue hundred Ships. This Kingdome of Coray is an hundred leagues long, and threescore broad, tributary to China, and confining vpon the Tartars. They are good Archers, but not so good Souldiers as the Iaponians, nor so well weaponed; but better prouided of Ships. Taicosama warred vpon it, both to make it his way (as was thought) to China, and especially that hauing subdued it, he might place the Kings his vassals in Iaponia there, so to possesse all that Iaponian state immediately himselfe.
There are to the North of Iapan neere to Sassuma certaine plentifull Ilands called Liuquiu; the Portugals name them Sechies, which by the King of Sassumas indeuour Cubo hath conquered,  the King, Nobles, and a rich bootie taken. Formosa is a great barren Iland; betwixt Macar and Iapan, not farre from China, to which it is tributary, betwixt whom and the Iapanders haue beene late quarrels. Lewis Frois speaketh of a great Nation of wilde people to the North of Iapan, three hundred leagues from Meaco, which are cloathed with Beasts skinnes, with great beards and mustachoes; a people giuen to Wine, valiant, dreadfull to the Iaponites: they worship the Heauen: and other Religion they haue not. Captayne Saris was told at EdooEdoo. of an Ile called Yedzo North-west from Iapan, by one which said hee had beene there twice; * that the people are hayrie as Monkeys, and that further North there were small people of little stature. These of Yedzo were as tall as the Iaponians, with whom they haue continuall traffique, hauing little apparell but from them. Of Corea hee was also  told, that there are many bogges, for which cause they haue Waggons with broad wheeles, to keepe them from sinking, and obseruing the Monson or season of the wind (of which you haue heard how certaine it comes yeerely in all the East) they haue sayles fitted to those Waggons, and so make their Voyages on land. With such Waggons full of Souldiers Taicosama (as he was told) had intended to assaile China, but was preuented by One, which to poison him, poisoned himselfe.



CHAP. XVI. Of the Philippina's.

@. I. Of the Spanish Ilands, and others adioyning.
IT is already shewed, that those Ilands receiued this name of Philip the second, King of Spaine, and that this name sometime is in a large sense attributed to  all these Ilands in those huge Seas, but more properly to those which Lagaspi discou^red, in the yeere 1564. and where the Spaniards haue since that time had some places of abode; Mendenao, Tendaya, Luzon, and their neighbours, lying farre-into the Sea before Cauchinchina, and Cambaya, betwixt the seuenth degree and the twentieth of Northerly latitude: but first of all other Tendaia was called Philippina, by the Spaniards, which discouered it out of New-Spaine 1542. as Iuan Gaetan, one of them, testifieth. They areGio. Bot. Ben. many in number, some of them very great, rich in Rice, Honey, Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Gold; and enriched further with trade from China. Seuentie of these Ilands are Subiects or friends to the Spaniards. Of ancient time they were subiect (as some say) to the Chinois,Discourse of China, of F. Iuan. Gon. de Mend. vntill they did voluntarily relinquish them: the cause  of much Ciuill warre amongst themselues, that Anarchie prouing worse to them then a Tyrannie, or rather the worst tyrannie, euery man becomming a Tyrant; and as hee had
 meanes of wit, strength, and followers, preying vpon others vsing or selling them for slaues: which their diuisions made an easie way to the Spanish Conquest.
They worshipped the Sunne and Moone, obseruing in their honour solemne and sumptuous Feasts. In the Illocos they worshipped the Deuill, and offered to him many Sacrifices in recompence of a great quantitie of Gold, which they said he had giuen them. Their Feasts and Sacrifices were done by women, which were Witches of them called Holgo) reuerenced amongst them as Priests. These had ordinary talke with the Deuill, and many times in publike. These wrought strange Witchcrafts; they answered vnto all Questions that were demanded of them: (although their Answeres were often eyther Lyes or Riddles) they vsed Lots as the Chinois, and were obseruers of times. If they beganne a Iourney, and met with  a Lizard or other Worme, they would returne home, saying the Heauens prohibited their proceeding.
They haue now amongst them many Preachers and Monasteries of the Augustinians, Franciscans, and Iesuits. But the wicked life of the Spaniards is so offensiue to the Inhabitants, that the Discourser (himselfe a Frier) telleth heere of a notable Story.Pag. 34^. A certayne Ilander soone after his Baptisme, died, and appeared after to many of his Countreymen, perswading them to be baptized, as a way vnto that happinesse, whereof hee now had in himselfe most blessed experience; onely they must be baptized, and obserue the Commandements, which the Spaniards preached to them; of whom, and of others like vnto them, there were in that happy place infinite numbers. Hereupon he vanished, and some were perswaded: but others  of them refused, saying, that seeing there were Spanish Souldiers in glory, they would not go thither, because they would not bee in their company. A like History Bartholom de las CasasCrud el. Hisp. relateth of a Westerne Indian, at the time of his death answering to a Dominicke Frier, which counselled him to dye a Christian, and so to bee capable of Heauen (when hee heard there were Spaniards in Heauen) hee would rather bee in Hell with his Fore-fathers, then in Heauen with the Spaniards.
The SpaniardsFrancis-Vaez. 1601. haue their Bishop and Archdeacon, and besides other Religious, seuen Colledges of Iesuits. BoterusG.B.B. part. 4 lib. 3. sayth, That the King of Spaine had thought to haue made Manilla an Archbishopricke, and added three other Archbishoprickes. CaptaineOliuer a Noort. 1600. Noort (a  Dutchman that compassed the World) lost a ship heere in fight with the Spaniards, and sunke one of theirs: he affirmes, that the Conuerts of these parts are more Popishly Christian, then in the midst of Rome or Spaine, and more addicted to their Superstitious follies.
In these Philippina'sTho. Cand sh Voyage Hak. Tom. 3. some carue and cut their skinne, with sundry streakes and deuices all ouer their body. Moreouer, as we haue spoken of Bals worne in their yards, (or Bels rather, for they make a lowd ringing as they goe, if they wrap them not vp very clos^) by the men of Pegu; so heere, the men, and men-children amongst them haue nayles of Tin thrust quite thorow the head of their priuy part, being split in the lower end, and riueted, which is done when they be young, and the place groweth vp againe, without any great paine. They take it out, and put it in, as occasion serueth. This here, as that in Pegu, is said to haue beene  practised to auoid the sinne of Sodomy, whereto before they were prone. The Males also are (at least in someOn the Ile Capul. of the Philippina's) circumcised. The people worship the Deuill, who oft times appeareth to them in conference, in most vgly and monstrous shape. There is amongst them an Iland of Negro's, inhabited with blacke people, almost as bigge as England, in nine degrees.
Here also bee thoseAnt. Galuan^. blacke people called Os papuas, Man-eaters and Sorcerers, among whom Deuils walke familiarly, as companions. If these wicked Spirits find one alone they kill him, and therefore they alwayes vse company. Their Idols they adorne with Ostrich feathers. They vse to let themselues bloud with a certayne Hearbe layd to the member, and licked with the tongue: with which they can draw out all the bloud in their body. They  are like the Cafers or Ethiopians, and are diuided into many Kingdomes, asNic Nun. I Gaetan ap. Ram. Nunnes wri^eth.
Migindinao, Mindanao, or Vendenao is a great Iland, contayning by Iuan Gaetans obseruation, three hundred and foure score leagues in compasse. It is inhabited of Moores and Gentiles: there are many Kings. In stead of bread they vse Rice and Sagu. There is Pepper, Ginger, and Gold singularly good. Tendaia enuironeth a hundred and sixty leagues, from twelue to fifteene degrees of latitude; the people Idolatrous; abound with Pepper, Ginger, Gold, and Mynes.
When as Magellan, first of all men,A Pigafettae. by the West discouered these Easterne Ilands, in the Ilands of Buthoan and Caleghan, hee could learne no other Religion obserued amongst them, but that lifting vp their hands closed together, and their face towards Heauen, they called  on their God by the name of Abba. In Zubut (in token of friendship) hee and the King did let themselues bloud on the right arme, for so was their wont to confirme leagues of amity. The King had his skinne painted with a hot Iron Pensill: he and his people at Magellan's
 peswasion were baptized; and burned their Idols, which were made of hollow wood, with great faces and foure teeth, like Bores tuskes in their mouthes: painted they were all ouer, but had only a forepart, and nothing behind.
They weare in their yard a nayle of Gold. They had many wiues, but one principall. TheyMas. Transil. ^ano. obserued many Ceremonies in killing a Hogge, in Sacrifice, as it seemed, to the Sunne. After the sounding of their Cymbals, and certaine Cates set downe in platters, two old women came forth with Trumpets or Pipes of Reed, and did reuerence to the Sunne, and then clothing themselues with sacred Vestments, one of them put about her fore-head a haire-lace with two hornes, holding another heire-lace or skarfe in her hand, and so beganne to sound, dance, and call vpon the Sunne, wherein she is followed by the other, both of them  in this manner dancing about the Hogge, which is there fast tyed. The horned Beldame still muttereth certaine words to the Sunne, and the other answereth her: then doth shee take a cup of wine, and after some Ceremonies powreth it on the Hogge: and after that with a Launce, after dances and flourishes, she killeth the Hogge. All this while a little Torch is burning, which at last she taketh into her mouth, and byteth it: and the other woman washeth the Pipes with the Swines bloud, and with her finger embrewed with bloud, marketh the fore-head of her husband first, and then of the rest. Then doe they vntire themselues, and onely with women associates, eate the cheare in the platters: and after sindge the Hogge and eat him. Without these Ceremonies they eat no Swines flesh.  
From hence Magellan went to Mathan, where in a battle with the Ilanders he was shine.
In Pulaoan they keepe Cockes for the game, but eate not of their flesh, forbidden by their Superstitions. In Ciumbubon they found a tree, which had leaues like those of the Mulbery, hauing besides on each side of the leafe, as it were, two feete, with which (as if it had beene mouing and sensible) it would stirre and goe vp and downe. Pigafetta kept one eight dayes in a platter, and when he touched it, presently it would flee from him, and moue vp and downe: he thought it liued of the ayre.
In Burneo the people are partly Moores, and partly Gentiles, and according to their Religions, haue two Kings and two Royall Cities, situated in Salt-water. The Moores when they kill a Hen or a Goat, vse first certayne words to the Sunne. The GentilesMas. Transil. worship  the Sunne and Moone, esteeming the one Male and the other Female, him the Father, this the Mother of the Stars, whom also they reckon in the catalogue of their Demi-gods. They salute the Sun in his morning-approach, with certaine Verses and adoration: which they also performe to the Moone, and demand of them children, riches, and other their necessaries. After death they expect no future state. The Spaniards heard of great Pearles as bigge as Egges, which the King of Burneo had: and if you beleeue them, they tooke an Oyster themselues, whose fishie substance weighed seuen and fortie pounds. The Moore King in Burneo was serued in his Palace, and attended only by women and Maydens.
In GiloloPigafetta. they are likewise, some of the Arabian Sect, the others Gentiles. The Moores had two Kings of their Law, each of which had sixe hundred children. The Gentiles vsed to worship the first thing they encounter in the morning all the day following.Got. Arthus pag. 396. They were  sometime man-eaters: some of the Ilanders were by the Portugals conuerted; but the King being poysoned by a Mahumetan, they declined. Yet one Nobleman named Iohn, first killed his wife and children with his owne hands, lest they should apostatize, and then offered himselfe to endure any torment.


@. II. Of the Moluccos, Banda, Amboyna, and Selebes.  
THe Moluccos are vsually reckoned fiue (as before is said) but many other Ilands are subiect to them, and by some Authours called also by that name. The King of Ternate is said toSir Fr. Drake. haue seuenty Ilands vnder his subiection, and in his Port representeth great Maiesty. Both heere and in Banda the Mahumetan Superstition hath set footing, and preuayled, as in the other adioyning Ilands, the Moores being as zealous to winne Proselites, as to enrich themselues. None of these Ilands is aboue sixe leagues in compasse, enriched with Cloues, but of other fruits barren and poore. One treeMaff. lib. 5. they haue, which out of the cut branches yeeldeth a white, wholsome, and sauourie liquor for drinke; they call it Tuaca, and the pith thereof affoordeth them meate called Sagu, tasting in the mouth like sowre  Curds, melting like Sugar, whereof they make certayne Cakes, which will endure good for food ten yeeres.



HONDIVS his Map of the Indian Ilands.
map of the islands of Maritime Southeast Asia
INSULAE INDIAE orientalis


The Cloue-trees not onely sucke vp all the moysture of the Earth where they grow, disdayning  any other plant should grow neere them (like our Inclosers) suddenly drinking vp all the Heauens liberality in showres, but with their thirsty appetite intercept the running waters that descend from the Mountaines, before they can betake them to their Mothers lap, the Oceans refuge. In this IlandGaluane. are said to bee men hauing anckles with spurre^ like to Cockes; heere are Hogges with hornes: a Riuer stored with fish, and yet so hot, that it flayeth off the skin of any creature which entereth it: Oysters so large, that they Christen in the shels: Crabs so strong, that with their clawes they will breake the Iron of a Pick-axe: stones which grow like fish, whereof they make Lime.
InIac. Neccius. Ternate is a Mountayne, which (as it were) angry with Nature, for being fastned to the earth, doth not only lift vp his high head aboue the Ayrie Regions of cloudes, but endeuoureth  also to conioyne it selfe with the fiery Element, wherewith it seemeth to hold some entercourse, with dreadfull thunders, belching out light flames mixed with a darke smoke, like proud Greatnesse, wasting it selfe with it owne flames, and filling the neighbouring-valley with ashes. It is not much aboue a hundred yeeres, since first the Sect of Mahumet entred the Moluccas. But nowLud. Fernand. La. Masonius. both heere and in Amboino the Iesuits haue their Residences, and haue perswaded many to their Catholike Faith, and whipping Processions. Stephan abGot. Arthus pag. 403. Hagan in the yeere 1605. wanne this Iland of Amboino, and the Fort of the Portugals, to the States: it is a Cloue-Iland. The King of Ternate is Mahumetan.
InHolland. Nauig 1598. and 99 per Bilibald. Stobaum. Ternate theft is neuer suffered vnpunished: the Hollanders saw a Boy of eleuen or twelue yeeres, for stealing a leafe of Tobacco, led vp and downe with his hands bound behind  him, for a publike spectacle and derision to other Boyes. They mayntaine deadly wars with the Portugals, and spare none of them that they can get. If an Eclipse of the Sunne or Moone happen, they howle and make piteous lamentation, perswading themselues,
 that their King, or some great man amongst them will dye. Experience thereof was the sixt of August 1599. when the Moone was eclipsed about eight of the clocke at night, they euery way by crying out, by strange gestures, praying and beating their Basons and Drummes, expressed a lamentable passion of griefe, for the feare aforesaid. And the eclipse being past, when they see that neither the King, nor any other is dead, they obserue the next day solemnely ly festiuall with publike Procession of old and young of all sorts. They esteemed it a Miracle when the Hollanders told them that there were in their Country which could prognosticate of Eclipses long before. ColumbusGas. Ens lib. 1. cap. 5. vsed the like simplicity of the Iamaicans to his preseruation: for when they forsooke him, hee threatned vnto them the anger of God, whereof they should see an euident token in the darkening of the Moone within two dayes, which  according to the naturall reuolution of the Heauens (knowne to Columbus) comming to passe, the Ilanders with dread and feare shewed all readinesse to his Seruice. The conceits of the Moones Eclipse haue beene diuers, some Indians thinking that shee was whipped by the Sun till the bloud followed: the Greekes attributing the same to Thessalian Charmes, for remedy whereof, theyPlutarc. P. Aemil. Seneca. Hippol. and Med. Tibul. l. 1. Eleg. 8 Manil lib. 1. Astron. Iuuenal, Martial, etc. vsed to beat on Instruments of Brasse, and lighted Torches, and cast fires vp towards Heauen. And the Athenians persecuted naturall Philophers, and Meteorlogians, as aduersaries to Diuinitie, as appeareth in Diagoras Protagoras, and Socrates, till Plato brought them to another mind. Plutar. Nicias.
The water about Ternate is so cleere, that they fish by the eye, and can see the Anchors in the bottome of the water, at sixteene or seuenteene fathome deepe, as if it were but a foot:  and espy euery fish which passeth, to no small aduantage of their fishing.
When the King goeth to the Mesquit, a Boy goeth before, which beareth his Sword on his shoulder, and in the other hand a Kid: after him follow the Kings Souldiers. After them another with a Censer. Next to whom commeth the King with a Tiresold ouer his head, to keepe off the Sunne. When they are come to the doores, there are vessels of water to wash their hands and feete, before they enter; and then the floore is couered with white cloth, whereon they prostrate themselues, with their faces to the earth, softly mumbling their Mumpsimus-deuotions. In the middest is a Pulpit spread with white cloth. In stead of a Bell, they haue a great Drum hanged vp, which they beate with Clubs. They haue in euery Temple also one Bell, but without a clapper. All come at that peale, or sound, with their  weapons armed.
The MolucciansIac. Neccij Nauig. in octaua part. Ind. Orient. de Bry. are better proportioned then other Indians, haue more beard, (which the elder men nourish and weare long for their greater authority) browne of colour, and meane of stature. For valour they haue not their like in all India, especially those of Ternate, chusing rather to dye then flee, and esteeming it a great credit to fight against greater multitudes. Their shields are of wood two spans broad, and 4. foot long. They are exceedingly addicted to sloth and ease, none working in any Handicraft; their houses are of Timber and Reeds, without one nayle in them, which their slaues build, and doe also their other labours. They haue no money, and the siluer which they haue is employed to vessels of plate. Their riches are their Cloues, wherewith they prouide them of other necessaries. They neuer see their  wiues till they are married; nor the wiues them. Makian and Moher are now subiect to the King of Ternate: Tidore and Batian haue their peculiar Kings. This people haue the power to elect their King, so that they choose one of the Royall and ancient Family. The King of Ternate calleth himselfe King of Gilolo, whereof hee hath but a part, and that by conquest. The birds of Paradise (saith this Authour) haue two feet as well as other Birds; but as soone as they are taken, they are cut off, with a great part of their body, whereof a little is left with the head and necke, which being hardned and dryed in the Sunne, seeme to be so bred. The MooresPigafetta. made the Ilanders beleeue that they came out of Paradise, and therefore call them Manucodiata, or holy Birds, and haue them in religious account. They are very beautifull, with varietie of feathers and colours.  
Amboyna bringeth forth Orenges, Citrons, Lemmons, Cloues, Coquos, Bonanas, Sugarcanes, and other fruits, being a very fertile Iland. The Inhabitants are simple, liue sparingly, and are attired like other the Moluccans. They spend much Rice, whereof they make loaues like Sugar-loues. They haue GalliesNauig. Holland 1598. per B. Strobaeum. De Br^, part. 5. Ind. Or. hath the Pictures of these Gallies, etc. after their manner, formed like Dragons, which they row very swiftly: they call them Karkolleu. The Admirall came to the Hollanders with three of these, full of armed men, which rowed round about them, expressing manifold signes of ioy with Songs and Drummes; the slaues singing as they rowed. They had three Peeces of Ordnance in euery Galley, which they discharged, answered in that kinde by the Hollanders. But two of the Holland ships not finding sufficient store of Commodities for them all, went to Banda, passing by Poel Setto, an Iland not inhabited, bearing North-west  from Banda fiue Dutch miles. They say it is inhabited of Deuils, and whosoeuer must passe by, maketh all possible haste to be gone, much affrighted eyther by selfe-fancies, or Deuillish Impostures.

Banda is foure and twentie dutch miles from Amboyna, and diuided into three parts, which comprehend fiue miles. The chiefe Citie is Nera. In this Iland are more store or Nutmegs then elsewhere in the Moluccas: for which cause they resort hither from Iaua, China, and Malacca. They professe Mahumetisme so deuoutly, that they neuer goe to their watches before they haue prayed in the Mesquit, whereinto they enter, being first washed (after the Mahumetane manner) but pray so lowd, that they may bee heard a great distance: their wordes of prayer are Stofferolla, Stofferolla; Ascehad an la, Ascehad an la; Ylla, Ascehad an la; Yll lolla, yll lolla, Mahumed die Rosulla: At the pronouncing of which last wordes, they stroke their hands ouer their face; in which gesture they thinke is much holinesse. Other prayers  they mutter ouer very softly, with little mouing their lips. They stand vpon Mats, and lift vp their eyes twice or thrice to heauen: after which they kneele downe, bowing their head twice or thrice to the earth. Thus they doe often euery day, both at home and in the streets. They haue their publike meetings and bankets in their Temples very often, euery one bringing his part of the cheere: which sometimes they doe in the woods a hundred in a companie. At these times they consult of publike affaires.
They haue ciuill warres, Nera and Lantoor holding together against three other Townes. Two little Ilands, Polleruijn and Poelvunay take part with Nera,Polerine or Poolaroon and Polaway. and when occasion requireth, come thither with their boates to consultation, where they are entertayned in publike feasts: the manner whereof is, that they sit downe in order; in stead of a table euery one  hath a peece of a leafe of the Bonanas Tree: then is set before each a peece of Sagu bread, after that, a dish made of the leafe of another Tree, with a little sodden Rice and Flesh-pottage, which they hurle by handfuls into their mouthes, deuouring rather then eating the same. In the meanewhile the Gentlemen arise with their weapons, and exercise themselues in Martiall games, with Daunces. The quarrell betwixt these Ilanders grew about the cutting of certayne Trees, from whence it is come to cut and kill one another with cruell butcheries. They exercise Sea-fights in their Caracorae, or Galeots, with great dexteritie, with great showts and cryes, the G^ntlemen dancing on the hatches very actiuely. They are very bloudie and barbarous, yet bury the heads of their enemies with sweet odours. If any of their friends die, the women make a shrill and lowd crie to call him againe; which not effected,  they prouide a great feast, whereunto all the kindred and friends are inuited. They burie them almost after our fashion, in a white sheet, the corps being carried on mens shoulders, the men first, and women after, following. A Censer is there left fuming all the day and might; and in the night they keepe a light burning in a little house, which they haue set ouer the graue. In the morning and euening all of all sorts come and say their prayers a long while together at the graue: and being asked wherefore? they said, that the dead should not arise againe. They haue a play with the Ball, exercised by many of them, not as amongst vs with the hand, but with their feete, tossing the same vp into the ayre, and taking it one of another wi^l^ admirable sleight. Thus haue we related from Dutch testimonies.
In Banda the Hollanders are reported to haue foure Factories, and three Castles.Ex relatione Cap. Saris qui suit Bantame per multos anno. dum haec gerabantur. They are  farre more feared of the Natiues then loued. They raysed a Fort neere to one of their Mesg^^s or Temples, to the prophanation (as they thought) of their holy ground, and of the Sepulchres of their dead, which for this cause they spared not. Hence did the Bandeses burne with indignation, which yet they concealed, and with goodly protestations desired the Dutch Generall Verhauf, which was there at that time with many ships, to come into their House, or place of Councell. This was compassed with Trees and Bushes, in the midst hauing a faire round place, where they sate vpon Mats, their chiefe Magistrate being the Sabandare. Verhauf promised to come, and when hee was by one of his Countrey-men, that had long continued there, admonished of the trecherie of this people. Hee yet scorned to feare, and with some three hundred followers at the appointed houre marched thither. The Xeriff  (one of Mahomets kindred, wearing, as note hereof, greene in his Turbant) which had before inuited him to this assembly, with all lowly semblance meetes him, tells that in such armed troupes they shall not dare to speake their mindes. He presently commands his Souldiers to stay, tooke with him some two and fortie chiefe men, entred and sate downe with the Bandese Senate, crosse-legged, a Bandese and a Hollander together, and so through all the companie. At the watchword each Bandese stabbed his neighbour Dutch, and presently the Generals head was smitten off, and carried out to his Souldiers, now busie in playing, or altogether idle, their peeces lying on the ground: and in this case they were suddenly assaulted by an ambush, hidden there in the Thickets, and were in great danger to haue lost their Fort. The English in their ships might see the fight. In another place the Hollanders turned one of  their Mesgids into a Fort. The offended Bandeses offered their slaues libertie to dispossesse them: they refused, till a Iauan Merchant (then there with his Iunke) offered his ten slaues aboard his Iunke to giue the onset. Thus they went about three hundred, each man with a
 fire-brand in one hand, and a creese in the other, aduentured on the shot, and soone fired the Fort ouer their heads, slaying euery man.
N. Bangam.These Ilands of Banda are subiect (as some, but vntruely, report) to the King of Botone, with whom one M. Richard Welding, an Englishman, was in great fauour. The king had a sonne which was mad, whom a certaine Italian vndertaking to cure, was sent to attend him in the other World,Martin Pring. his patient dying vnder his hand. M. Welding had serued him in his warres, and gotten victories for him, and honour for himselfe and his Nation.
It is reported, that lately neere to the Hollanders Fort inThe more full relation of this Earthquake (so it wa^) see in my Voyages, l. 5. tom. 1. together with a description of these Ilands in Cap. Fitzherberts L^tter. There also may you see diuers Letters of the Kings of Tidore, Ternate, Bantam, to His Maiestie, and three Surrenders to him of diuers of those Ilands: and the warres which the Banda businesse occasioned in the Indies betwixt the Dutch and Our Merchants, as their owne and ours haue related the same. Banda, there issued a great fire out of the Sea, which continued a good space, and was likely to haue fired the Hollanders Fort, the Natiues wayting for such oportunity, but by shifting of the winde it escaped. The  Sea in that fired place was many many fathomes deeper then it had beene before. But our English haue since this was published, enioyed not only commerce but Forts and Dominion by voluntary subiection of the Bandaneses themselues; the cause of great warres twixt the Dutch and ours: the particulars whereof you may see at large in my Booke of Voyages.
The Hollanders and the Spaniards are in continuall warres for these Molucca Ilands. They droue out the Portugals by force about ten yeeres since, but the Spaniards haue succeeded in the quarrell, which yet is managed on both parts, so as the Natiues haue the worst. For they both weare out the Country people in warres, which betweene Tidore and Ternate are ancient (by these bellowes kindled into continuall flames) that there are scarsly sufficient to gather their Cloues. Machian yeelds the most store: in the third yeere (which is most plentifull)  about 1800. Bahars; on other yeeres almost eleuen hundred.
The Spaniards haue a Castle on Ternate, another on Tidore, in Gelolo also and Battachina two others, but the Hollanders haue three in Terenate, and as many in Tidore, one in Amboyna, one in Battachina, in Batchame one, in Botoone two Bulwarkes, in Mechame three, in Moutter one; besides their other Indian Forts, and all their Factories. They haue their wiues also to helpe man (if that name may bee giuen to women) their Fortresses in some places. Their Sea-force and Land-vices being added, make them dreadfull to the Spaniard, hatefull to the Indians, and for their insolence, distastefull to theCapt. Saris. Will. Keeling. W. Floris. W. Bangam. R. Cock. Martin Pring. M. Ball, etc. English, vnder pretence of I know not what conquest, stiffely denying, terribly threatning, disgracefully deprauing the English, vnder whose name they haue yet borne themselues in many places of the Indies, and with  mayne force and violence binding the Natiues to their owne trade, and that at lower prices and harder conditions; which makes them loue the more liberall, though imperious and proud spirit of the Spaniard, more then that accounted fordid dealing of the Flemming, in the Moluccas and Banda Ilands.
Before we leaue these Moluccas and their dependant Ilands, we may conclude with a Tragedy, wherein blind superstition, and beastly cruelty, were principall Actors. When MenesiusArt. hist. Ind. Orient. cap. 46. was Gouernour of the Portugall Fort in Ternate, he kept a Sow, which some of the deuouter Mahumetans killed. He getting the chiefe Priest (accessorie to the fact) into the Castle, at his deliuerie made his face bee greased with Bacon by the Iaylor, which caused the people to ofter abuse to some Portugals. Menesius in reuenge cut off the hands of two of them, the third had his hands bound behinde him, and was bayted with two dogges on the  Sea-shore: which his implacable enemies transported him into like dogged humour (though he were not with Hecuba transformed into the shape:) insomuch, that fastening with his teeth on one of their eares, he held fast, till his strength fayling, hee sunke into the Sea with the Dogge, and was drowned.
In Celebes theyOd. Barbosa. eate mans flesh.Hak. tom. 3. The King of the Moluccas was wont to send condemned persons to Celebes, to be deuoured. Nicolaus Nunnes writeth, That Celebes is very large, and contayneth many and great Ilands: the Soyle is exceeding fertile; the Inhabitants comely and tall, rather ruddie then blacke. They haue many Kings; which is cause of many contentions. Three of them were conuerted. Peter Mascarenia, in a Letter dated a thousand  fiue hundred sixtie nine, speaketh of a King of Sion in Celebes, which was baptized, and his subiects therefore rebelled against him, one Towne onely except: and that hee and the King of Sanguim did take vp a Crosse on their owne shoulders, which the chiefe Men had before hewen of a faire piece of wood, and helped to erect the same; and then, with the multitude kneeling downe, worshipped it.
Southward of Celebes, is situated a little Iland, where Sir Francis Drake graued his ship. This Iland is throughly growne with Woods; in which, euery night certayne fierie Flyes made such a light, as if euery Twigge or Tree had beene a burning Candle. Here they found Batts as bigge as Hennes, and plentie of Cray-fishes so great, that one vvould suffice foure men to their dinner: they digged themselues holes in the earth, like Conies.  
At Macassar in this Iland is an English Factorie. In this Iland some are Moores, some Ethnikes. They enuenome their Arrow-heads (which are made of Fish-bones) with an
 incurable poyson. There are Priests, which conforme, or rather deforme themselues, to the habit of women; nourishing their haire on the head, and plucking it out of the face. They gild their teeth, and vse broken, wanton, effeminate gestures. They are called Becos, and marrie one another. For them to lye with a woman, is capitall, and punished with burning in pitch. These Men-Monsters, Women-Deuils, much hindered the Portugals Conuersions.


@. III.  Of the Iauas, and other adioyning Ilands.
NOt farre from hence is Iaua: of which name, M. Paulus and Nich. di Conti, reckon two great Ilands; ascribing to the one, two thousand; and to the other, three thousand miles in circuit. The lesse is neere to the firme Land of the South Continent, where Beach, and some other Prouinces, are named by Paulus and Vertoma^^^, of Heathenish superstitions. The lesse Iaua had, in the dayes of M. Paulus, eight Kingdomes; in sixe of which, himselfe had beene, which hee nameth Felech; wherein the rurall Inhabitants were Idolaters; the Citizens, Moores: the Idoll-worshippers eate any flesh whatsoeuer, of man, or beast, and obserue all day what they first see in the morning.  BasmaM. Paulus, lib. 3. These seeme Rhinocerotes. the second, acknowledged the Great Chams soueraigntie, but payed him no tribute. Here were certayne Vnicornes, headed like Swine, footed like an Elephant, with one horne on their foreheads (with which they doe not hurt any, but to that end vse certayne prickles that grow on their tongues:) They delight also in the myre, like Swine. Here are little Apes, much resembling men in their countenance, which they vsed to preserue with certayne Spices, hauing flayed off their skins, and left the haire growing in those parts, where Nature causeth men to be hayrie, and sell them to Merchants, to be carried ouer the World as the bodies of little men; happily the onely true Pygmies the world yeeldeth. In Samara, the third of those Kingdomes, none of the North-starres can bee seene. They are Man-eaters, and Idolaters; but not so brutish, as in Dragorian, the next Kingdome: where, if a man bee  sicke, his kinsmen consult with their Sorcerers, who enquire of the Deuill, Whether he shall escape, or no? And if the answere bee Negatiue, they send for certayne men, specially designed to that villanous mysterie, which strangle him; and then they dresse and eate him amongst the kindred, euen to the very marrow in his bones. For (say they) if any flesh should remayne, it would putrifie, and wormes would breede thereof, which after (for want of sustenance) would perish, whereby the soule of the dead partie would be much tormented. The bones they burie safely, that no beast should touch them; such dread haue they of beasts and crueltie, in a more then beastly crueltie, and such a care to obserue humanitie and pietie in a most impious inhumanitie. Lambri, the next Kingdome, hath in it some men with tayles, like Dogs, a span long. The last is Fanfur, where they liue of bread made of pith of Trees,  the wood whereof is heauie, and sinketh to the bottome, if it be put in water, like Iron: and therefore they make Lances thereof, able to pierce Armour; for it is three fingers thicke betwixt the hollow and the barke.
To let passe Pentan, Sondar, and other Idolatrous Ilands, and come to Iaua maior: This Countrey is very rich; but in times past, of most abominable custome. Nic. ContiN. di Conti. saith, That they feede on Cats, Rats, and other vermine, and were most vile murtherers, not sticking to make triall of the good cutting or thrust of their blades on the next body they met with, and that without punishment, yea (if the blow or thrust were deliuered with fine force) with much commendation. VertomannusVert. lib. 6. affirmeth of them, That some obserue Idols, some the Sunne or Moone, others an Oxe, and many the first thing they meete in the  morning, and some worship the Deuill. When men were old, and not able longer to worke, their children or parents carryed them into the Market, and sold them to others, which did eate them. And the like they vsed with the younger sort in any desperate sicknesse, preuenting Nature with a violent death, and esteeming their bellies fitter Sepulchres then the earth; accounting others fooles, which suffered the wormes to deuoure so pleasant foode. For feare of these Man-eaters, they stayed not long there. It seemeth, that they haue much left their brutish customes; since, wonne to more ciuilitie, by trading of the Moores and Christians, especially such as are of the Arabian law: although, as our owne Countrey-men report, which haue there liued, a mans life is valued to the murtherer at a small summe of money. They are a prowd Nation.Scot. If a man should come in, where they are set on the ground  after their manner, and should sit on a Chest, or high thing, it were as much as his life were worth. TheBert. Ta^. King of Bantam breaking promise with the Hollanders; when they obiected it, My tongue (he answered) is not of Bone.

When they are sicke,Gio. Bot Ben. they vow vnto God, vpon their recouerie, a more honourable death, which they performe after their recouerie, by the murtherous hand of some other vpon them. They areOd. Barb^sa. great Inchanters, and obserue houres, and fitting minutes and moments of time, for composing their Blades and Armour, of which they are conceited, that being tempered with their charmes and superstitions, with the least drawing bloud of another, they will kill him; themselues, in their inchaunted Armour, safe from others blowes. They abide in expectation of these martiall minutes, for their coniured Armours, sometimes eight or ten yeeres, before they can finish them. The IauansBar. dec. 2. l. 9 cap. 4. Of the Hollanders nauigations in these p^tts, see Isacius Atthus, the Dutch Historie of Graue Maurice. say, That their Ancestors came from China, which Countrey they forsooke, because of the tyrannie wherewith they were oppressed, and in great multitudes peopled this Iland. They weare their haire and their nailes  long. They are dutifull to their superiors. The great men stirre not forth, without a great troupe of followers. They are seldome idle, much busied about their scabberds and weapons, which they vse to poyson. They are not without their weapons night or day, which they will not suffer another man to touch. They are so eager of reuenge, that they will presse on their aduersaries weapon, drawing it thorow their owne body, to kill him that hath wounded them. They haue Mahumetane Temples, where they doe their deuotions with great silence. They acknowledge IESVS, Mahomet, Dauid, and Moses, foure Prophets. They obserue their houres, and two Fasts, or Lents. The great mens wiues neuer goe out of the doores to be seene. Their Cities are Ballambua, and Panarucan (a litle from whence is a burning  Hill, which first brake forth 1586. and oppressed infinite numbers of men, and cast great stones into the citie, for three dayes space making one continued night of darknesse) Passarua, the King whereof married ^he King of Ballambuas daughter, and the second night after hee had lyen with her, slue her and her attendants, because hee would not turne Mahumetane. Ioartam, Surrabaia, Tuban, Matara, are also royall Cities, as are Daunia, Taggal, Charabaon, and many others. But bantam is of most traffick, frequenced by Portugals, Dutch, and English, in which euery day are three seuerall markets. Here Merchants, when they come, may buy a woman for their fleshly and worldly businesse (you may adde the Deuill too, to make vp the number) which at their departure they sell againe. Publike affaires are treated and handled by night, at which time the Counsellors of State meet, and ascend some tree, or the roose of  the house, viewing the Heauens till the Moone arise, and then goe into the Senate-house.
The women in Iaua act Comedies. They punish Adulterie with death, the woman chusing her neerest friend or allie to stabbe her. The Southerne parts of Iaua are little knowne, being full of Lions and wilde Beasts. It hath been fatall to many English: but much through their owne distemperCapt. Saris. with Racke (a wine made or Rice) and their contagious women. Iohn Milwards iournall relateth of their voyage against their wills by the South of Iaua, and of some Ilands, Bayes, and other obseruations in those parts.
Not farre from BantamIo. Isac Pontan. Hist. Amstelodam. Nau. Batau. 1594 ap. De Bry, part. 3 c. 33. liue certaine of the Passarrans, which being there oppressed by their King, came hither, and heere obtayned a piece of ground, to build them a Citie, which is called Sura. They haue a King or Gouernour, and liue quietly, following Husbandrie: they eate nothing that hath life (a common Superstition of the Indians) weare white Clothes of  Paper, made of the leaues of Trees, and neuer marrie (herein resembling the Iewish Essees) yet neuer want succeeding generation: Many of the Iauans daily consecrating themselues vnto their Societie. The Chinois in Iaua doe sometimes bring vp Crocodiles, and eate them.
Bantam is the chiefe Factorie of the English, although they haue others. The King of Bantam hath the Title, but the Pangram exerciseth the Power, and hath shut vp the King, where none, but at his pleasure, may come at him. The situation of this Citie is low and vnwholsome: it is often subiect to fire: in diuers of which fires, our English haue by Gods blessing well escaped. Not farre from hence at the Ile Pulo Penione, the Trades Increase perished in the Careening, most of the Company, both of English and others, which wrought on Her, dying of an infectious sicknesse: which a Chinoise offered by sacrifice to the Diuell to cleere.  Sir Henry Middleton heere dyed of this sicknesse, and the Ship too, wanting that Head and necessarie Hands to sustaine her; bequeathing that goodly Fabricke to the two Elements, Fire, and Water, which not agreeing in the Diuiding, whiles each laboured to haue all, the Ship was lost in the quarrell. A great losse of our greatest Merchants-ship that England euer had, but not till after great exploits: and not comparable to diuers losses of the Portugals or Hollanders,1615. Generall Butts, the Dutch Generall cast away, with two ships, and their rich lading; the third, some goods saued, but after losse of 135 men, found driuing in the Sea, besides many other losses. Mart. Pring. Th. Crowther, etc. at the Iland Mauricius and other places, both there, and at their owne doores.
The King of TubanBilib. Stobaeuo. is the richest King, and mightiest in all Iaua. They haue many Horses, and make great account of them, decking them with gallant furniture of gold, siluer, and the counterfeits of Dragons and Diuels on their Saddles: they ride and manage their Horses  with great skill. Iambee is another Passaman for vnwholsomnesse.
Madura is North from Iaua, ^ fertile Iland of Rice, the soyle whereof is so moyst and
 waterish, that their Buffals and men goe almost knee-deepe, when they sow it. Arosbay is the chiefe Citie. They are theeuish, and giuen to spoyle, and captiued many of the Hollanders, which went thither on shoare, to buy commodities; which they were forced to redeeme at a deare rate. In these parts, are Battes as bigge as Hennes, which the people rost and eate.
The Iland Baly is East from Iaua, very populous, contayning (as is thought) sixe hundred thousand Inhabitants; they are Ethnikes, and worship that which they first meet in the morning. Heere and in Pulo Rossa the Women are burned with their dead Husbands: one man is saidCor Houtman, Cor. Gerardi. to haue had fiftie of his Wiues (for they marrie as many as they please) burned  with him, whiles the Hollanders were there. The Iland hath many Bulls, Buffals, Goates, Swine, Horse, with many kindes of Fowles, Fruits, and Metals: The chiefe men are carried by slaues on Seats borne on their shoulders, or else in Chariots drawne with Buffals.
In the Voyage of Master Thomas CandishTho. Candish. Hak. tom. 3. pag. 822. is mention made of a Iauan King, called Raia Ballomboam, very aged,Houtman saith he was aliue 1596. supposed 160. yeeres old. which had a hundred Wiues, and his Sonne had fiftie. Their custome is, that when the King dyeth, they burne the body, and preserue the ashes. Fiue dayes after, the wiues of the dead King goe to a place appointed, and there shee which was deerest in his fauour, throweth a ball from her; and where that ball resteth, thither they goe all, and turning their faces Eastward, stabbe themselues with a Crise or Dagger to the heart. They are  very resolute people, and dread no attempt which the King shall enioyne them, bee it neuer so dangerous. All the race of this King Ballomboam was rased and vtterly destroyed by the Passaruan, after a long siege: which warre was begun in the blood of the King of Ballamboams Daughter, whom he slew, as is before said, and added this Drunkennesse vnto his thirst.
Iortam, orNauig. Oliuer Noort. Ioartam, contayneth about a thousand Housholds. The Inhabitants are Ethnikes, and haue their Temples in Woods; to which they resort, to say and doe their Holies at noone, before their deformed Diuell-formed Pagodes. In this Citie dwelleth the chiefe Pope, or heigh Priest, of that Superstition, whose authoritie is great in all those parts. Hee was a hundred and twentie yeeres old, and had many Wiues which nourished him with their milke, being not able to take other sustenance: a deadly enemie to the Christians,  whom the King did yet with some priuiledges fauour.
Edmund Scot writeth, That they vse in Bantam martiall Law; Adulterie is death. (...) free Iauan must to euery wife keepe ten women-slaues, which are their Concubines also; some keepe fortie: but they may haue but three Wiues. They are proud, and (by this multitude of Slaues) poore; cruell, and cowardly. Their Crisses or Daggers are two foot long, waued Indenture-fashion; and poysoned, that few escape. The vulgar sort haue little Religion: but many pray to the Diuell (whom for that end they haue painted in their houses, and set Wax Candles, and sing before them) for feare of hurt; which they doe not to God, because of his goodnesse. The most of their worke, is to c^rue stickes for their Crisse-handles. They are Couzeners, Theeues, Idle, Gluttons; take Betele, Opium, Tobacco. They haue diuers S^cts;  yet most are in manner Atheists. Many Chinois dwell there: Some thinke, that if they bee good, they shall be borne againe after death to great riches; and that wicked men shall bee turned into Toades, or other vgly beasts. Euery New Moone they burne Sacrifices, and sing ouer them certayne Prayers, in the meane while tinging a Bell, which at the end of euery Prayer they ring out; which is also their Passing-Bell Ceremonie, when any are readie to die. They furnish their Altars with Goats, Hennes, Duckes, sometimes raw, and sometimes ready dressed; all which they eate: onely certaine papers, painted and cut out in curious workes, they burne. Many of them haue some skill in Astronomie. They keepe no Sabbath; but what day they begin any great worke, they after keepe holy. They haue South-sayers, which sometimes runne vp and downe the streets like mad-men, with swords in their hands,  tearing their hayre, and throwing themselues against the ground. Chinois cut not their haire, for then they may not returne to China. They buy Slaues, and get Children of them, which they carrie with them to China, but sell the Mother. The * Moores, if they be Great men,Houtman. haue Moschees in their owne houses: they haue one great one in the Citie. Forreiners (whereof are many from many places) inhabite the Suburbes. They buy by night distilled Wines of the Chinois, and drinke it secretly, being forbidden it by their Mahumetane Law. It was about the yeere 1560. that this people became of that Sect. The men and women passe their time day and night in much sloath, dalliance, and chewing Betele, Epicuri de grege  porci.




CHAP. XVII. Of Samatra, and Zeilan.
SAmatra is esteemed by someGi. Bot. Ben. Maff. lib. 4. G. Arthus Hist. Indiae Orient. cap. 40. the greatest of the Easterne Ilands, stretching it selfe almost seuen hundred miles in length, in bredth aboue two hundred. The Ayre is not very wholsome, by reason of the situation vnder the Line, and the multitude of Lakes and Riuers, whereout the Sun drinketh more then hee can well concoct, and therefore (as it were) belcheth out heere continually  such crude and vndigested vapours. Their food is Millet, Rice, Sagu, and Fruits. Their riches are Pepper, Ginger, Cassia, Silke, Benioyn, Gold, Tinne, Iron, etc. The Kingdome of Campa yeeldeth Trees, whose pith or marrow is Aloe, which is prized in India at the like weight (some say) of Gold; the Barke is called Aquila. In the Sea-coast they are Moores in Religion, and so haue been about these last two hundred yeeres: vp, within Land, they are Pagans; and in many places, as in the Kingdomes of Andragiri and Aru, they are Man-eaters. They were diuided, before the Portugals entred India, into nine and twentie Kingdomes, whereof the chiefe was Pedir, after that Pacem, and now Acem. For Abram, sometime a Slaue, since King of Acem, hath conquered almost all the North part of the Iland, and with helpe from the Turke and the Arabians, distresseth sometimes the affaires of  Malacca. This KingL^nschot. gaue in marriage with his Daughter, to the King of Ior, a Peece of Ordnance, such as for greatnesse, length, and workmanship, can hardly bee matched in all Christendome. Heere is aP. Bertius Tab. Hill, called Balaluanus, which continually burneth; and a Fountaine (as is reported) which runneth pure Balsome. SomeOrtel. Maff. lib. 4. thinke, that this was Chersonesus Aurea of the Ancients.
GaluanusDiscoueries of the world. writeth, That the Bacas, or Man-eaters in the Mountaines of Samatra, gild their teeth, and esteeme the flesh of blacke people sweeter then of the white. The flesh of their Kine, Buffes, and Hennes, is as blacke as Inke. They say, that, there are certaine people there called Daraqui Dara, which haue tayles like to Sheepe. Heere is said also to grow a Tree, the juyce whereof is strong poyson, and if it touch the blood of a man, killeth him,  but if a man drinke of it, it is a soueraigne Antidote. As for those tayled-people (a slander by Beckets LegendSee Lamberts perambul. reported of some Kentish-men, iniurious to that angrie Saint, and after applyed to our whole Nation; many indeed esteeming the English to bee tayled.) Galuano affirmeth, That the King of Tidore told him, that in the Ilands of Batto-China there were some which had tayles, hauing also a thing like vnto a dugge betweene their coddes, out of the which there came Milke.
Nicoli di ContiNic. di Conti. saith, in his time the Samatrans were all Gentiles, and the Man-eaters amongst them vsed the skuls of their eaten enemies in stead of money, exchanging the same for their necessaries; and he was accounted the richest man, which had most of those skuls in his house. In Vertomannus time they had money in Pedir, marked on the one side with a Diuell,  on the other with a Chariot, drawne with Elephants. TheirL. Vert. Religion (hee saith) is the same with those of Tarnassari, burning their Wiues in like manner. The inhabitants are cunning Artificers, Merchants, and Saylers: their Ships haue at each end a Prow, which with maruellous agilitie they can dispose forwards, or backwards, making vse of the same, according to the diuersitie of Wind and Channell, which there are very changeable.
In AcemHerman. de Brec. Arthus pag. 559. are Mesquits of Timber and Reed, with Vessels of water at the entrie, for them to wash, according to the Arabian custome. The King comes little abroad, nor may any goe to him, except he be sent for by an Officer with a gilded staffe or dagger. To his Palace they passe through seuen Gates one after another, guarded with Women expert at their Weapon, and vsing both Peeces and Swords. He hath none other Guard for his person. In saluting the King,  they lay their hands folded on their head, which in other salutations they lay on the forhead.
Sultan Aladin the King, was (as Cornelius Houtman reporteth) first a Fisher-man, and growing famous for his exploits by Sea, was preferred to the marriage of the Kings kinswoman, and the Office of Admirall. Afterwards, he became Protector of the young King (the former being dead) but proued his murtherer, and sent a thousand of the chiefe men to follow him into the other world, ennobling base fellowes of his Conspiracie, and vsurped the State to himselfe. He was supposed an hundred yeeresIn 1598. old; so old, that his eldest Son (whom he kept at home with him, hauing made his younger King of Pedir) imprisoned him,1604. Sir Ed. Michelborn. alledging, that he was too old for Gouernment, and warred on his Brother. Our English firstSir Iames Lancaster. had Trade here in the last times of Queene Elizabeth, whose name was then famous in those parts for her  Exploits against the Spaniards. The Queenes Letters, directed to this King, were receiued with great State. First, he entertained the Messenger with a Banquet, gaue him a Robe, and a
 piece of Calico wrought with gold, and offered Pledges for the Generals safetie; for whom he sent six Elephants, with Drums, Trumpets, Streamers, and much people. The greatest Elephant, being thirteene or foureteene foot high, and a small Castle, like a Coach, couered with Veluet, on his backe: in the midst whereof, was a great Bason of Gold, with a rich Couering of Silke, wherein the Letter was put. The Generall was mounted on another Elephant, but was staid at the Court-gate, till the Kings pleasure and license was againe sent. The King made him a Feast; the dishes were of Gold or Tambayck (which is mixed of Gold and Brasse) their Wine is of Rice, in which the King dranke to the Generall out of his Gallery (a fathom higher then where they sate) it is as strong as Aqua vita. After the Feast, the Kings Damosels made  Musick and Dances: which was a great fauour; for they are not commonly seene. The chiefe Prelate was appointed one of the Commissioners for Articles of League, which were concluded. They tooke a Prize of 9. hundred Tuns, and were like to be taken themselues by a strange Spout (as they call it) which fell not farre from them (as in one whole drop, enough to haue sunke any ship; and sometimes continueth a quarter of an houre together, as powred out of a vessell, the Sea boyling therewithThe like hapned there May 5. 1613. Pat. Copland..) The King sent a Letter and a Present to the Queene: and at their departure asked, if they had the Psalmes of Dauid, and caused them to sing one; which, he and his Nobles seconded with a Psalme (as he said) for their prosperitie.
The CourtCor. Houtman. hath three Guards, betweene each of which is a great Greene. The King may see all that come, himselfe vnseene. The walls of his house are hanged sometimes with  Cloth of Gold, Veluet, or Damaske. He sits crosse-legged, with foure Crisses, two before, and two behind, very rich. Fortie Women attend him with Fannes, Cloathes, Singing, and other Offices. Hee eateth and drinketh all day, or chewing Betele and Arecca, talking of Venerie and Cock-fighting. When they would doe reuerence (which we vse to performe by vncouering the head) they put off their hose and shooes, holding the palmes of the hands together, and lifting them aboue the head, with bending of the body, and saying, Doulat. They vse not to put malefactors to death, but cut off their hands and feet, and banish them to the Ile Polowey: and if they execute them, it is by Elephants tearing them, or thrusting a stake in their fundament. This King had an hundred Gallies; of which, some will carry foure hundred men: open, without decke; their Oares like shouels, foure foot long, rowed with one  hand. A woman was Admirall; he not daring, through selfe-guiltinesse, to trust men.
They had many differing Dignities and Degrees for their Clergie;Iohn Da^y^. vsed to pray with Beads; had Schooles: they had one Prophet; disguised in his apparell, whom they much honoured. They bury their Dead in the fields, with their head towards Mecca, laying a free stone at the head, and another at the feet, with signification what the deceased had beene. The Kings haue them, not of Stone, but of Gold: and this King had two made for him, each weighing a thousand pound, enriched with Stones. They haue a tradition, that Achen is Ophir. Once euery yeere they obserue a solemne ceremonie of going to Church, to see if Mahomet bee come. Then are there fortie Elephants richly couered, and on them the Nobles; one, spare for the Prophet, and another whereon the King rideth, with much pompe, When  they haue looked into the Moskee, and not seene their Mahomet, the King returnes on that spare Elephant. Pider, Manaucabo, and Aru, are tributaries to Achen. Anno, 1613. Aprill twelfth, Captayne Best anchored in the Rode of Achin, and was kindly entertayned.Patrick Copland* M. Best. The King sent an Arancaia riding in a Tent on an Elephants backe, attended with two or three of the Kings boyes (for Hee is attended by Boyes abroad, and by Women within) to receiue His Majesties Letter, which was thus carried in a Bason of Gold, the Generall following with fortie or fiftie Men. After this Letter and a Present deliuered, the King told them they should see some of his pastime; which was first Cock-fighting, next that, the fight of Rammes, then his tame Elephants, after them his Buffoloes, (all as they succeeded, exceeding the former in fiercenesse,) lastly the Antilopes which the Generall had giuen Him. All this  while did the King take Tobacco in a Siluer pipe, giuen him by his Women standing in a close roome behind. This done, Supper was serued in by young Boyes of foureteene or fifteene yeeres old, in Swaffe, which is a mettall halfe Copper, halfe Gold: and continued from seuen of the clocke till almost twelue, in which were serued in foure hundred Dishes, besides Hot drinkes. The next day the King sent the Generall an Elephant to ride on (otherwise none might doe it) and appointed One of his chiefe Arancaias alway to attend Him: free accesse was likewise granted at all times, which none else may doe without the Kings Creese or Dagger (there vsed as a Scepter) and the Articles agreed on betweene Sir Iames Lancaster and his predecessour, were promised to be ratified. On the second of May, all Strangers were inuited to a Feast kept at the Spring of the Riuer, in the water, sixe miles from the Citie. Two  Elephants were sent for the Generall. The dishes were serued in by Boyes, swimming with one hand, and holding the Dish or strong drinke in the other. Of all these drinkes they must taste, and then throw the rest into the water. This continued from one till fiue; they had
 fiue hundred dishes well dressed. Generall Best weary of sitting so long in the water, had leaue to depart an houre before the Rest: the Captayne of the Dutch house tooke his bane either with hote drinkes, or cold sitting so long in the water, and soone after dyed. The King gaue the Generall a New Title, calling, and charging his Nobles to call him, Arancaia Pule, that is, the honourable white man. Iune, the second, They were entertayned with a fight of foure Elephants, and a wilde Tygre, which was fastened to a stake, and yet so fastened on their Trunks and legs, that he made them roare and bleed extreamly. Sometimes wild Elephants fight before Him, which would soone kill each other, but that tame ones are fastned to them, which draw them backe, fourescore or a hundred men helping. And for their taming, they vse to set one wilde, betweene two tame.  
This King sent to his Majestie a Present, and a Letter in forme for painting and writing very curious, the words thus interpreted. PEDRVCKA SIRIE SVLTAN, King of Kings, Renowmed for his warres, and sale King of Samatra, and a King more feared then his Predecessours: feared in his Kingdome, and honoured of all bordering Nations; in whom there is the true image of a King, in whom raignes the true methode of Gouernment, formed as it were of the most pure mettall, and adorned with the most fine colours; whose seate is high and most compleat, like to a Chrystall Riuer, pure and cleere as the choisest Glasse; from whom floweth the pure streame of Bounty and Iustice; whose presence is as the finest Gold: King of Priaman, and of theThis reason is ^lledged why Sumatra should be Aurea Ch^rson^slus and Ophyr: and not the Continent of Malacca which h^th no Gold vid disc. del R. di Mal. Tes. Pol. p. 3. Of this Ophyrian Dispute see Varerius his Treatise, Io. Vassius Ortel. Pined. etc. Our Ophyrian discourse in the first booke of Voyages. Mountayne of Gold, viz. Solida; and Lord of nine sorts of Stones; King of two Sumbreroes of  beaten Gold; hauing for his Seates Mats of Gold: His furniture for his Horses, and Armour for Himselfe being likewise of pure gold; His Elephant with teeth of Gold, and all prouisions thereunto belonging; His Lances halfe Gold, halfe Siluer; his small Shot of the same; a Saddle also for another Elephant of the same mettall; a Tent of Siluer; and all his Seales, halfe Gold, halfe Siluer; his Sepulchre of Gold: (whereas his Predecessours had all these halfe Gold, halfe Siluer) his seruices compleat of Gold and Siluer. A King vnder whom there are many Kings, hauing taken Othe King of Aurow; all the Countrey of Priaman, Tecoo, Barouse, being subdued by Him, is now vnder His command: Seuentie Elephants and much prouisions carried by Sea to make his warres in Aurow, where God gaue Mee more Victorie then Any of my Predecessours. This great King sendeth this Letter of Salutation to IAMES KING OF GREAT BRITAINE, viz. England, Scotland,  France, and Ireland, to signifie the great content Hee hath receiued by His Highnesse Letter deliuered by the bands of Arancaia Pule, Thomas Best His Maiesties Embassadour: at the receipt whereof, His Eyes were surprised with a coelestiall brightnesse, and his Spirits rauished with a Diuine Ioy; the opening thereof rendred a sauour more fragrant then the most odoriferous Flowers, or sweetest perfumes in the world. For which cause, I the Great King of Samatra doe professe my selfe to bee of One heart, one minde, and of one flesh, with the most Potent Prince IAMES King of England, and doe earnestly desire that the League begunne, may bee continued to all Posterities. And herein I take my greatest Felicitie, there being nothing in the world more pleasant or ioyfull to Mee. And for a testimony of my desire, that the League and Amitie begunne, may bee continued betwixt Vs, I haue returned this Letter vnto your Maiestie, making also My Prayers vnto the Great God for the Continuance of the same. And it shall bee My greatest Honour to receiue Memoriall  from so Great a Potentate, and so Remote a Nation. And for a pledge of My Loue and Honour, and Continuance of our League, I send your Maiestie a Creese wrought with Gold, the hilt thereof being beaten Gold, with a ring of Stones, an Assagaya of Swasse, halfe Copper, halfe Gold, eight Purslan dishes small and great of Camphire, one piece of Sowering stuffe, three pieces of Calico Lawne: Which your Maiestie accepting as from a Brother, I shall rest satisfied and much honoured. And so with my prayers to the Great God, Creator of Heauen and Earth, for your Maiesties long life, with Victorie ouer your Enemies, and Prosperitie in your Land. Giuen at Our Palace at Achi the 1022. yeere of Mahomet by the Accompt of the Moores.
This Letter for the strange swelling forme, and because it contayneth a pettie Inuentorie of the Kings Wealth, and some knowledge of the adjoyning Kingdomes, I haue thus verbatim  expressed. This King of Achi is a proper gallant man of warre (they are Master Coplands words) ofAnno 1613. two and thirtie yeeres, of middle size, full of Spirit, strong by Sea and Land; his Countrey populous, his Elephants many, whereof wee haue seene a hundred and threescore, or a hundred and fourescore at a time. His Gallies and Frigats carry in them very good Brasse Ordnance, Demicanon, Culuerin, Sakar, Minion, and the like. His building is stately and spacious, but not strong: his Court at Achi pleasant; hauing a goodly branch of a maine Riuer running about and thorow his Palace, which branch Hee cut and brought sixe or eight miles off in twentie dayes whiles wee continued at Achi. Samatra is very Mountainous, the people courteous. Without the Kings Chop no Stranger may haue ingresse or egresse. Hee desired the Generall to commend Him to the King of England, and to intreat  Him to send him two white Women. For (said Hee) if I beget one of them with Child and it proue a Sonne, I will make Him King of Priaman, Passaman, and of the Coast from
 whence you fetch your Pepper, so that you shall not need to come any more to Mee, but to your owne English King for these Commodities.
He is cruell: he plucked out one of the eyes of a Nobleman for looking on one of the Kings women washing in a Riuer: Another wearing a Shash beyond his degree,Captaine Sari^. had his head cut round so farre, as that too large: some he boyles in scalding Oyle, some are sawne in pieces, spitted aliue, their legs cut off, or otherwise tortured. It is reported that in his Predecessors time, when Malacca was besieged, the Portugals putting on shore here, by the ozie and myry landing, were made an easier prey to an Ambush of Achiners in the Reeds, which tooke many of them, who by the Kings command, had all of them, all their Priuities presently cut  away. To returne to M. Copland, on the third of Iuly 1613. the Kings Armada of a hundred and twenty, or two hundred Frigats and Gallies arriued from Ioar, which Kingdome Laxamar the Generall had then subdued to this King, with the Kingdome of Siak, bringing both those Kings with two of their brethren, and some Dutchmen prisoners to Achi.
At Tecoo they stayd eleuen weekes, and bought a hundred and twenty tunnes of Pepper, burying fiue and twenty men, which got their death at Passanan (for Tecco is a healthfull place) where and in the Country about, the Pepper most groweth.
In Nicobar they are base people, and till not the ground. Sumbrero is ten or twelue leagues Northward from this Iland, where that plant growes, not a plant but a Worme, but a stone: beforeSup. c. 13. @. 3. obserued. The people are tawny and naked: they paint their faces. Their Priests in  their Sacrifices weare apparell so close, as if it were sowed to them; and hornes on their heads turning backe, with a taile also hanging downe behind: for so the Deuill (they say) appeareth to them. Their faces and haire are deformed with greene, blacke and yellow colours.


HONDIVS his Map of Zeilan.
map of Sri Lanka, South Asia
CEILAN insula




@. II. Of Zeilan.
ZEilan (which some call Seylon, other Ceilan) is by Barrius auerred to be Taprobana: sometimes (according to Marcus PaulusM. Paul. l. 3. his reports) thought to haue comprehended 3600. miles in circuit, since much impayred by his ouer-mighty neighbour the Sea, which hath now left not aboue 250. miles in length, and an 140. miles of breadth vnto it.Barbosa. b The Indians call it Tenarisim, or the delicious land, and some are of opinion, that this was Paradise. (So iust are the iudgements of the Highest, that, when as man wandred from him, caused him also to wander from himselfe, and from his habitation;  yea, the place it selfe hath also wandred, in mens wandring conceits, ouer the World, yea, and out of our habitable World altogether, as before isVid. sup. l. 1. ^4. and Mos Barcepha in Bib. Pat. and Hopkins. etc. shewed; men now seeking it as vainly as before they lost it.) It is in fashionLib. 1. resembling an Egge, by a shallow channell separated from the Cape Comori. The Heauens with their dewes, the Ayre with a pleasant holesomnesse and fragrant freshnesse, the Waters in their many Riuers and Fountaynes, the Earth diuersified in aspiring Hils, lowly Vales, equall and indifferent Plaines, filled in her inward Chambers with Metals and Iewels, in her outward Court and vpper face stored with whole Woods of the best Cinamon that the Sunne seeth, besides Fruits, Oranges, Limons, etc. surmounting those of Spaine; Fowles and Beasts, both tame and wild (among which is their ElephantLinschot. An. Corsali. honoured (by a naturall acknowledgement of excellence) of all other  Elephants in the World.) These all haue conspired and ioyned in common league to present vnto Zeilan the chiefe of worldly treasures and pleasures, with a long and healthfull life in the Inhabitants, to enioy them. No maruell then, if Sense and Sensuality haue heere stumbled on a Paradise. There, wooddie Hils (as a naturall Amphitheatre) doe encompasse a large Plaine: and one of them, as not contenting his beetle-browes with that onely prospect, disdayneth also the fellowship of the neighbouring Mountaynes, liftingMaff. lib. 3. vp his steepe head seuen leagues in height; and hath in the top a Plaine, in the middest whereof is a stone of two Cubits, erected in manner of a Table, holding in it the print of a mans foot, who (they say) came from Deli thither, to teach them Religion. The Iogues and other deuout Pilgrimes resort thither, from places a thousand leagues distant, with great difficulty of passage both hither  and heere. For they are forced to mount vp this Hill by the helpe of nayles and chaines fastened thereto, Nature hauing prohibited other passage. Maffaeus and Boterus could perswade themselues, that this foot-step is a relike and memory of the Aethiopian Eunuch: others will haue it further fetcht, and father it vpon Adam, the first Father of Mankinde, of whom the Hill also is named, Pico de Adam. The MooresOd. Barbosa. call it Adam Baba, and say, That from thence Adam ascended into Heauen. The Pilgrimes are clad in their Palmers Weed, with Iron chaines, and skins of Lions, and other wild beasts. Vpon their armes and legs they weare buttons with sharpe points, that cut the flesh, and draw bloud, which (they say) they doe in Gods seruice.
Before they come at the Mountayne, they passe by a fenny Valley full of water, wherein  they wade vp to the waste, with Kniues in their hands, to scrape from their legs the bloudleeches, which else would end their Pilgrimage and life before the time. For this dirty and watery passage continueth eighteen miles, before they come at the Hil; whose proud top would disdaine climbing, if Art did not captiue Nature, and binde the Hill with chaines of Iron, as is said. When they are mounted, they wash them in a Lake or Poole of cleere springing water, neere to that foot-stone, and making their Prayers, doe thus account themselues cleane from all their sinnes. This holy iourney is generally performed by the Ilanders (sayth Vertomannus) once a yeere. He addethVert. l. 3. c. 4. that a Moore told him, that this foot-print was two spans long: and that Adam heere a long time bewayled his sinne, and found pardon. But Odoricus affirmeth, that they reported this mourning to haue beene for Abel, and to haue lasted three  hundred yeeres, and of the teares of Abel and Eue this purifying water to haue proceeded: which OdoricusOdoricus. proued to be a Tale, because he saw the water springing continually, and it runneth thence into the Sea. He saith, that this water had in it many precious stones; and the King gaue leaue at certayne times of the yeere to poore men to take them, that they might pray for his soule; which they could not doe, but first anointed with Limons, because of the Horse-leeches in that water. ThereBert. Tab. are reckoned nine Kings in this Iland: The first of Colmuchi, to whom the rest pay tribute, viz. the Kings of Ianasipatan, Triquinamale, Batecolon, Villassem, Tanamaca, Laula, Galle, and Candy.
In CandyHer. de Brea. were Statues artificially wrought fiue or sixe fathomes high, which these Symmetrians proportioned to the stature of Adam, gathered by that print of his foot. In  VintaneGeorgius. Spilbergius. is a Pagode or Idoll Temple, the compasse whereof is an 130. paces: it is very high, and all white, except on the top, which hath the spires thereof gilded, insomuch that
 men are not able, when the Sun shineth, to looke thereon. It hath a Towre or square Steeple of excellent workmanship. There are many other Temples, and a Monastery also of Religious persons, which are attired in yellow, haue their crownes shauen, with B^ades in their hands, and alwayes seeme to mumble ouer somewhat of their deuout Orisons, being in high estimation of sanctity with the vulgar, and freed from publike labours and burthens. Their Monastery is built after the manner of the Popish, being also gilded with Gold. In their Chappels are many Images of both sexes; which, they say, represent some of their Saints: they are set on the Altars, and are clothed with garments of gold and siluer. Before them are the Images of Boyes, which beare vp great Candlestickes, with Wax-candles burning therein  night and day. Euery houre they resort to these Altars to their Mumpsimus. They held a solemne Procession, whiles the Hollanders were there, in which their Abbot rode on an Elephant richly attired, lifting vp his hands ouer his head, with a golden Rod therein: the Monkes went two and two before him in order, partly bearing and playing on many Instruments of Musicke, partly bearing Wax-lights and Torches: the men also, and after them the women and Maids following in like order: and the fairest Virgins were busied with games and dances, being naked from the nauell vpwards, beneath couered with smockes of diuers colours, their armes and eares adorned with Gold and Iewels. Any man that should see it (saith our Author) would thinke, our Westerne Monkes had hence borrowed their Ceremonies. Their Images are in euery corner of the way, which they adorne with flowers. In Candy,  the chiefe Citie of that Kingdome, were Pagodes innumerable. The houses or Temples were of stone, like the Temples in these parts: some Statues were as high as the mast of a ship. The people heere, if they haue once touched meate, which for quantity or quality they cannot eate, they cast it to the dogs: neither will any man (be he neuer so meane) eate that which another hath touched. The women goe naked from the waste vpwards. They marry as many wiues as they can keepe.
The King makes vse of their Superstition: For pretending to build Temples, he after leaues them vnperfect, excusing himselfe, that they had not contributed sufficient summes of mony, and therefore exacteth a new. There is one Statue of great stature, with a Sword in his hand, which by illusion of the Deuill (if it be not the delusion of fabulous reports) made as though  he would strike the King with his Sword, as he was entring the Temple, and put him in great feare, whereas before he had made a mocke of it. The Singales or Natiue Inhabitants say, that the World shall not perish, as long as that Image continueth safe. When any one is sicke, hee sacrificeth to the Deuill, hauing a Box hanging in his house to that end, therein to gather somewhat for his Offering. Some pray vnto the Image of an Elephants head, made of wood or stone, that they may obtaine wisdome (whereof this prayer argues their great want:) some eate no quicke creature. They eat no Beefe, nor drinke any Wine; they worship whatsoeuer first meeteth them in the morning.
George Spilberge was bountifully entertained of the King of Candy,Herman. de Brec, ap. de Bry, part. 8. Ind. Or. but Sebald de Weert was with diuers of his companions slaine, after he had receiued much kindnesse of the King;  his importunitie to get the King into his ship, making him suspect some trechery.
The King of Motecalo had eares adorned with Iewels, and hanging downe (the lappets of them were so stretched) to his shoulders. He was kind to the Hollanders: but they incensed him against them by killing certaine Kine; for some of them said, that the soules of Kine slaine after that manner, were hurled forthwith into Hell. He obserued one Pagode, to whole Feast he went while the Hollanders were there, the solemnity whereof was to continue (ten dayes) till a new Moone, with great concourse of deuout persons.
Of the Superstitions of Perimal, and the worship of the Apes tooth, celebrated in this Iland; we haue already shewed in the ChapterChap. 10. of Narsinga. The Cingalan language which they speake in this Iland, isGi. Bot. Ben. thought to haue beene there left by the Chinois, sometimes  supposed (I thinke falsely) Lords of Zeilan. In Marcus Paulus his dayes the Tartarians had not pierced thus farre. For the King then raigning, refused to sell to Cublai Can (then the greatest Monarch in the World) at a price, a Rubie which hee had left him by his Ancestors, esteemed the richest Iewell in the World, being (as hePaul l. 3. c. 19 saith) a span long, and as bigge as a mans arme, cleere and shining, as if it had bin a fire. In this Iland were reckoned nine Principalities or Kingdomes, butLinschoten. not long since, their chiefe King was murthered by a Barber, who draue the other Kings out of the Countrey, and vsurped the Monarchy to himselfe, practising hostility against the Portugals. The Cingulas are very cunning Artificers in all Metals. One of them presented the Archbishop of Goa with a Crucifix, so cunningly wrought, as if he had giuen life to the Image of one dead. He sent it to the King of Spaine as a rare Iewell,  not to be equalled in Europe. The Inhabitants heere are actiue and expert in Iuggling, both men and women, trauelling through India with their strange Hobby-horses, to get money by this vanity. The Sea-coast (as in other Indian Ilands) is inhabited with Moores, the Inland with Pagans.

The Portugals haue a Fortresse at Colombo. The IlandersOd. Barbosa. are not warriours: they giue themselues to pastime and pleasure: they goe naked from the girdle vpward: they make wide holes in their eares, which they stretch out with the weight of their Iewels to their shoulders. Monfart relates, that Zeilan hath whole Forrests of Cinamon, and Mountaynes of Chrystall, and that out of their Riuers they draw Pearles, Rubies, Saphirs and Cats-eyes: that they worship the first creature they meet, eat nothing that hath bloud, make no more bread then will be eaten at a meale, their Religion prohibiting them to eat any two houres old. The Hollanders found exceeding, both good and bad entertainment with the King of Candy. Now for that question, whether Zeilan or Samatra be that Taprobane of the ancient is very doubtfull, yet that report in PlinyPlin. li. 6. c. 22. Many reasons for proofe hereof see in a little Booke called the Circumference of the Earth. of Taprobane, seemes more to encline for Zeilan. For hee  sayth, That in Claudius time, a seruant of Annius Plocamus, which was Customer for the Red Sea, was carried from the Coast of Arabia, besides Carmania, in fifteene dayes, which, I thinke, could not possibly bee done to Samatra. Likewise the excellency of the Elephants, beyond all the Indian, agrees to Zeilan: and had Samatra beene so knowne at that time, the other parts of India (it is like) had beene better discouered then they were in those times. This Taprobane was discouered to bee an Iland, by Onesicritus, Alexanders Admirall of his Fleet in these parts. It was then accounted another World, and therefore shall be the period of our Pilgrimage, and Perambulation in this Asian part of the World* which (by the gracious goodnesse of his Almighty Guide) the Pilgrime hath now passed, and hath led the industrious Reader along with him.  


@. III. The Conclusion of this Asian Pilgrimage.
THe Popish Pilgrimes were wont to beguile their weary steps, with MusickeW. Thorp. ap. Fox. Act. Mon. Our Pilgrimes with wanton Songs, Bagpipes, Canterbury Bels, etc. when they come into a Towne, make more noyse then the King with al his Clarions and Minstrels, So Chaucers tales. Eras. Colloq. etc. or pleasant tales (according to the delicate deuotion of those times) and easie was their pardon and penance at their iournies end. And in these our times Madonna de Loretto must giue entertainment to many Pilgrimes, which (as if Venus were become her Chamberlaine) haue their Curtezan-consolations to solace their Pilgrim-paines: the deuout Friers  and Nuns themselues, that haue defied the Deuill, and denyed the World, by a new Vow deuoted to the flesh, disguise themselues in Lay-habits, trauelling thither, and from thence, as Man and Wife, only at Loretto couering all with their Cowles. And if Confession discouer, it hideth againe as a double couering. But to vs, Vowes, Cowles, and such salace-solaces are wanting: the end of this labour is but the beginning of another: our penance endureth all the way; neyther haue we hope of Pardon and Indulgence from some seuerer Poenitentiaries and Censours, whose greatest vertue is to find or seeke faults in Others.
Had the Muses beene propitious, and the Graces gracious, we would haue had some Musicall and gracefull harmony, at least in Phrase and Method: but euen the Muses which whilome so graced that Father of History,See diuers examples here of in Iohn Nichols Pilgrimage, and W. Lithgow reporteth the like when he was there. Herodotus, that each of them vouchsafed, if yee vouchsafe  it credit, to bestow that Booke on him, which hee entitled with their names) seemed afraid of so tedious a iourney; nor would the Graces grace vs with their company. Many indeed offered themselues with their Rules, Methods, and Precepts of Histories, as Bodinus, Chytraus, Posseuinus, Mylaeus, Folietta, Viperanus, Zuinger, Sambucus, Riccobonus, Patritius, Pont^nus Foxius, Robertellus, Balduinus, and Others which haue written Treatises of that argument: but I thought such attendance would be chargeable, especially to a Traueller: and their many Rules would not haue added wings to my Head and Feet, (as the Poets paint their Mercury) but rather haue fettered my Feet, and made my weake Head forget it selfe with their remembrances. I therefore followed Nature (both within me and without me) as my best guide, for matter and manner, which commonly yeeldeth Beauties as louely, if not so curious, as those  which bankrupt themselues with borrowing of Art: the issues of our bodies and minds herein being like, Quas matres student, demissis humeris esse, vincto pectore vt gracilae sint, saith Cherea in the Comedy, Tametsi bona est natura, reddunt curatura iunceas: To conceited curiositie may hide rather then commend Natures bounty, which of it selfe is alway more honest, if not more honourable.Est. 2.15. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 12. c. 1. Neuer could the Persian Court parallel the goodlinesse of Ester and Aspatia, which yet neglected the Persian delicacies. Once, I haue had sufficient burthen of the businesse in hand; enough it was for me to goe, though I did not dance vnder it. But it is time to leaue this idle discourse about our course in this Asian History, and bethinke vs of our African Perambulation.  





 RELATIONS OF THE REGIONS AND RELIGIONS IN AFRICA. OF AEGYPT, BARBARIE, NVMIDIA,  LIBYA, AND THE LAND OF NEGROS, AND OF THEIR RELIGIONS. THE SIXT BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of Africa, and the Creatures therein.

@. I. Of the Name and Limits of Africa.
WHether this name Africa, bee so called ofGen. 25.4. Epher or Apher, the sonne of Midian, and nephew of Abraham, by his  second wife Keturah (as IosephusAntiq. lib. 1. cap. 15. affirmeth, alleaging witnesses of his opinion, Alexander Polyhistor, and Cleodemus;) or of the Sunnes presence,De his erymis and aliis consule F. Luys de Vrreta, lib. 4. cap. 1. Botero, Bernardo Aldrete Antigued var. etc. because it is aprica, or of the colds absence, of (...) and (...), as Festus saith; or of the word Feruca,Dom. Nig. G. Arthus hist. Ind. Orient. c. 4. which in the Arabian tongue signifieth to diuide (wherupon they call this part of the world Ifrichia) because it is (saithIo. Leo. lib. 1. Leo) diuided by Nilus, and the Sea, from the rest of the world: or ofRom. Mal^. lib. 1. cap ^. Ifricus, an Arabian King, which (chased by the Assyrians) here seated himselfe; or of (...) Aphar, the Hebrew word, which  signifies dust (as Aphra the Syriake also) fitly agreeing to the sandie and parched Soile: or if any otherMany of the Ancients, and Leo ascribe all beyond Nilus to Asia: so Polyhist. l. 3. c. 37. Dio^ Af etc. fe^e omnes. can giue more probable Edymologie of the Name, I list not to contend. Nor is it (...) for me to be ^^ligious in, th^se questions, of names, in this Quest and Inquirie of Religions. It is a great P^ninsul^ by (...), or necke of Land betweene the Red Sea, and the Medit^rranean, ioyned to th^ Continent, which with the Red Sea aforesaid is the Easterne limit of Africa, a^ the Medi^s (...) elsewhere the Ocean. For Nilus is a (...) obsen^e, and vncertaine V^^ p^rn. Some diuide the World into two part^, Asia and Europe, accounting Africa a part of Europe, which opinion V^^r^ ascribeth to Aratosthenes; Salust, I^can, and Aethicus, with Si^^derus, (...) It is twice^^ as bigge as Europe, and (...) so much peopled: N^^^^^ hauing made h^re her soli^^^ie place or re^yting, accended  by scorching hear^, and sho^^^ (...) those heauenly (...),Maginus. and mouing waters, which the Aire and (...) the many De^rts in Africa, onely fer^ile in barrennesse although (...) other parts it is both fruitfull (...) populous.
 The Equinoctiall Circle doth in manner diuide it in the middest. And yet old Atlas neuer sheddeth his inowie hairts, but hath alwayes on his huge and high tops vnmolten snow, whence sometime it is dispersed (as from a store-house) in such incredible quantitie, that it couereth Carts, Horses, and the tops of Trees, to the great danger of the Inhabitants: and the Fountaynes are so cold, as a man is not able to endure his hand in them. Mount Atlas aforesaid stretcheth from the Ocean,Oc. Antlanticus. bearing name of him, almost to Egypt. Other Mountaynes of name are those of Sierra Leona, and the Mountaynes of the Moone, etc.
One Lake Zembre yeeldeth three mightie Riuers, disemboking themselues into three seuerall Seas: Nilus, which runneth Northwards fortie degrees from hence, in Astronomicall reckoning; Cuama, which runneth into the Easterne; and Zaire into the Westerne Seas:  of which Riuers, and of other like, the Reader shall finde more in due place spoken.


map of Africa
AFRICAE DESCRIPTIO


Some parts of Africa are beyond admiration for bar^ennesse, some for fertilitie. Plini^Plin. lib. 1^. cap. 22. mentions a Citie in the middest of the sands, called Tacape, in the way to Lepti^, which hath a Spring of water flowing plentifully, and dispensed by course amongst the Inhabitants. There vnder a great Date-tree groweth an Oliue, vnder that a Figge, vnder that a Pomegranate, vnder that a Vine, vnder that Wheat, Pease, Herb^, all at once. The Vine beares twice a yeere; and otherwise, very abundance would make it as bad as barren. Somwhat is gathered all the yeere long. Foure ^ubits of that soile square, not measured with the fingers stretched out, but gathered into the fist, are sold for so many Denarij. This BudansBud. de Ass. lib. 5. sommes and proportions by the Acre, after the Roman measure, and saith, that an Acre of that ground, after that rate, is prised at 12800, Sester^ij m^m^i, which maketh 320. French crownes, not  reckoning the defect of the cubic, which bring added, w^des much to the summe.
The Romans reckoned sixe Prouinces in Africa: Ptolemey numbreth twelue. But then was
 not Africa so well knowne as now. Iohn LeoIo Le^, lib. ^. (a Moore, both learned and experienced) hauing spent many yeeres in trauell, diuideth Africa into foure parts; Barbaria, Numidia, Libya, and the Land of Negros. Numidia he calleth Biledurgerid, or the Region of Dares: and Libya, he calleth Sarra, for so the Arabians call a Desart. But he thus excludeth Egypt, and both the higher and lower Aethiopia, which othersMaginus Pory. adde hereunto, and make vp seuen parts of Africa.


 @. II. Of the Beasts, wilde and tame.
MAny are theIo. Ler. lib. ^. Creatures which Africa yeeldeth, not vsuall in our parts. Elephants are there in plentie, and keepe in great herds together. The Giraffa, or Camelopardalis; a beast not often seene, yet very tame, and of a strange composition, mixed of a Libard, Hart, Buffe, and Camell,P. Bellon. lib. ^. cap. 49. doth largely describe him See his description in Moreson and Sandys: also Master Sanderson saw one (...) Cairo, and hath described him in his voyage, which I haue printed. Tom. 1. lib. 9. and by reason of his long legs before, and shorter behinde, not able to graze without difficultie, but with his high head, which hee can stretch forth halfe a pikes length in height, feed^ on the leaues and boughs of trees. The Camels in Afrike are more hardie then in other places; and will not onely beare great burthens,  but continue to trauell fiftie dayes together, without carrying with them any corne to giue them, but turne them out at night to feede on thistles, boughs, and the little grasse they find: and no lesse patient are they of thirst, being able to endure fifteene dayes without drinke vpon necessitie, and fiue dayes ordinarily. The Arabians in Africa count them their greatest wealth: for so they describe a mans riches, saying, Hee hath so many thousand Camels: and with these they can liue in the Desarts without dread of any Prince. SixeG. Sandye. hundred waight is his ordinarie load, yet will hee carry a thousand. In lading or vnlading, hee lyes on his belly, and when hee is laden proportionably to his strength, will rise, not suffering more to bee laid on him. For satisfying his thirst, they say, in his often belchings he rayseth vp a bladder, wherewith he moystneth his mouth and throat. They are, say some, the onely that ingender backward:  which others haue affirmed also of the Lion, Tygre, Elephant, Rhinoceros, and Ounce^ and some denis it, not of those alone, but euen of the Camell, who voydeth vrine backward, but by a strange worke of Nature is said in that act to shoot forward.
Of Camels they haue three sorts: the first called Hugiun, of huge stature and strength, able to carry a thousand pound waight: the second lesse, with two bunches on the backe, fit for carriage and to ride on, called Becheti, of which they haue onely in Asia. The third sort, called Raguahil, is meagre and small, able to trauell (for they are not vsed to burthens) aboue an hundred miles in a day. And the King of Tombuto can send messengers on such Camels to Segelmesse or Darha, nine hundred miles distant, in seuen or eight dayes, without stay or change by the way. Their Camels also are docible: they will more be petswaded, to hold on  a iourney further then ordinarie, by songs, then blowes. In the Spring they are mare-wood, and mad of copulation, in which time they are very readie both to hurt their followers, and to kill their masters, or any that haue whipped or hurt them. Of Horses they haue both wilde (which they entrap by subtiltie) and tame: of which the Barbarie horse is famous, in Europe and Asia highly prized. The Lant or Dant is a kinde of wilde Kine, but swifter then almost any other beast. They haue also wilde Kine and wilde Asses. The Adimmain is as bigge as an Asse, otherwise resembling a Ram. They haue other sheepe,Caius de rar. animal. speakes of two kindes: the taile of the one three cubits long, of the other a cubit broad. vid. Hero. Th^l Arist. hist. an. 8. Plin. 8. 49. ^^lian, etc. whose tayles weigh twentie pound, and sometime fourescore or more, carried on little carts behind them. But those Adimmain are found in the Desarts, and kept to profit, yeelding them milke and cheese. The females onely haue hornes.
 The Lions in cold places are more gentle, in hotter are more fierce, and will not flee the onset of two hundred horse-men armed. Master Iohn VassallOf Eastwood in Essex. (a friend and neighbour of mine) told me that he brought out of Barbarie a Lions skin, which from the snowt to the top of the taile contayned one and twentie foot in length, a thing seeming incredible, a raritie and prodigie also to those Barbarians; and I could almost doubt whether memorie fayled not: for otherwise the Relator I know to be otherwise wise and honest. Strange it is that a Lionesse by shewing her hinder parts to the male, should make him runne away. In time of their coupling eight or ten will follow one female, with terrible and bloudie battels amongst themselues. They spare such men as prostrate themselues, and prey rather on men then women, and not at all on Infants, except compelled by hunger. Plinie tels that Alexander set  thousands on worke by hunting, hawking, fishing, or other meanes to take and learne the natures of Creatures, that Aristotle might be by them informed thereof, who wrote almost fiftie Treatises of that subiect, whereof it seemeth most are lost. He citeth out ofAristot Hist. Animalium. him, that
 Lions bring forth small deformed lumps, at the first time fiue, and (euery yeere after) one lesse, after the fift burthen remayning barren. It cannot stirre till it be two moneths old, nor goe till it be sixe, if you beleeue him. The Libyans beleeue that the Lion hath vnderstanding of prayers, and tell of a Getulian woman, which lying at the Lions mercy, besought him so noble a beast, not to dishonour himselfe with so ignoble a prey and conquest, as shee a weake woman was.Ouied. histor. Ind. l. 16. c. 11. Vrban Calueto in Benzon, l. b. 3. The like is told c of a Spanish dogge, of one Didacus Salazar a Spaniard. This man according to the bloudie practice of that Nation, minding to fill his dogs belly with an old womans flesh which was his captiue, gaue her a letter to carry to the Gouernour, and so soone as shee was a little past, loosed his Mastiffe, who presently had ouer-taken her. The woman terrified, prostrates her selfe to the dogge, and sues for her life; Good master Dogge,  master Dogge (saith shee) in her language, I carry this letter to the Gouernour (and shewes it him) Be not fierce on me, master Dogge. The dogge (hauing changed, it seemes, with his Master, his doggednesse for the others humanitie) made a stay, and lifting vp his legge, onely pissed on her and departed, to no small wonder of the Spaniards that knew him.
But to returne to the King of beasts. His tayle seemeth to be his Scepter, whereby he expresseth his passion. Hee shrinkes not at danger, except some couert of woods shroud him from witnesses, and then hee will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise hee seemes to disdaine. Mentor, a man of Syracusa, was encountred with a Lion, which in stead of tearing him, fawned on him, and with his dumbe eloquence seemed to implore his aide, shewing  his diseased foot, wherein Mentor perceiued a stubbe sticking, which he pulled out. The like is repor^ed by GelliusA. Gellius Noct. Attic. out of Polyhistor, of a fugitiue seruant, who hauing performed this kind of office to a Lion, was by him gratified for a long space with a daily portion of his prey. But after this the man was taken and presented to his Master (a Roman Senator) who exhibited games to the Romans, wherein seruants and condemned persons were exposed to the furie of the beasts, amongst whom he placed this seruant; and by a wonderfull Fate, this Lion also was a little before taken, and bestowed on him for this solemne spectacle. The beasts running with violence to their bloudie encounter, suddenly this Lion stayed, and taking little better view, fawned on this his guest, and defended him from the assault of the other beasts: wherevpon, by the peoples entreatie (who had learned the storie of him) he was freed, and the beast  giuen him: which followed him with a Line in the streets, the people pointing and sayingt Hic est homo Medicus leonis, Hic est leo hospes hominis. One Elpis a Samian performed a cure on another Lion, pulling a bone out of his throat, at the Lions gaping and silent moane: and in remembrance hereof built a Temple (at his returne) to Bacchus at Sango, whom before hee had inuoked before in feare of a Lion.
Plinie and Solinus among other African beasts mention the Hyaena, which some thinke to be Male one yeere, and Female another, by course: This AristotleArist. Hist. animal. l. 6. c. 32. denyes, This beast hath no necke ioynt, and therefore stirres not his necke, but with bending about his whole body. He will imitate humane voyce, and drawing neere to the sheepe-coates, hauing heard the name of some of the shepheards, will call him, and when hee comes, deuoure him. They tell that his eyes are diuersified with a thousand colours, that the touch of his shaddow makes a dogge  not able to barke. By engendring with this beast, the Lionesse brings forth a Crocuta, of like qualities to the Hyaena. Hee hath one continued tooth without diuision throughout his mouth. Some thinke this Hyaena to bee the Lycanthropos or Man-wolfe, some the Ciuet. Cat, some a fable: howsoeuer, old and late Philosophers, Physitians, and Historians mention it. Something, perhaps, told of it is fabulous. But it is absurd to denie the eye-sight of so many witnesses. He that will reade a pleasant storie of the taking them, let him reade Buibequius his Epistles: if an entire storie, Banhinus his second booke De Hermaphroditis.
In Africa also are wilde Asses, among which, one Male hath many Females: a iealous beast, who (for feare of after encroching) bites off the stones of the young Males, if the suspicious Female preuent him not by bringing forth in a close place where hee shall not finde it. The  like is told of Beuers,Plin. l. 8 c. 30. Whitney Emble. Solinus. which being hunted for the medicinable qualitie of their stones, are said to bite them off when they are in danger to be taken, paying that ransome for their liues. It cannot be true that is reported of the Hyaeneum,Marbodeus de Gemmis. a stone found in the Hyaena's eye, that being put vnder the tongue of a man, bee shall foretell things to come, except hee foretell this, That no man will beleeue what our Authour before hath told. The Libard is not hurtfull to men except they annoy him: but killeth and eateth dogges. Dabuh is the name of a simple and base creature like a Wolfe, saue that his legges and feete are like to a mans:Sol. in cap. 36. calleth them Celphos. so foolish, that with a song, and a taber, they which know his haunt will bring him out of his den, and captiue his eares with their musicke, while another captiuateth his legs with a rope. Scaliger thinkes this is the Hyaena, which the Turkes call Zirtlan, and  take with a rope fastened to the legge, he that goes in professing he is not there, till they be there sure of him.

The Zebra of all Creatures for beautie and comelinesse is admirably pleasing: resembling a Horse of exquisite composition, but not all so swift, all ouer-laid with partie-coloured Laces, and gards, from Head to Taile. They liue in great Heards, as I was told by my friend Andrew Battle, who liued in the Kingdome of Congo many yeeres, and for the space of some moneths liued on the flesh of this Beast, which hee killed with his Peece. For vpon some quarrell betwixt the Portugals (among whom he was a Sergeant of a band) and him, he liued eight or nine moneths in the Woods, where hee might haue view of hundreds together in Heards both of these, and of Elephants. So simple was the Zebra, that when hee shot one, he might shoot still, they all standing still at gaze, till three or foure of them were dead. But  more strange it seemed which he told me of a kinde of great Apes,These great Apes are called Pongo's. if they might so bee tearmed, of the height of a man, but twice as bigge in feature of their limbes, with strength proportionable, hairie all ouer, otherwise altogether like Men and Women in their whole bodily shape, except this, that their legges had no calues. They liued on such wilde fruits as the Trees and Woods yeelded, and in the night time lodged on the Trees: Hee was accompanied with two Negro-Boyes: and they carried away one of them by a sudden surprise: yet not hurting him, as they vse not to doe any which they take, except the Captiue doe then looke vpon them. This slaue, after a moneths life with them, conueyed himselfe away againe to his Master. Other Apes there are store, and as Solinus reporteth,Satyres are thought to be a kind of Apes: these are Naturall. There are others vnnaturall of humane copulation with goats: a third sort diabolicall illusions, and a fourth poeticall tales. See these things at large in Baubinus de Hermaphrod. l. 1 also Drad. in Solin, etc. Satyres with feete like Goates, and Sphynges, with brests like women, and hairie, whereof Pierius saith hee saw  one at Verona, and a kind of Conies also at the same time, foure times as bigge as the ordinary, and (which is more incredible) had each of them foure genitall members. Philippo Pigafetta speaketh in his RelationCongo translated by A.H. of Congo, of other Beasts in Africa, as of the Tygre as fierce and cruell as Lions, making prey of Man and Beast, yet rather deuouring blacke men then white: whose Mustachios are holden for mortall poyson, and being giuen in meates, cause men to die madde. The Empalanga is somewhat like to an Oxe. Their Sheepe and Goates neuer bring forth lesse then two, and sometimes three or foure at a time. They haue Wolues, Foxes, Deere (Red and Fallow) Roe-buckes, Ciuet-cats, Sables and Marterns.
The Riuer-horse seemes peculiar to Africa, a beast somewhat resembling a Horse, shorter-legged, with great feet and a very great head, with horrible teeth: so fearefull by Land  that a Child may affright them, and in the Water as their proper element (though their aliment be Grasse, Corne in the blade, and other like from the earth) they are audacious and daring. But of this and many other African Creatures (too long heere to relate) the Reader may informe himselfe more fully in my Voyages; in Iobson, Battell, Santos, Aluares, Iohn Leo, and others there published.


@. III. Of Crocadiles, Serpents and other strange Creatures.
 THey haue Snakes and Adders, whereof some are called Imbumas, fiue and twentie spannesStrabo and Agatharchides write that they had seene Serpents 30. Cubits long. long, liuing in Land and Water, not venemous but rauenous, and lurke in Trees (for which taking purpose, Nature hath giuen it a litle horne or claw within two or three foot of the Taile) waiting for their prey, which hauing taken, it deuoureth hornes, hoofes, and all, although it bee a Hart. And then swolne with this so huge a meale, it is as it were drunke and sleepie, and vnweldie for the space of fiue or sixe dayes. The Pagan Negroes roast and eate them as great dainties. The biting of their Vipers killeth in foure and twentie houres space. Africa for monsters in this kinde hath been famous, as in the Roman historie appeareth. AttiliusA. Gel. l. 6. c. 3. and Iul. Obsequens Cap. 29. Pl. l. 8. c. 14. ballisus tormentisque vt oppidum aliquod, expugnata serpens etc. Regulus the Romane Consul in the first Punicke  Warre, at the Riuer Bagrada encountred with a huge Serpent, and planted his Engines and Artillerie against the same, whose skinne, sent to Rome for a Monument, was in length a hundred and twentie foot, as Gellius out of Tubero reporteth. The ScalesOsor. l. 4. c. 8. Treasurie of times, l. 5. c. 31. see the whole Chapter. Vitriaco testifieth, that the Crocodile hatcheth her eg^s onely with her sight and other things not probable. armed it from all hurt by Darts or Arrowes, and with the breath it killed many, and had eaten many of the Souldiers, before they could with a stone out of an Engine destroy this destroyer. The Riuers of Niger, Nilus, Zaire, and others, haue store of Crocodiles, whereof some are of an incredible bignesse, and greedie deuourers, thirtie foot long, from an Egge lesse then a Goose-egge. Aristotle saith, that Crocodiles haue no tongues, but I my selfe haue seene both great and little (saith our Author) dead and dryed, in all which I found a tongue, but very short, flat and large. Strange it is that they tell of the number of sixtie in this beast; the age sixtie yeres, the teeth,  joynts, egges, and dayes of laying and hatching, being all numbred by sixtie.
The Crocodiles taile is as long as his body, his feet with clawes, his backe armed with scales almost impenitrable: hee moueth onely his vpper jaw, and that so wide, that some
 of them are able to swallow an entire Heifer, as some report. They say also, that the Female layes her Egges where Nilus will make an end of his flowing that yeere, as if by secret Prouidence she diuined how farre the Riuer would rise. In ingendring she lyes on her backe, and through the shortnesse of her legs cannot turne her selfe on her belly, but by the Males helpe: from which being scarred by the clamours of some watching this opportunitie, she is easily taken: which they doe also by Pit-fals and other meanes. Foure moneths together in the Winter, they eate nothing: they are thicke-sighted by Land, and easier take their prey by water, which is done by their tayle. They are bold vpon the fearefull, and fearefull vpon the bold: yet a fearefull beast to encounter rising on his tayle, with such Hellish iawes and Deuillish clawes ouer the assaylant, as require an vndaunted spirit. For which the Tentyrites were  famous, easily conquering them. Authors tell of a little Bird, which as he lyes gaping, goes into his mouth, and picks his indented teeth, which he cannot deuoure by reason of her sharp feathers raysed like bristles, when he offereth to shut his mouth on her: the Ichneumon or Rat of Nilus is said to gape for this occasion of his gaping, and then to runne into his belly and gnaw himselfe a passage out, therefore worshipped of the Egyptians. The Ichneumon is as big and as cleanly as a Cat, snowted like a Ferret, but without haire, and blacke; sharpe tooth'd, round ear'd, short legg'd, long tayl'd, supposed of both genders: bought at Markets in Egypt to kill Mice and Rats. They prey vpon all lesser Serpents destroy Crocodiles Egs, and strangle all the Cats they meet with, loue Poultrey, cannot endure the wind: their mouthes are so  little, they cannot bite any thing that is thicke.
Mount Atlas hath plenty of Dragons, grosse of body, slow of motion, and in byting or touching, incurably venemous. The Desarts of Lybia haue in them many Hydra's. Dubb is the name of a kind of great Lizard, not venemous, which neuer drinketh, and if water bee put in his mouth, he presently dyeth. He is counted dainty meat, and three dayes after hee is killed,P. Pigaset. at the heat of the fire he moueth as if he had life. In Congo is a kind of Dragons like in bighnesse to Rammes, with wings, hauing long tayles and chaps, and diuers iawes of teeth, of blue and greene colour, painted like scales, with two feet, and feed on raw flesh. The Pagan Negros pray to them as Gods, for which cause the great Lords keepe them to make a gaine of the peoples deuotion, which offer their gifts and Oblations. The Chameleons are  knowne among vs, admirable for their Aerie sustinance (although they also hunt and eat Flies) and for the changeablenesse of their colours p into all (as Theophrastus sayth) but redde and white.Solinus c. 33. and Theophrast. de animal. The Tarandus is a Beast some what resembling an Oxe, in quantitie, a Hart in shape, the skin hard, a finger thicke, fit for shields, haired like a Beare, liuing, as Theophrastus affirmeth, in Sarmatia, Solinus sayth in Aethiopia, seldome seene, of incredible changeablenesse to the colour of that which is next it. The Polypus seemeth by his breath to change his colour, his lungs extending almost through all his body: which Aristotle testifieth he doth both for feare and hunting his prey: adding the same qualitie of another fish called a Cuttell. Another Serpent hath a rundle on his Taile like a Bell, which also ringeth as it goeth. But if any desire to know the varietie of these Serpents, Solinus in his thirteenth Chapter will more fully satisfie him, and Bellonius in his obseruations.  
Manifold are these kindes of Serpents in Africa, as the Cerastes, which hath a little Coronet of foure hornes, whereby he allureth the Birds vnto him (lying hidden in the sands all but the head,) and so deuoureth them. The Iaculi dart themselues from Trees on such Creatures as passe by. The Amphisbena hath two heads, the Taile also onerated, (I cannot say honored) with a Head, which causeth it to moue circularly with crooked windings: a fit Embleme of popular sedition, where the people will rule their Prince; needs must their motion bee crooked, when there are two heads, and therefore none. The Scythale is admirable in her varied Iacket. The Dipsas kils those whom she stingeth, with thirst. The Hypanale with sleepe, as befell to Cleopatra. The Hemerois with vnstanchable bleeding. The Prester with swelling. And not to poison you with names of many other of these poysonfull Creatures, the Basilisk  is said to kill with her sight or hissing.Galen. lib. de Theriaca. Plinie saith it is twelue fingers long, and nine inches. l. 8. c. 21. Albert. mag. de mirab. Galen describes it, and so doe Solinus and others. It is not halfe a foot long and hath three pointels (Galen saith) on the head, or after Solinus, strakes like a Mitre. It blasteth the ground it toucheth, the Herbes also, and Trees, and infecteth the Ayre, so that Birds flying ouer, fall dead. It frayeth away other Serpents with the hissing. It goeth vpright from the belly vpwards. If any thing be slaine by it, the same also proueth venemous to such as touch it. Onely a Weasill kils it. The Bergameni bought the carkasse of one of them at an incredible summe, which they hung in their Temple (which Apelles hand had made famous) in a Net of Gold, to preserue the same from Birds and Spiders. The Catoblepas is said to be of like venemous nature, alwayes going with her head into the ground, her sight otherwise being deadly. As for the Monsters, that by mixt generations of vnlike kindnesse  Nature vnnaturally produceth,Io. Baptista Porta, etc. I leaue to others discourse. LeuinusLemnius de occultis. l. 4. c. 12. Lemnius tels, that of the marrow in a Mans back-bone is ingendred a Serpent; yea, of an Egge which an old Cocke
 will lay after he is vnable to tread Hennes any longer, is (saith hee) by the same Cockes sitting, produced a Basiliske: and telles of two such Cockes at Zirizea, killed by the people, which had found them sitting on such Egges. Theophrast also saith, that Serpents are plentifully ingendred of much Raine, or ^ffusions of Mens blood in Warre. Mice are multiplyed in drie seasons) which the store of them this drie Winter 1613. confirmeth) of which hee saith there are great ones in Egypt with two feet, which they vse as hands, not going, but scaping.
Ostriches keepe in companies in the Desarts, making shewes a farre off, as if they were troupes of Horsemen; a ridiculous terrour to the Carauans of Merchants: a foolish Bird, that  forgetteth his Nest, and leaueth his Egges for the Sunne and Sands to hatch; that eateth any thing, euen the hardest Iron: that heareth nothing. They haue Eagles, Parrots, and other Fowles. But none more strange then that which is termed Nifr, bigger then a Crane, preying vpon Carnon, and by his flight buryeth his great body in the Clouds that none may see him, whence hee espyeth his prey: and liueth so long, that all his feathers fall away by age, and then is fostered by his young ones.
Other Fowles they haue too tedious to relate, of which let the Reader consult Iobson, Santos, and other Relations in our Voyages published. Grashoppers doe here often renue the Aegyptian plague, which come in such quantitie, that they intercept the shining of the Sunne like a Cloud, and hauing eaten the Fruits and Leaues, leaue their spawne behind (worse then  their predecessours) deuouring the very barkes of the Leafe-lesse Trees. The old depart none knowes whither: and sometime with a South-East winde are carried into Spaine. The Arabians, and Libyans eate them before they haue spawned, to that end gathering them in the morning, before the Sunne hath dryed their winges, and made them able to flie. One man canIoh. Bapt. Mat. 3. ate Locusts, and many people were therefore called. (...). gather foure or fiue bushels in a morning.P. Oros. lib. 5. cap. 11. Orosius tells, that once they had not onely eaten vp Fruits, Leaues, and Barke, While they liued, but being dead, did more harme: for being carried by a wind into the Sea, and the Sea not brooking such morsels, vomiting them vp againe on the shoare, their putrified carkasses caused such a plague, that in Numidia dyed thereof eight hundred thousand: and on the Sea-coast neere Carthage and Vtica, two hundred thousand: and in Vtica it selfe thirtie thousand Souldiers, which had beene mustred for  the Garisons of Africa. In one day were carried out of one Gate one thousand and fiue hundred carkasses. They are said to come into Barbarie seuen yeeres together, and other seuen not to come, at which times Corne before so deare, is sold for little, and sometime not vouchsafed the reaping, such is their soyle and plentie. The iuyce of the young is poyson. Plinie calsPlin. l. 11. c. 29. them a plague of Diuine Anger: they she saith hee, with such a noyse, that one would take them for other Fowles, and passe ouer huge tracts by Sea and Land. In Italy the people by them haue beene driuen toTaken out of the Sibylles Bookes. Sibyllius remedies for feare of Famine. In Cyrenaica there was a Law thrice a yeere to warre against them, destroying the Egges first, then the young, and lastly the growne ones. In Lemnos a certaine measure is appointed for each man to bring of them to the Magistrate. And they hold Iayes in high regard, because they kill them with  flying against them. In Syria men are compelled to kill them: in Parthia they eate them.Ioel. 1. and 2. etc. The Scriptures also often threaten and mention this plague as Gods great Armie. But otherwhere they seeme strangers: In Aethiopia they haue their principall habitation. Clenard mentionethCl. Ep. ad Latem. Aristot. in hist. An. haud recte cicadis ieiunium tribuit, and rorem tantum procibo. their mischiefes about Fez, where they bring Cart-loades of them to fell, the people deuouring these deuourers.
Aluares in his thirtie two, and thirtie three Chapters, tels of these Grashoppers in Aethiopia, that in some places they made the people trusse vp bagge and baggage, and seeke new Habitations where they might finde victuall; The Countrey all Desart and destroyed, and looking as if it had snowed there, by reason of the vnbarked Trees, and the fields of Mais, the great stalkes whereof were troden downe, and broken by them: and in another place, a Tempest  of Raine and Thunder left them more then two yards thicke, on the Riuersbanks. This he saw with his Eyes. But if we stay a little longer on this subiect, the Reader will complaine of their troublesome companie heere.
The studious of Natures rarities in these parts, may resort to Leo, and others, as also for their further satisfaction in the Fishes and Monsters of the water; as the Hippopotamus, in shape resembling a Horse, in bignesse an Asse, they goeAelian de an. Lib. 5. cap. 53. into the Corne grounds of the Aegyptians, and in their feeding goe backwards towards the Riuer, so to beguile men, who looking forwards for them, they meane while conuey themselues into the Water. InTheoph. Simocatta hist. Mauri l. 7. cap. 16. this Riuer of Nilus, in the time of Mauritius, Mena being Gouernour of Egypt, there with many other saw neere the place where Cairo now standeth, a Giantly monster, from the bottome  of his belly vpwards aboue the water like altogether to Man with flaxen hayre, frowning Countenance, and strong limbes. Some imagined him to bee Nilus the supposed Riuer-deitie. After hee had continued in the common view of all men three houres, there came
 forth of the Water another like a Woman with a smooth face, her haire partly hanging, and partly gathered into a knot, and blacke of colour; her face very faire, rosie lippes, fingers and brests well proportioned, but her lower parts hidden in the water: Thus from morning till Sun-set, they fedde their greedy eyes with this spectacle, which then sanke downe againe into the Waters, Hondius speakes of a Mermaid taken in the Netherlands, and taught to Spin: I sweare not to the truth of it. But many Histories speake of some like Men in their whole shape both in our and other Coasts, and some like Lions: and for Mermaides, in the VoyageVi. Ges. de Aq. of Henry Hudson for Northerly Discouerie 1608. Thomas Hils and Robert Rainer saw one rise by the Ship side on the fifteenth of Iune; from the Nauill vpwards her backe and brests like a Woman, as likewise her bignesse of body: her afterparts like a Porpise, and speckled  like a Mackerill:Robert Iuet in his relation of that Voyage. when they called their company to see it, shee sanke downe. I might adde many other Creatures strange and wonderfull, and yet not so wonderfull, as the effects and vertues which Albertus, Mizaldus, and others tell of these and other Creatures. Such are the Sea-kine, lesser then the Land-kine, the Tartaruca a Tortoise, which liueth in the Desarts of huge bignesse, etc.
The people wich inhabite Africa are Arabians, Moores, Abissines, Aegyptians, and diuers sorts of the Heathens; differing in Rites from each other, as shall follow in our discourse. The Monsters which Plinie, and others tell of, besides Munster and Sabellicus out of them. I neither beleeue, nor report.  



CHAP. II. Of Aegypt and the famous Riuer Nilus. and first Kings, Temples, and Monuments, according to HERODOTVS, DIODORVS, and others.

@. I.  The names of Aegypt, and of the Riuer Nilus.
AFter our generall view of Africa, Egypt may justly challenge the principall place in our African discourse, as being both in situation next to Asia (whence we are lately come) and consequently from thence first peopled; besides that Religion, our Load-Starre hath heere found the soonest and solemnest entertainment. And not in Religion alone, but in Policie, Philosophie, and Artes, the GreciansIamblicus. which would seeme the first Fathers of these things, haue beene Disciples to the Egyptians, asAm. M. l. 22. D.S. l. 1. Plin. d. Os. and Is. Volat. 12. Lact. l. 4 c. 9. Hieron. ad Paul. Am. Marcellinus, and D. Siculus, Plutarch, and many others affirme. Hence Orpheus, Musaus and Homer fetched their Theologie;  Lycurgus and Solon their Lawes; Pythagoras, Plato, Anaxagoras, Eudoxus, Democritus, D^dalus, here borrowed that knowledge for which the World hath euer since admired them. Let it not then be imputed to me as a tedious officiousnesse. If I longer detaine the Reader (otherwise delighted with the view of those rils which hence haue flowed among the Greeke and Latine Poets and Philosophers) in Surueighing these Aegyptian Fountaines and Well-springs; whence haue issued especially a deluge of Superstition, that in elder times drowned all the neighbouring parts of the World. Nor let it be tedious vnto vs to behold (in this Historicall Theater) those Egyptian Rarities; the sight whereof hath drawne not Philosophers alone but great Princes too, and mightie Emperors, to the vndertaking of long and dangerous journeyes: AsAelian. Spart. Seuerus. Seuerus, who though hee forbad Iudaisme and Christianite, yet went this  Pilgrimage, in honour of Serapis, and for the strange sights of Memphis, Memnon, the Pyramides, Labyrinth, etc. Vespasian also and others did the like.
The name of Egypt (saithAntiq. l. 1. c. 6. Broughtons Concent. Iosephus) is Mesre of Misraim, the sonne of Cham, as the Egyptians themselues are called Mesrai. So the Arabians at this day call it (as LeoIo. Leo l. 8. Mitzer, and Mitzer, ait Postellus, Aldrete Africa. affirmeth) but the Inhabitants they call Chibth. This Chibth they say was he which first ruled this Countrey, and built houses therein. The Inhabitants also doe now call themselues thus: yet are there not now left any true Egyptians, saue a few Christians; the Mahumetans hauing mingled themselues with the Arabians and Africans. These Christians are hereuponB. Enquiry. cap. 22. called Cophti, of their Nation, as Master Brerewood obserueth, not of their Religion, which is the same with the Iacobites. And the Egyptians in some ancient Monuments are tearmed  Aegophti: and the name Aegyptus (which some deriue from Aegyptus brother of Da^an^) is likelier to come of that Chibth: or this Aegophti: and all these names may seeme to
 borrow their originall from Koptus, a chiefe Citie in Egypt, as both ScaligerD. Chyter. and Lidyat are of opinion, quasi Ai Koptus,Coptus, as Pliny sa^^h was the neerest m^^ke to Nilus, of Arabia; and Indian Merchandise, lib. 2. c. 9. the Land of Koptus so is Aethiops of Ai and Thebeth, or Thebais Ignatius the Patriarch of Antioch, in an Arabicke Epistle written to Scaliger, calleth Egypt the Land of Kopti, where he speaketh of Aera Kopti, or the computation of yeeres by those Koptite Christians, reckoned from the nineteenth yeere of Dioclesian, at which time hee destroyed the Christian Churches, and slue an hundred and forty foure thousand Martyrs in Egypt, and other seuen hundred thousand exiled. The TurkesScal. E.T. 4. 5 Lidyat. E.T. call both the Countrey it selfe, and principall City (Cairo) by the name of Misir. Thus singeth an olde Pilgrime in written Rimes, without name of the Authour,
 In Egypt is a Citie faire,That height Massar or else Kare.
Egypt was before called (if wee may beleeue StephanusSteph. Byz. R^ffinus. Ortel. Thes. and others) Aeria, and otherwise also by the names of Aeria, Potamia, Ogygya, Melambolos, Haephestia, Ethiopia. Some addeApollon. Argon. H^plae, as Nilus was also called Melas of the blacknesse. The Riuer was first called Oceanus, then Egyptus, and after that Nilus, and Triton.
Egypt hath on theTzetz. ad Lycophron. East the Gulfe, and some part of Arabia; on the South the fals and Mountaynes of Aethiopia; on the West the Desarts of Libya; on the North, the Mediterranean Sea: all which Nature hath set not only as limits, but as fortifications also to this Countrey.  Nilus is by OuidFast. 5. Tib. l. 1. Cla. ^pig. called aduena, for his forreine Springs; by Tibullus, fertilis, which supplyeth the place of showres to Egypt, whereupon Claudian sings:
Egyptus sine nube ferax, imbresque serenosSola tenet, secura poli, non indiga venti: and Lucan,Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis,Aut Iouis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.Egypt no raines nor Merchandise doth need,Nilus doth all her wealth, and plenty breed.
 Hereupon the Romanes accounted it their Granary, and the Turke Selym when he conquered it, said, he had now takenG. Sandy^. a Farme that would feed his Gemoglans, without it, the earth is sand, perhaps had not beene earth, nor is there aboue one Well of sweet springing water, nor brackish in all Egypt. The water of Nilus is sweet, wholesome, and yeelds no mystie vapours.
This Riuer runneth through the midst thereof, sixty miles fromAgatharchid^^ ap. Phot. 250. Luys del Marmol. l. 11. per totum. Cairo, making by diuision of himselfe) that Delta, to which some appropriated the name of Egypt, refuted by Iupiter Ammon, whose Oracle (sayth Herodotus) reckoned all that Egypt, which Nilus ouerflowed. PtolemausPtol. l. 4. c. 5. numbreth three of those Deltas. Touching the head ofVid. Eustat. in Dionys. Aethicus and others diuide Egypt into the superiour and inferiour: this is that Delta, the other Thebais. Ortel. Simler. Nilus; Bredenbachius affirmeth, that many Soldans haue sent men on purpose furnished with skill and prouision  for the Discouery, who, after two or three yeeres, returning, affirmed that they could find no head of this Riuer, nor could tell any certainty, but that it came from the East, and places not inhabited: both of like truth. And before the Soldans, Sesostris, Cambyses, Alexander, Nero, are reported to haue made search for the head of this Riuer. Neros men by the helpe of the Aethiopians passed farre vp, to large vnpassable Marishes full of weeds, the extents vnknowne. Later Geographers relate, that Nilus ariseth out of a Lake in twelue degrees of Southerly latitude, out of which not onely this Riuer runneth Northwards into the Mediterranean; but Zaire also Westward; Zuama, and Spirito Sancto Eastward, into the Ocean, as is said; all ouerflowing their Territories in the same time, and from the same cause. What this cause should be, many both old and later Writers haue laboured to search. Herodotus, Diedorus,  Pliny, and Solinus, haue lent vs the coniectures of Antiquity herein.P. Pigafetta. l. 2. c. vlt. ap. Ram. Fracastorus and Rhamusius haue bestowed their Discourses on this Subiect, as Goropius also and others ofScal. ex. 47. Lucret. l. 6. Lucan. l. 10. later yeeres haue done. The most probable cause is the raines, whichGoro. in Becces. Niloscopium. Goropius in his Niloscopium, deriueth from a double cause. For the Sunne in places neere the Line, doth shew more mighty effects of his fiery presence, exhaling abundance of vapours, which in terrible showers he daily repayeth, except some naturall obstacle doe hinder (as in some places ofAcosta hist. Ind. Peru, where it seldome or neuer raineth:) And hence it is, that the Indians both East and West, and the Africans reckon their Summer and Winter otherwise then in these parts of the World: for this time of the Sunnes neere presence with them, they call Winter, in regard of these daily stormes; which hee seemes to recompence them with other sixe  moneths continuall serenitie and faire weather, not then raysing (by reason of his further absence) any more exhalations then are by himselfe exhausted and consumed, which time for that cause they call Summer. GOROPIVS therefore out of his coniectures
 telleth vs of a twofold Winter, vnder both Tropikes at the same time; vnder Cancer the rainy Winter, which in manner (as ye haue heard) attends on the Sunne; vnder Capricorne the Astronomicall Winter in the Suns absence, where also he supposeth it to raine at that time, by reason of the high Hils there situate, and the great Lakes which minister store of moisture, besides that Cancer is then in the house of the Moone. Againe, the windsP. Pigafetta. 1.2. Etesij (that is to say, ordinary euery yeere) in their annuall course, euery Winter lift vp the Cloudes to the tops of the Hils, which melt them into raine, whereby all the Riuers in Aethiopia are filled: and cause those ouer-flowings, which in Nilus is strangest, because it is in Egypt farthest off from the raines that cause it. AristidesAristot. ap. Phot. 249. sayth, that Aristotle found by his wit, and Alexander by experience, sending men thither for that purpose, that raines were the cause of this  ouer-flowing; and that those raines were caused by Etesian winds, which (sayth hee) are by the approching Sunne ingendred in the North parts, and carried to the South, where meeting and multiplying on the tops of the high Aethiopian Hils, they cause raines. Master Sandys affirmeth, that some moneth before this rising of Nilus, for diuers dayes you shall here see the troubled Ayre full of blacke and ponderous Cloudes, and heare a continuall rumbling, threatning to drowne the whole Country, yet seldome so much as dropping, but carried Southward by the North winds that constantly blow at that season. The Egyptians by three Pitchers Hieroglyphically intimated a threefold cause; the Earth, the South Ocean, and these raines. Strange it is, that the Earth of Egypt adioyning to the Riuer, preserued, and weighed daily,  keepes the same weight till the seuenteenth of Iune, and then growes daily heauier with the increase of the Riuer: experimented generally affirmed by French, English, and others.
Marcus Fridericus Wendelinus hath written a large Booke, which hee calleth Admiranda Nili, and hath preambled with a pretie Preface Booke of the wonders of water, Saint Ambrose had giuen him a good Text in his Hexaemero. The Sea, saith hee, is good, the hostry of Riuers, the fountaine of showers, the deriuation of ouer-flowings. By it remote Nations are ioyned, danger of battles are remoued, Barbarian furie is bounded, it is a helpe in necessitie, in perils a refuge, a delight in pleasures, wholsomnesse to the health, coniunction of men separated, compendiousnesse of trauelling, a shelter of the afflicted; a Subsidie to the publike Treasury, the nourishment of sterilitie. Hence are showres transfused on the Earth, the Sunne drawing the water of the Sea, by his rarifying  beames, and exhaling it vp to the colder shadie clouds; there cooled and condensate into showers, which not only temper the drought, but makes fertile the fields. What should I reckon the Ilands? which are as it were embroydered Iewels, in which those which with firme purpose of chastitie put off the secular enticements of intemperance, may chuse to lye hid to the World, and to auoyd the doubtfull turne againes of this life. The Sea therefore is the Closet of Temperance, the Schoole of Continence, the retyring place of Grauity, the Hauen of Securitie, the time-tempests calme, the sobrietie of the World; the incentiue of deuotion, the voyce of singers contending with the waues, surges, etc.
These prayses of that holy Father giuen to the Sea, may here be set as Prince Nilus his Inheritance, the Oceans eldest sonne, a Riuer of longer course, and further fetched, and more vnknowne pedigree then any Riuer that age of the Ancients knew, and from so equall an arbitriment to three Seas, the West-Atlantike, the East-Indian, and vnknowne-South running  so many degrees to the North, in pilgrimage to that holy ground where Christ himselfe had sought refuge, and whence by a mightie hand God had deliuered Israel, and in whose waters Moses made the beginning of the Egyptian plagues. For more holinesse was in Christs feet, then could be vnholinesse in Egypts elder Idolatries, or later Mahumetan Furies: and yet those precious feet impart no holinesse to the ground or men, where Faith receiueth not what thence readily floweth. Still doth Nilus visit, and euer forsakes those whom Christ visited, and which haue forsaken Christ, as drowning himselfe for anguish, or vnder the Seas bottome to seeke close and priuate Intelligence with Iordan, where the waters are as pestiferous in that Dead Sea, as were the deeds Deuillish which ouerwhelmed the Sodomites Region therein, and from the neighbouring Region chased the Canaanites first, and after the carnall  Israelites. But I am almost drowned also betwixt these places of Diuine Iudgement. Wendelinus hath giuen vs the elder names Schichor, (...), Oceanus, Aegyptus, Triton, Astaboras, Iupiter Aegyptius, Gichon, Syris, Chrysorrhoas, Noym, Mahara, Abbabuius, Sy^ne, Dyris. Hee tels vs also the originall (out of the Negus his Title) to be in Goyome, a Countrey subiect to the Abassine: argueth against the conceits of those which make Nilus one of the Riuers of Paradise, and Philosophically discourseth of the ouer-flowing, the mouthes and issues, and the qualities thereof, but so largely that I rather referre the studious to him, then presume hence to enlarge this Discourse already tedious. He hath packed his Booke as a full store-house of ancient and moderne, Ethnike and Christian authorities of all kindes in this Argument. In my Voyages now published Aluarez and the Iesuits giue great light to this  Obscure-famous Riuer.
Iohn Baptista Scortia a Iesuite hath lately published two Bookes of this one Riuer, with
 manifold speculations thereon. It seemeth not without cause that the name Paper is deriued from Papyrus, growing in Nilus; so much Paper hath bin written thereof.See Iobson of Gambra. He deriueth Nilus from two Lakes, which I dare not aduenture, there are so many Hippopotami, and Crocodiles therein. The ouer-flowing is common to most Riuers vnder the Line, to Zaire, and diuers Riuers of Africa (but the cause and effect are in shorter streames more euident) to Gambra also whose ouer-flowing is as obscure on the Guinaea Coast as Nilus on the Egyptian) likewise to Menan of Pegu, and Indus (which Philostratus in diuers other things compares to Nilus) and the Riuer of Siam in Asia; and to the Riuers of Amazones, and Guiana in America. FrierHistoria de la Etiopia, l. 1. c. 28. Luys de Vrreta ascribeth the ouer-flowing to some secret passages and pores, whereby the  Ocean, and the Mountaynes of the Moone hold mutuall commerce. This increase of Nilus continueth forty dayes or more, after which followeth the decrease as long. In the middle of Nilus (saythLeo lib. 8. Leo) ouer against the old City of Cairo, standeth the Ile Michias, or the measuring Ile, contayning one thousand, and fiue hundred Families, and a Temple, and a foure-square Cisterne of eighteeneHimerius ap. Phot. 243. mentions this measuring Nilus by Cubits. Cubits depth, whereinto the water of Nilus is conueyed by a certaine sluce vnder the ground, in the midst whereof is a Pillar marked also with eighteene Cubits, to which Officers for the purpose resort daily from the seuenteenth of Iune, to obserue the increase, which if it amount to fifteene Cubits, and there stay, it doth portend fertilitie, and how much ouer or vnder, so much lesse abundance. In the meane time the people deuoutly exercise Prayer and Almes-giuing: And after, the price of victuals (especially of Corne) is  proportionably appointed for the whole yeere. The Cities and Townes of Egypt, whiles this inundation lasteth, are so many Ilands. Master SandysS. l. 2. writes, that it begins to arise with the arising Sunne on the seuenteenth of Iune, swelling by degrees, till it mounts sometimes foure and twenty Cubits, but that the vttermost. Heretofore seuenteene was the most that it attayned to, presented by that Image of Nilus hauing seuenteene children playing about it: brought from hence by Vespasian, and dedicated in his Temple of Peace, still to bee seene in the Vatican at Rome. That yeere when he was there, it did rise at Cairo three and twentie Cubits about two miles aboue the Citie; at the end of old Cairo, in the beginning of August they cut the bankes (for sooner, it would destroy the vnreaped fruits) the Bassa himselfe in person giuing the first stroke; a world of people attending Boates, or in Pauillions on the  shoare, with night triumphs and reioycings, welcoming in the Riuer into the Land diuers dayes together. The Bassa feasts three dayes in the Castle of Michias. In the nights their many lights (placed in buildings erected of purpose for this solemnity) make a glorious shew. These lights are said to succeed the Deuillish Sacrifices of a young Man and a Mayd, wonted to be offered at this time to Osiris and Isis; euery night they haue fire-workes: Euery Turke of account hath a gallant Boat adorned with Streamers, Chambers, and the Lights artificially set, to represent Castles, Ships, Houses, or other formes: in the day making Sea-fights, others practising like exercises on land. The soyle is sandy and vnprofitable, the Riuer both moystening and manuring it. Yea, if there dye in Cairo fiue thousand of the plague the day before, yet on the first of the Riuers increase, the plague not only decreaseth, but meerely ceaseth,  not one dying the day after: which we haue elsewhere ascribed to the Sunnes entrance into Leo. The land is otherwise a very Desart, as appeared two yeeres together when Cleopatra raigned, Nilus not ouer-flowing, and in Iosephs seuen yeeres of famine, the Riuer being part of Pharaohs Dreame, by which he stood, and out of which the fat and leaneGen. 41.1, 2, 3 vid. Com. Mart. Marl. Munst. etc. Kine ascended.
And thus, sayth Herodotus, The Land of Egypt doth not onely owe the fertility, but her selfe also vnto the slimy increase of Nilus: forRaine is infectious if at any time it fall in Egypt, except in and abou^ Alexandria, where Pigifetta saith it raineth. Sac. lib. 19. Nilus, solux ex omnibus vniuersis nullas expirat Auras Solin. raine is a stranger in this Countrey, seldome seene, and yet oftner then welcome: as vnwholesome to the Inhabitants. Pharus, by Homer mentioned farre off in the Sea, is now adioyning to the Continent. The mouthes or falls of Nilus, numbred by the Prophet Esay,Isay 11.15. and other in old times, seuen; and after Plinie (who reckoneth the foure smaller) eleuen^ are now (as Willielmus Tyrius out of his owne search ^^stifieth)  but foure, or as other Writers, but three worthy of consideration: Rosett^, Balbicina, Damiata, where the saltnesse of the earth and shels found in it, may seeme to confirme Herodotus opinion, that Nilus hath wonne it from the Sea, which Goropius laboureth to confute. Aristotle g doth not onely auerre the former opinion with Herodotus, but addes, that all the mouthes of Nilus, except that of Canopus, may seeme to be the labour of men,A. Meteor. l. 1 vid. Hieron. ad Es. 12. and not naturall Channels to the Riuer.



HONDIVS his Map of Egypt.
map of Egypt, North Africa
AEGYPTUS





@. II. The diuision of Aegypt, and the great workes of their Ancient Pharaos.
EGypt was anciently diuided into Thebais Delta, and the Region interiacent: and these subdiuided into sixe and thirty Nomi, which we call Shires, whereof Tanete and Heliopolit^ were the assignement of Iacobs Family,D. Chytr. them called Goshen, from whence Moses after conducted them into Canaan, as StraboStra. lib. 16. also witnesseth.  The wealth of Egypt, as it proceedeth from Nilus, so is it much increased by the fit conueyance in the naturall and hand-laboured channelsSesostris, Ptolomei, Tr^i^^ti fossae. thereof. Their haruest beginneth in Aprill, and is threshed out in May. In this one Region were sometimes (by Herodotus and Plinies report) twenty thousand Cities: DiodorusDiod. Sic. l. 1. Siculus sayth eighteene thousand: and in his time, three thousand. He also was told by the Egyptian Priests, that it had beene gouerned about the space of eighteene hundred yeeres, by the Gods and Heroes; the last of whom was Orus: after whom it was vnder Kings vntill his time, the space almostOlymp. 180. of fifteene hundred yeeres. To Herodotus they reported of three hundred and thirty Kings from Menas to Sesostris.
The Scripture, whose Chronology conuinceth those lying Fables, calleth their Kings by  one generall name, Pharao (which someMorn. de ver. Ios. Antiq. l. 3. c. 2 interprete a Sauiour; Iosephus saith it signifieth authority) and maketh ancient mention of them in the dayes of Abraham. Some begin this
 Royall computation at Mizraim. If our Berosus which Annius hath set forth, were of authoritie,Pseudo Ber^sus. hee telleth, that Cham, the sonne of Noah, was by his father banished for particular abuse of himselfe, and publike corruption of the World, teaching and practising those vices, which before had procured the Deluge, as Sodomie, Incest, Buggerie: and was therefore branded with the name Chemesenua, that is, Dishonest Cham, in which the Egyptians followed him, and reckoned him among their gods by the name ofXenoph. de aequiuocis, calleth Cham, Saturnus Aegyptius. Sa^^^, consecrated him a Citie, called Chemmis. The Psalmes ofPsal. 75. and 108. Dauid doe also thus intitle Egypt, The land of Cham: which name was retayned by the Egyptians themselues in Ierem^^Hier. in Gen. Brought. Conc. dayes. Chemmis, after Diodorus, was hallowed to Pan, and the word signifieth  Pans Cit^^'s in Herodotus his time it was a great Towne in Thebais, hauing in it a Temple of P^s^^s, square, and set round with Palme-trees, with a huge porch of stone, on which were two great statues, and in it a Chappell, with the Image of Perseus. The Inhabitants want not their miraculous Legend, of the Appatitions of their god, and had a relique of his, a sandale of two cubits which hee sometimes ware; they celebrate festiuall games in his honour, after the Greeke manner. Herodotus also mentioneth an Iland called Chemmis, with the Temple of Apollo in it. Some say,Plut. in Os. Thebes was called in their Holies, Chemia, or Chamia: and allArist. Meteor. lib. 1. Egypt was sometime called Thebes.
L^canLucian. Dea Syr. saith, the Egyptians were the first that had Temples, but their Temples had no Images. Their first Temples are reportedDiod. Sic. l. 2. to haue beene erected in the time ofOsiris is supposed by some to be the sonne of Chaus. vid. inf. cap. 6. Patric. saepe. Osiris  and Isis, whose parents were Iupiter and Iuno, children to Saturne and Rhea, who succeeded Vulcan in this Kingdome. They built a magnificent Temple to Iupiter and Iuno, and two other golden Temples to Iupiter Coelestis, and Iupiter Ammon, or Cham, which wee before spake of, instituting vnto them Priests and golden statues. Menas is reckoned the first King after those Demi-gods,Morn. de verit. Christ. Relig. cap. 26. who built a Temple to Vulcan, and taught the people to sacrifice, and other rites of Religion. Long after him, Busiris built Thebes, which wasHerodot. l. 2. Dionys. (...), etc. Iuuen. Atque vetus Theb^ contum iacet obrutae portis. said to haue an hundred Gates, and many stately erections of Temples, Colosses, Obeliskes; by the one name they call their more then giantly Images; by the other, their pillars of one stone, fashioned like a needle. Pomponius Laetus, and Martianus, speake of two of these Obeli^kes with hieroglyphicall inscriptions, carryed from Hieropolis in Egypt by Augustus to  Rome, the one fourescore foote high, the other an hundred and thirtie, which was broken in the raysing. Plinie mentions these and others at Rome, one of which hee made serue for the measuring of the Sunnes shadow in Campus Martius, in Dyall-wise. He speaketh of an Obeliske (...) Thebes made and raysed by twentie thousand men.
Of foure Temples, there was one contayning in circuit thirteene furlongs, in height fiue and fortie cubits, the wall foure and twentie foote thicke. The ornaments answered to the structure. But the Gold, Siluer, Iuorie, and Iewels were taken away by the Persian^, when Cambyses burned the Egyptian Temples. Out of those fires, they report, flowed three hundred talents of gold, andThe Egypt-talent of filuer is reckoned 250. l. of our money: and gold is vsually accounted 12. times so much. two thousand and three hundred of siluer. Amongst the seuen and fortie Sepulchres of their Kings, that of Simandius was reckoned most sumptuous,  the gates whereof were two hundred foote long, and fiue and fortie cubits high: within was a square Cloyster, contayning in each square foure hundred foote, borne vp with statues of beasts in stead of pillars, of sixteene cubits, the roofe made of stones, of two paces broad, beautified with starres. Then was there another gate like to the former, but fuller of worke, with three huge statues to himselfe, his mother and daughter. Within this was another Cloyster more beautifull then the former. But for the particulars of these things, let our Reader refort to Diodorus Siculus, who partly from the Priests relations, and in great part from his owne sight, deliuereth them at large. He addeth, that there was an inscription contayning the cost and charges hereof to be three thousand and two hundred millions of Minae. These summes are admirable, and scarcely to bee paralleld in any Historie, excelling euen  those summes which Dauid left Salomon for the Temple, and onely surmounted by those which Sardanapalus is said to haue consumed together with himselfe in his funerall fire. For if we account euery Mina three pound two shillings and sixe pence, as Master Brerewood hath obserued of the Atticke Mina, out of many Authors, (which yet is lesse then the Egyptian, and but halfe so much as that of the Hebrewes and Alexandrians) it comes to ten thousand millions of our pounds: a summe incredible, improbable, that I say not impossible. Yea, neither are those things credible which Ctesias tells of Sardanapalus, which Brerewood summeth after the Attick Talent, at two and twentie thousand and fiue hundred millions of pounds in gold, and eighteene thousand two hundred and fiftie millions of pounds in siluer. Euen in those things also which the sacred Historie auoucheth of Dauid, howsoeuer the truth is beyond  all names of certaintie, yet the interpretation of that truth is not fully agreed vpon, as we haue elsewhere shewed.
This cost of Samandius, although inlarged in the telling, doth not disagree to that Egyptian
 opinion, esteeming their houses their Innes, and their Sepulchres their eternall habitatations. Of the race of Simandius was Ogdous, that builtIn 69.51. and 29.50. Memphis (called in the Scripture N^ph) compassing a hundred and fifty furlongs, at the parting of Nilus into that Delta-diuision, where the succeeding Kings abode, forsaking Thebes till Alexandria was after built by Alexander.
Thebes was called Diospolis, or Iupiters City, where (as StraboStrab. l. 17. reporteth) was consecrated to Iupiter a beautifull Virgin of noble birth, who, vntill the time that shee had her naturall purgation, had the carnall company of whomsoeuer shee pleased, and at this her menstruous accident was bewayled as dead, and after married. Such Virgins the Greeks (sayth he) called Pallades. Many yeeres after Ogdons, succeeded Sesostris.Antiq. l. 8.4. Iosephus is of opinion,  that Herodotus erred in the name, and ascribed the deeds of2. ^hron. 12.9 Shoshak to Sesostris; to which also the computation of Herodotus doth agree reasonably in the time.Volater li. 12. Lud. Reg. lib. 4. Others account him the same with Sesachis in Diodorus. The huge Conquests of this Sesostris are beyond all that euer Alexander atchieued, if we credit Authors. At his returne he builded in euery City of Egypt a Temple to their chiefe God at their owne costs; and offered a ship of Cedar two hundred and eighty Cubits in length, siluered on the in-side, gilded on the outside,Learned M. Fuller. Misc. l. 2. c. 4. holds the relations of Tearcon and Sesostris to be in great part fabulous: and rather troublesome Expeditions then setled Empires. to the chiefe God at Thebes, and two Obeliskes one hundred and twenty Cubits high, wherein were ingrauen the greatnesse of his Empire and Reuenues. At Memphis in the Temple of Vulcan he dedicated Statues of himselfe and his wife, thirty Cubits high, of his children twenty. And when he went to the Temple, or through the City, his Chariot was  drawne by Kings, as Lucan singeth:
Venit ad Oceasum mundique extrema Sesostris;Et Pharios currus Regum ceruicibus egit,Sesostris in the Westerne World, by WarreCompelled Kings to draw his Memphian Carre.
Thus we reade in our owne ChroniclesHoueden. Malmesbur. Mat. West. Fox. Act. and Monuments. Speed. Stow Chron. etc. of Edgarus Pacificus, sometimes King of England, rowed in a Boat by eight Kings, himselfe holding the Sterne.  
TacitusAnnal. 2.15. telleth of Rhameses an Egyptian King, who conquered the East and South parts of the World, helped herein (as the Priests told Germanicus) with the forces of Thebes, who had then seuen hundred thousand fighting men. This was written in Egyptian Characters at Thebes, interpreted by one of the Priests, together with his reuenues not inferiour to the Romane or Parthian Empires. Pheron, the Sonne and Successor of Sesostris, enraged at the rage of Nilus, swelling aboue eighteene Cubits, cast a Dart against the streame,Her. lib. 2. and thereupon lost his sight, which by the aduice of the Oracle in Butis, was restored by the vrine of a woman, which had neuer knowne man but her husband: which caused him to burne his owne wife, and many other, fayling in this new experiment, and to marry her whom at last he found by this proofe to be honest. He set vp in the Temple of the Sunne two Pillars, each  of one stone of 100. Cubits high, and eight broad. After succeeded Memphites, Rhasinitus, and Cheopes. This last shut vp all the Temples in Egypt and busied them in his owne workes, one hundred thousand by course ten yeeres together, in building a Pyramis for his Sepulchre. The least stone was thirty foot, and all grauen. Nilus passeth vnder it by a Trench. It was reckoned among the Wonders of the World. His daughter and brother made two other; odious therefore to the Egyptians who will not once name them. This was hollow, the other solid. They did it (sayth he) in hope of the Resurrection. For they would not interre their dead bodies, because of the Wormes; nor burne them, because they esteemed fire, a liuing creature, which feeding thereon, must together with it perish. They therefore with Nitre and Cedar, or with compositions of Myrrhe, Cassia, and other Odours thus preserue them.  Scaliger sayth,Sca. Ep. ad Putean. they set these bodies in their dining Roomes, that their Children and Nephewes might behold them whiles they were eating. Some also report,Gi. Bot. Ben. Porc. fun. an-. cap. 11. Theuet. Cosmog. de Leuant. That the poorer sort vsed hereunto the slimy Bitumen of the Dead Sea, which had preserued an infinite number of Carcasses in a dreadfull Caue (not farre from these Pyramides) yet to bee seene with their flesh and members whole, after so many thousand yeeres, and some with their haire and teeth: Of these is the true Mummia.
The Mores and Indians violate the Sepulchres: and either burne them, (as is reported they somtimes doe, in stead of fire-wood, which is scarce in those parts) or else sell them at Cairo, a body for a Dolor, the Citie being nigh twenty miles from thence. For these Mummes are neere the place where Memphis sometimes stood. In that place are some indifferent great, and  a number of little Pyramides with Tombes of seuerall fashions; many ruinated, and many violated: the ancient Egyptians coueting there to bee buried, as the place supposed to conteine
 the body of Osiris. Vnder euery one, or wheresoeuer lye stones not naturall to the place, by remouing the same, descents are discouered like the narrow mouthes of Wels, hauing holes in each side of the walls, to descend by (but with troublesome passage) some well-nigh ten fadome deepe, leading into long Vaults (belonging, it should seeme, to particular Families) hewen out of the Rock with pillars of the same. Betweene euery arch the corpses lye ranckt one by another, shrowded in a number of folds of linnen, swathled in bands of the same, the brests of some being stayned with hieroglyphicall Characters. Within their bellies are painted papers, and their gods inclosed in little models of stone or metall: some of the shape of menin coat-armours, with the heads of Sheepe, Hawkes, Dogs, etc. others of Cats, Beetles,  Monkies, and such like. They wrapt the dead bodies in manifold folds of linnen besmeared with gumme, and after other ceremonies laid the corps in a boat to be wafted ouer Acherusia, a Lake on the South side of the Citie by Charon (so they called the Ferry-man) and there the body was brought before certayne Iudges, who, if conuinced of euill life, depriued it of buriall; the most terrible of punishments to the Egyptians. About this Lake stood the Temple of Hecate, with the Ports of Cocitus and Lethe, or Obliuion: Styx and other Poeticall fables had hence their deriuation. But let vs returne to the Pyramides, and view them as they now stand, with Master Sandys his eyes: hauing first told a miracle, or imposture rather of the Moores with pieces of Mummes stucke in the sands, many thousands on Good Friday resorting to see the armes and legs of dead men appearing on the other side of Nilus, to the gayne  of the Ferry-men, for this cause perhaps, deluding the superstitious vulgar. Baumgarten mentions it in his time, and thought it an illusion of the Deuill: whether Hee, or His, wee will not now examine.
Full west from Cairo, close vpon the Libyan Desarts, hauing crossed Nilus, and a Playne twelue miles ouer, they came to the three Pyramides, the greatest of them is ascended by two hundred and fiftie fiue steps, each step aboue three feet high, of a breadth proportionable. No stone so little through the whole, as to bee drawne by our carriages, brought out of the Mountaynes of Arabia, with a double wonder of the conueyance and mounting. The North side is most worne by reason of the humiditie of the Northerne winde in these parts. From the top is discerned the Countrey, with her beloued Nile, the Mummes and many huge Pyramides  afarre off, each of which, were this away, might be reputed wonderfull. Descending on the East side, below from each corner equally distant, they approched the entrance, into which they went with a light in euery mans hand: a narrow and dreadfull passage, stooping or creeping, as downe the steepe of an hill an hundred foote, the descent still continuing, but few daring to venter further. (Plinie writes, that at the bottome is a spacious pit, eightie and sixe cubits deepe, filled at the ouerflow by concealed Conduits; others adde, that there is in the middest a little Iland, on that the Tombe of Cheops the Founder.) Master Sandys saith, That climbing ouer the mouth of this dungeon, they ascended by like vneasie passage about an hundred and twentie feete; and thence passing through a long irkesome entrie direct forward, they came to a little roome with a compast roofe of polished marble. From  hence they climbed an hundred and twentie feete higher, at the top entring a goodly roome twentie foote wide, and fortie foote long; the roofe of a maruailous height, the stones so great, that eight floores it, eight roofes it; eight flagge the ends, and sixteene the sides, all of well wrought Theban marble. At the vpper end is a Tombe of one stone, vncouered and emptie, brest high, seuen foote in length, and almost foure in breadth, sounding like a bell, more probably supposed the Builders sepulchre. If any desire a more exact suruey, let him resort to our Authour, and other eye and pen-witnesses. Not farre hence is that Sphynx, a huge Colosse, with the head of a Maide, and body of a Lion, supposed by Bellonius, to be the monument of some sepulchre, by Plinie, of Amasis. It yet continueth all of one stone, and is a huge face, looking toward Cairo. The compasse of the head, saith P. MartyrLeg. Bab. l. 3. an eye-witnesse, is  fiftie eight paces. PlinieLib. 36. c. 12. numbreth eight Pyramides, and saith, That the compasse of this Sphynx, about the head, was an hundred and two feete, the length an hundred and fortie three. Master Sandys affirmeth, that vnto the mouth it consists of the naturall Rocke, thus aduanced; the rest of huge flat stones laid thereon, wrought altogether into the forme of an Aethiopian woman (heretofore adored by the people) not so huge as before reported, the whole being but sixtie foote high: the face disfigured by Time, or the Moores supersticion, detesting Images. Plinie writes, That three hundred and sixtie thousand men were twentie yeeres in making one of the Pyramides; and three were made in seuentie eight yeeres and foure moneths. The greatest (saith he) couereth eight Acres of ground; and Bellonius affirmeth, That the Pyramides rather exceed, then fall short of the reports of the Ancient; and  that a strong and cunning Archer on the top, is not able to shoot beyond the fabrick of one; which Villamont, being there, caused to bee tried and found true. William Lithgow writeth, that the height of one is 1092. foote,Plinie saith 883. f. and the second 737. the third 3^3. as their Dragoman told him: the top thereof is all
 oneSandys hath three stones. stone, which he measured seuenteene foote in euery square, yet on the ground seemed as sharpe as a pointed Diamond. The other are lower, and want steps to ascend on them. They are of marble. But I would be loth to burie the Reader in these sumptuous monuments, the witnesses of vanitie and ostentation; of which, besides the Ancient, Martyr, Bellonius, Euesham, Villamont, and other eye-witnesses haue largely written.
Mycerinus is reckoned the next King, better beloued of his subiects, whose daughter was buried in a woodden BullPorcharch in his ^unerali Antichi ^an. 12. ^^th set forth this in picture. Hont. ^os. lib. 3. Reg 23.29. in the Citie Sai; to which euery day were odors offered, and a light set by night. This Oxe once a yeere was brought out to the people. Next to him was Asychis, who made a Pyramis of bricks; and these bricks were made of earth, that claue to the end of a pole for this purpose, in a vaine curiositie thrust into a Lake. Yet were  all these wonders exceeded by the Labyrinth, the worke (say some) of Psammetichus, or (after Herodotus) of the twelue Peeres which raigned in common as Kings; partly aboue ground, partly beneath, in both contayning 3500. roomes. Herodotus saith, he saw the vpper roomes, the lower he might not, as being the sepulchres of the Founders, and of the sacred Crocodiles: all was of stone, and grauen. The cause of making this Labyrinth is diuersly deliuered; by Demoteles, the Palace of Mothetudes; by Lysias, the sepulchre of Meris; the most probable opinion, that it was consecrated to the Sunne: the paterne to Dedalus, for that in Crete, representing but the hundreth part of this. The entrance was of Parian marble pillars.Plin. l. 36. c. 13. The worke was diuided into RegionsThere were in Egypt 73. Nomi, 10. in Thebais, 10. in Delta, and 17. in the middle Region. and perfectures, sixteene vast houses being  attributed to sixteene of them. There were also Temples for all the Aegyptian gods; and Nemeses aboue in fifteene Chappels: many Pyramides also, each of fortie elles, and founded on sixe walls. After a wearie iourney they come to those inexplicable wayes (the Labyrinth of this Labyrinth) hauing before ascended high Halls and Galleries, each of ninetie steps, inly adorned with pillars of Porphyrie, Images of their Gods, statues of Kings, and monstrous shapes. Some of the houses were so seated, that the opening of the doores caused a terrible thunder: As terrible was the darke wayes: and most of all, without a guide, the inextricable windings, infolded walls, and manifold deceiuing doores, making by many passages, none at all. No cement or morter was vsed in all this huge worke.
The Lake of Maeris was not lesse wonderfull, compassing three thousand sixe hundred furlongs, and fiftie fadome in depth, made by Meris whose name it beareth: in the middest  were two Pyramides fiftie fadome aboue, and as much beneath water, one for himselfe, the other for his wife. The water flowes sixe moneths out, and sixe moneths in, from Nilus. The fish were worth to the Kings coffers twentie of their pounds a day, the first sixe; and a talent a day, the last sixe moneths. Of Necus, whom the Scripture calls Pharaoh Necho, and of his victorie against the Syrians in Magdolo, or Magiddo, where he slue King Iosiah, Herodotus witnesseth. Hee also makes this Necus authour of that Trench; from Nilus to the Red Sea (which Strabo ascribes to Sesostris. PliniePlin. l. 6. c. 29. makes Sesostris first Authour, seconded by Darius, who in this businesse was followed by Ptolemaeus) one hundred foot broad, seuen and thirtie miles long; but forced to leaue the enterprise, for feare of the Red Sea ouer-flowing Egypt, or mixing his water with Nilus.
Tremellius thinkes it to be the labour of the Israelites, in that seruitude from which Moses  freed them. He consumed in this worke 120000. Egyptians. After him reigned Sammi, and then Apries. About these timesAnton. Galua. Nabuchodonosor conquered the Egyptians according to Ezechiels prophecie, Ezech. 30. But they had also ciuill warres. AmasisPhilostrat. de vita Apollon. l. 5. cap. 15. saith that Apollonius, seeing a Lion (which one had tamed) offer to fawne on him, withall, vttering certaine murmurings, interpreted that speech of the Lion to the people, saying, that hee sometime had been Amasis the Egyptian King: whereupon he was sent with pompous procession of the Priests, to Leontopolis, and there placed in the Temple. depriued Apries, who, being of a base birth, of a great bason of gold in which himselfe and his guests had vsed to wash their feete, made an Image and placed it in the most conuenient part of the Citie, and obseruing their superstitious deuotion thereunto, said that they ought now no lesse to respect him, notwithstanding his former base birth and offices. When hee was a priuate man, to maintayne his prodigall expenses, he vsed to steale from others: and when they redemanded their owne, he committed himselfe to the censure of their Oracles. Such Oracles as neglected his thefts, hee being a King, did neglect. Hee brought from the Citie Elephantina twentie  dayes sayling, a building of solid stone, the roofe being of one stone, one and twentie cubits long, fourteene broad, and eight thicke, and brought it to the Temple at Sai. Hee ordayned, that euery one should yeerly giue account to the Magistrate, how hee liued, and maintayned himselfe. And he which brought a false account, or liued by vniust meanes, was put to death. Hee was buried, as was supposed, in that Sphynx abouesaid. Psammenitus his sonne succeeded, whom Cambyses depriued.




CHAP. III. Of the Aegyptian Idols, with their Legendarie Histories, and Mysteries.

@. I. Of Osiris and Isis, their Legends of the Creation, etc.
 IF we stay longer on this Aegyptian Stage, partly the varietie of Authors may excuse vs which haue entreated of this Subiect, partly the varietie of matter, which adding some light to the Diuine Oracles, (not that they need it, which are in themselues a Light2. Pet 1.1^. shining in a darke place; but because of our need, whose Owlish-eyes cannot so easily discerne that light) deserue a larger relation. For whether the Histories of the old Testament, or the Prophecies of the New, be considered, both there literally wee reade of Aegyptian Rites practised, and here mystically of like Superstitions in the Antichristian Synagogue reuiued, thereforeApoc. 11.8. spiritually called Sodome and Aegypt. No where can Antiquitie plead a longer succession of errour;  no where of Superstition more multiplicitie; more blind zeale, in prosecuting the same themselues; or crueltie in persecuting others that gaine-said. Oh Aegypt! wonderfull in Nature, whose Heauen is brasse, and yet thine Earth not Yron; wonderfull for Antiquitie, Artes and Armes; but no way so wonderfull, as in thy Religions, wherewith thou hast disturbed the rest of the World, both elder and later, Heathen and Christian, to which thou hast beene a sinke and Mother of Abhominations. Thy Heathenisme planted by Cham, watered by Iannes, Iambres, Hermes, ouerflowed to Athens and Rome: Thy Christianisme was famous for many ancient Fathers; more infamous for that Arrian heresie, which rising heere, eclipsed the Christian Light; the World wondring and groaning to see it selfe an Arrian. I speake not of the first Monkes, whose Egge, here laide, was faire, and beginnings holy: but (by the Diuels  brooding) brought forth in after-ages a dangerous Serpent: Thy Mahumetisme entertained with like lightnesse of credulitie, with like eagernesse of deuotion, hath beene no lesse troublesome to the Arabian Sect in Asia and Afrike, then before to the Heathens or Christians in Europe. The first Author (it seemeth) of this Egyptian, as of all other false Religions, was Cham (as before is said) which had taken deepe rooting in the dayes of Ioseph the Patriarch, and in the dayes of Moses; their Priests,Genes. 41.8. Exod. 1.7. Wisemen and Southsayers, confirming their deuotions with lying Miracles, as the Scriptures testifie of Iannes and Iambres; andHer. Asclep. Hermes Trismegistus, of his Grandfather and himselfe. The Grecians ascribe these deuotions to Osiris and Isis: of whom the Historie and Mysterie is so confused; that Typhon neuer hewed Osiris into so many pieces, as these vaine Theologians and Mythologians haue done. They are forsooth  in the Egyptian throne, King and Q^eene: in the Heauens, the Sunne and Moone: beneath these, the Elements; after Herodotus, they are Bacchus and Ceres: Diodorus maketh Osiris the same with the Sunne, Serapis, Dionysius, Pluto, Ammon, Iupiter, Isis, the Moone, Ceres and Iuno, Appollodorus makes her Ceres: and Io. Antonius, and Cleopatra stiled and figured themselues, the one Osiris, and the other Isis. In Macrobius, and Seruius, she is the nature of things;Adol. Occo. Numis. He, Adonis, and Atis: Plutarch addeth to these Interpretations Oceanus and Sirius, as to Isis, Minerua, Proserpina, Thetis. And if you haue not enough, Apuleius will helpe you, with Venus, Diana, Bellona, Hecate, Rhamnusia: and Heliodorus neerer home, maketh Osiris to be Nilus, the Earth Isis. So true it is that1. Cor. 8.4. Io. 4.12. Georg. Stamp. Tab. Cosmogr. An Idoll is nothing in the world, and Idolaters worship they know not what. Stampellus interpreteth Osiris to be Abraham, and Isis to bee  Sazeb, whom Moses calleth also Ischa. Orus Apollo, or Horapollo saith, Isis is the Starre called of the Egyptians Sothis, which is the Dog-starre, therefore called Isis, because at the first rising of that Starre, they prognosticated what should happen the yeere following. The like was in vse amongst the Cilicians, who obserued the first rising of that starre from the top of Taurus, and thence saith Manilius,
Euentus frugum varios and tempora dicunt,Quaque valitudo veniat, concordia quanta, etc.Thence they foretell what store of fruits or want,What times, what health, what concord, they descant.
Tully in the first Booke of his Diuination, reciteth the same out of Heraclides, Ponticus of  the Cei. But the Egyptians had more cause to obserue that Starre, because Nilus doth then begin to encrease. And therefore from thence they began to reckon their Tekuphas or quarters of their yeere, as the Iewes from Nisan.

But to search this Fountaine further, you may read the Egyptian opinion in Diodorus,D^od. Sic l. 1. how that the World, being framed out of that Chaos, or first matter, the lighter things ascending, the heauier descending, the Earth yet imperfect, was heated and hardened by the Sunne; whose violent heat begate of her slimie softnesse certaine putride swellings, couered with a thinne filme, which being by the same heat ripened, brought forth all manner of creatures. This muddie generation was (say they) first in Egypt most fit (in respect of the strong soyle, temperate ayre, Nilus ouerflowing, and exposed to the Sunne) to beget and nourish  them; and still retayning some such vertue at the new slaking of the Riuer, the Sunne then more desirous (as it were) of this Egyptian Concubine, whom the waters had so long detained from his sight, ingendring in that lustfull fit many Creatures, as Mice and others, whose fore-parts are seene mouing before the hinder are formed. These new-hatched people could not but ascribe Diuinitie to the Author of their Humanitie, by the names of Osiris and Isis, worshipping the Sunne and Moone, accounting them to be gods, and euerlasting: adding in the same Catalogue, vnder disguised names of Iupiter, Vulcan, Minerua, Oceanus, and Ceres, the fiue Elements of the World, Spirit, Fire, Ayre, Water, and Earth. These Eternall Gods begot others, whom not Nature, but their owne proper Merit made immortall, which reigned in Egypt, and bare the names of those coelestiall Deities. Their Legend ofSome thinke that this Osiris w^s Miz aim the sonne of Cham. Morn. See this Legend at large in Cael. Calcag. derch. Egypt. Osiris, is, that he hauing set Egypt in order, leauing Isis his wife Gouernour, appointing Mercurie her Counsellour (the inuenter of Arithmeticke, Musicke, Physicke, and of their superstition)  made an Expedition into farre Countries, hauing Hercules for his Generall, with Apollo his brother, Anubis and Macedon his sonnes, (whose Ensignes were a Dog and a Wolfe, creatures after for this cause honoured, and their counterfeits worshipped) Pan,Polyaen. Stratag. l. 1. makes Pan to be Bacchus his Generall in his Indian Expedition Maron, and Triptolemus, and the nine Muses attending with the Satyres. Thus did hee inuade the world, rather with Arts, then Armes; teaching men Husbandry in many parts of Asia and Europe, and where Vines would not grow, to make drinke of Barley. At his returne his brother Typhon slew him, rewarded with like death by the reuenging hand of Isis and her sonne Orus. The dispersed pieces, into which Typhon had cut him, shee gathered and committed to the Priests, with injunction to worship him, with dedication vnto him of what beast they best liked, which also should be obserued with much ceremonie, both aliue and dead, in memorie  of Osiris. In which respect alsoLactan. lib. 1. they obserued solemnely to make a lamentable search for Osiris with many teares, making semblance of like ioy at his pretended finding, whereof Lucan singeth, Nunquamque satis quaesitus Osiris; alway seeking (saith Lanctantius) and alway finding. To establish this Osirian Religion, she consecrated a third part of the Land in Egypt for maintenance of these superstitious rites and persons: the other two parts appropriated to the King, and his Souldiers. This Isis, after her death, was also deified in a higher degree of adoration then Osiris selfe. One thing is lacking to our tale, which was also lacking a long time to Isis in her search. For when shee had with the helpe of waxe made vp of sixe and twentie parts, which she found, so many Images of Osiris, all buried in seuerall places: his priuities, which Typhon had drowned in Nilus, were not without much labor found, and with more solemnitie interred. And that the Deuill might shew how farre hee can besot men, the  ImageArnob. contra Gent. l. 5. aliam resert causam obscoenissimam Natalis Com. l. 5. cap. 3. aliam. hereof was made and worshipped; the light of this darkenesse shining as farre as Greece, whose Phallus, Phallogogia, Ithiphalli, Phallophoria, and Phallaphori issued out of this sincke, together with their Membrous monster Pri^pus. Yea, the Egyptians hauing lost their owne eyes in this filthy superstition, bestowed them on the Image of Osiris his stones, which they pourtrayed with an eye.
AthenaeusAthen. l. 5. c. 5. telleth of Ptol. Philadelphus in a solemnitie, wherein hee listed to shew to the world his madnesse; or (as it was then esteemed) his magnificence (a place worth the reading to them, who are not heere glutted with out tedious Egyptian Banquet) He among many sumptuous spectacles presented aPhallus is the Image of a mans yard. Phallus of gold, painted, with golden crownes, of an hundred and twentie cubits length, hauing a golden starre on the toppe, whose circumference  was sixe cubites. This was carried in a Chariot, as in others the Image of Priapus, and other Idols. Of Typhon the PoetsApollod. de Origen. deor l. 1. Nat. Com. etc. fable, that after the Gods, by the helpe of mortall men, had slaine the Giants, the Earth in indignation for rhe losse of that her Giantly brood, lying with Tartarus, brought forth Typhon, which exceeded all the former: for his height surmounted the Mountaines, his head reached to the Starres, one of his hands to the West, the other to the East, from which proceeded an hundred heads to Dragons: his legges were entwined with rolles of Vipers, which reached to his head, filling the world with terrible hissings: his body couered with feathers, his eyes flaming with fire, a flame streaming also out of his mouth. Thus was hee armed, and fought against Heauen, and made the Gods runne away into Egypt, and turne themselues into many formes: with many tales more which I surcease  to rehearse.
Of the Isiacall rites,Laur. Pig. Mens. Isiac. exposit. that brazen Table (supposed to haue beene some Altar-couer) after
 possessed by Card. Bembus, full of mysticall Characters, explained by Laurentius Pignorius in a Treatise of this Argument, may further acquaint the desirous Reader. Diodorus thinketh this the cause why they consecrated Goats, and erected Images of Satyres in their Temples* affirming that their Priests are first initiated in these bawdie Rites.


@. II. The causes of Consecrating their Beasts, and the mysticall sences  of their Superstitions.
THeir canonized Beasts, of which the Aegyptians and Syrians, (saithDe Nat. Dectum. lib. 1. Tully) conceiued stronger opinions of Deuotion, then the Romans of their most sacred Temples, werePhilo. Iud. da decim. praec. Ios. cont App: Dies Canic. p. 2. Colleq. 1. Dogges, Cats, Wolues, Crocodiles, Ichnumods, Rammes, Goates, Bulls, and Lions, in honour of Isis: their sacred Birds were the Hawke, Ibis, Phan^^opterus: besides Dragons, Aspes, Beetles, amongst things creeping: and of Fishes, whatsoeuer had scales; and the Eele. Yea their reason did not onely to sensible things ascribe Diuinitie, but Garlike and Onions were free of their Temples, devided therefore byInuenal. Sat. 15. Tarneb. ad. 18. 12. addeth garlike, as worshipped and sworn^ by Ia^end,
Porrum and coepe nofas violare and f^angere morsi^: O sanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hortisNumina.
For this cause someTrem. and (...), in Genes. 43. Exod. 8. thinke the Hebrewes were in such abhomination to the Aegyptians, that they would not eate with them, as eating and sacrificing those things, which the other worshipped. Example whereof Deodorus, an eye-witnesse telleth, That when Ptolemey gaue entertainment to the Romans, whose friend hee was declared* a Roman, at vnawares hauing killed a Cat, could not by the Kings authoritie, sending Officers for his rescue, nor for feare of the Romans, bee detayined from their butcherly furie. For such was their custome for the murther of those sacred Creatures, to put to death by exquisite torments him that had done it wittingly, and for the Bird Ibis and a Cat, although vnwittingly slaine. And therefore  if any espie any of them lying dead, hee standeth aloofe, lamenting and protesting his owne innocencie. The cause of this blinde zeale, was the metamorphosis of their distressed Gods into these shapes; Secondly, their ancient En^^gnes; Thirdly, theTusc. Qu. l. 5. profit of them in common life. OrigenOrig. contra Celsum, lib. 4. Hier. Roman. d^ la rep. Gent. l. 1^ addeth a fourth, because they were vsed to diuination, and therefore (saith hee) forbidden to the Israelites as vncleane. Eusebius out of the Poet citeth a fifth cause, namely, the Diuine Nature diffused into all Creatures, after that of the Poet:
Deum namque ire per omnesTerrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum.God goes thorow Sea and Land, and loftie Skies.
I might adde a sixth, that (...) or transanimation,That the same soule should one while quicken a man another while a fish, or beast, or bird, passing from one to another which Pythagoras (it seemeth)  borrowed hence and from India. Yea, Aeneas GazeusIn Bib. Pat. tom. 8. a Platonike, in his Theophrastus or Dialogue of the Soules immortalitie, affirmeth, That Plato learned this opinion of the Egyptians, and dispersed it through all his Bookes; as did Plotinus and other his followers after him, numbring amongst the rest Porphyriu^, and Iamblichus.
If I might, with the Readers patience, I would adde somewhat of their Mysterie of iniquitie, and this mysticall sense of this iniquitie. For as many haue sweat in vnfolding the mysterie^ of that Church, which spiritually is called Sodome and Aegypt, as Ambrosius de Armari^l^, Amalarius, Durandus, Durantus, and others: so heere haue not wanted mysticall Interpreters, Porphirius, Iambliochus, Plutarch, and the rest. Such is the deepenesse of Sathan in the shallownesse of humane, both reason and truth. Water and Fire they vsed in all their Sacrifices,  and doe them deuoutest worship (saithApud Euseb. de Praep. l. 3. c. 2, Porphiry) because those Elements are so profitable to mans vse: and for this vse sake they adored so many Creatures: at Anubis they worshipped a Man. But especially they held in veneration those creatures which seemed to hold some affinitie with the Sunne. Euen that stinking Beetele or Scarabee did these (more blinde then Beetles) in their stinking superstitions obserue, as a liuing Image of the Sunne; because, forsooth, all Scarabees are of Male sexe (and therefore also saithAe^^^n. de Animal. l. 10. c. 15 Aelian, Souldiers wore the figure of the Scarabee in their Rings, as thereby insinuating their masculine spirits) and hauing shed their seed in the dung, doe make a ball thereof, which they rowle too and fro with their feete, imitating the Sunne in his circular journey. Iulius FirmicusIul. Firm. de myst. profan. c. 1. inueigheth against them for their worship, and supplications, and superstitious vowes made to  the Water: and for that their fabulous Legend of Osiris, Isis, and Typhon, vnfolding the Historie and Mysterie. Eusebius followeth this Argument in the seuerall Beasts which they worship; but to auoyd tediousnesse, I leaue him, to looke on Plutarchs paines in this Argument.
 HeeDe Os. and Is. maketh Isis to bee deriued of the Verbe (...) to know, as being the Goddesse of Wisedome and Knowledge: to whom Typhon for his ignorance is an enemie. For without Knowledge, Immortalitie it selfe could not deserue the name of Life, but of Time.
Their Priests shaued their owne haire, and wore not woollen but linnen garments, because of their professed puritie, to which the haire of Man or Beast being but an excrement, disagreed: and for this cause they reiected Beeues, Mutton and Porke, as meates which cause much excrements. Yea their Apis might not drinke of Nilus, for this Riuers fatning qualitie, but of a Fountaine peculiar to his holinesse. At Heliopolis they might not bring wine into the Temple, holding it vnseemely to drinke in the presence of their Lord. They had  many purifications wherein Wine was forbidden. Their Kings, which were also Priests, had their sacred stints of wine; and did not drinke it at all before Psammoticus time, esteeming Wine to be the Bloud of them which sometime warred against the gods, out of whose slaine carkasses Vines proceeded, and hence proceedeth drunkennesse, and madnesse by wine. Their Priests abstaine from all fish: they eate not Onions, because they grow most in the wane of the Moone, they procure also teares and thirst. Their Kings were chosen either of the Priests, or of the Souldiers; and these also after their election, were presently chosen into the Colledge of Priests. Osiris signifieth many ey^^, in the Egyptian language. Os, is much and Eri, an eye. The Image of Minerua at Sai had this inscription, I am all, which is, which hath beene, which shall be, whose shining light no mortall man hath opened. Ammon(...). Opifex intellectus quiveritatis est dominus and sapientiae, quatenus in generationem progrediens occultam latentium rationem producit in lucem, Amum Egyptiaca lingua vocant: quatenus autem sine mendacio peragit omnia Phtha nuncupatur; quatenus effector bonorum Osiris; aliasque denominationes habet propter potentias, actionesque differentes: Tumblichus de Mysteriis. they call Am (the  same, as is before said, with Ham or Cham, the sonne of Noah) in the vocatiue case, as inuocating him, whom they hold the chiefe God of the World, to manifest himselfe. They esteemed children to haue a diuining facultie, and obserued the voyces of children playing in the Temples, and speaking at aduenture, as Oracles, because Isis seeking after Osiris, had enquired of children. They interpret Astronomically the Dog-starre to belong to Isis; the Beare, to Typhon; Orion, to Horus.
The Inhabitants of Thebais acknowledged nothing for God which was mortall; but worshipped Gneph, which they said, had neither beginning nor ending. So many are the interpretations in their mysticall Theologie, that Truth must needes bee absent, which is but One: and these may rather seeme subtile fetches of their Priests, to gull the people, then the  true intents of their first authors of Idolatrie. Because Typhon was of red colour, they consecrated red Bulls, in which yet there might not be one haire blacke or white. They esteemed it not a sacrifice acceptable to the gods, but contrarie, as which had receiued the soules of wicked men: and therefore they cursed the head of the sacrifice, which they hurled into the Riuer: and since haue vsed to sell to strangers. The Deuill happily would teach them an apish imitation of that sacrifice of the red Cow, Num. 19. The Priests abhorre the Sea, as wherein Nilus dyeth; and salt is forbidden them, which they call Typhons spittle. In Sai, in the Porch of Mineruaes Temple, was pictured an Infant, an old Man, a Hawke, a Fish, and a Seahorse. The mysterie was, O yee that are borne, and dye, God hateth shamelesse persons. The Hawke signified God; the Fish, Hatred; the Sea-horse, Impudencie.
By their Osiris and Typhon, they signified the good and euill, whereof wee haue not onely  vicissitudes, but mixtures, in all these earthly things. And heere Plutarch is large in shewing the opinion of these wise-men, which when they saw so much euill, and knew withall that good could not bee the cause of euill, they imagined two beginnings, one whereof they called God, the other Diuell: the good, Orimazes; the bad, Arimanius. This opinion is fathered on Zoroastres. Betwixt those two was Mithres, whom the Persians called a Mediator. So the Chadaeans had among the Planets, two good, two bad, three of middle disposition. The Grecians their Iupiter and Dis, and Harmonia begotten of Venus and Mercurie. Empedocles called the one Friendship, the other Discord: the PythagoreansVid. Soc. l. 1. cap. 17. call the Good, One, bounded, abiding, right, square, etc. The other, Duplicitie, infinite, moued, crooked, long, etc.  Anaxagoras, the Minde and Infinitenesse; Aristotle, Forme and Priuation. Plato, the Same, and Another. Hence appeareth how true it is, that1 Cor. 2.14. the Naturall men perceiue not the things of God, nor can know them: and hence grew the Manichaean Heresie.
AllNat. Com. l. 6. and 8. the deformitie and defect of things, Plutarch ascribeth to Typhon (whom they also called Seth, Bebon, and Smy, saith Pignorius) that which is good, to Osiris, andThe hornes of Isi* (for so they picture her) are by Suida^ ascribed to that fable of Io, which some say is Isis. Isis, to this the matter, to him the forme. In the Towne of Idithya they burned liuing Men, whom they called Typhonians, scattering their ashes, and bringing them to nothing. This was openly done in Dog-dayes. But when they sacrificed any of their sacred Beasts, it was done closely and at vncertaine times. According to which custome, Achilles StatiusAchil. Stat. lib. 3. frameth his Historie of Leucippe, sacrificed by Aegyptian Robbers and Pirats, for expiation of their villanies,  and protection against their enemies: the Rites whereof were, after some Hymnes sung by the Priest, to kill and rippe her, and hauing viewed and tasted the liuer, to burie her.

He that would furthor be acquainted with these Mysteries, let him resort to Eusebius* and Plutarch. Iamblichus hath written a large Treatise, De Mysterijs, where the more curious Reader may further satisfie himselfe. He mustereth in their rankes and order, first the Gods, then Arch-angels, next Angels, then Daemones, after them Heroes, Principalities and Soules in their subordinate Orders. MarciliusMarsit Fic. in Iamb. translated ac^ording to Proclus. Ficinus doth thus dispose his Egyptian Mysteries, or Mysticall opinions of God. The first in order is, Vnum Super Eus. The second, Vnum Ens, or V^itas Entis. The third, Intellectus Intelligibilis, Prima Icthon. The fourth, Emoph, the Captayne of the heauenly Deities. The fift, Captayne of the workmen of the World, the vnderstanding of the soule of the World, called Amun, Phtha, Vulcan, Osiris. But these wayes  are too rough, cragged and thornie for a dainty Traueller: they that will, I may reade Iamblichus, Proclus, Porphyrius, translated by Marsilius Eicinus. Caelius CalcagniniaDereb Egypt. hath also written a large Treatise of these Egyptian Mysteries. Much may the Reader gather also out of Doctor Rainolds his learned Treatise, De Romanae Ecclesiae Idolatria.Rain. l. 2. c. 3.


@. II.  Of HERMES TRISMEGISTVS.
MErcurius Trismegistus (so called,Gen. Dier lib. 2. cap. 8. because hee was thrice greatest King, Priest, and Philosopher) was (saithLact ^ib. 1. c. 6. Lactantius) called Thoth or Thoyth, of whom they named their first moneth, acknowledging to haue receiued their Lawes and Letters from him. He built the Citie Hermopolis, and of the Saits was honored for a God. Of him also Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 8. cap. 26. illustrated by the Annotations of Viues, will further acquaint you. GoropiusHermanthenae. lib 6. Hieroglyph l. 1. Gallica. lib. 4. from a speech of Iamblichus, That all sacred Writings were ascribed to Mercury Trismegistus, coniectureth after his farre fetched fashion, that Trismegistus signifieth God in Trinity and Vnity (which hee gathereth also out of the  word Got, or God) and that no mortall man was intended by Mercury, but God himselfe; called Thoyt, or Theut, as the head of all things, and that the eternall Wisdome of God first taught men LettersHe saith, ^he Hebrewes borrowed their Letters from the Cimmerians and findeth grea^ mysteries in the names of the Letters.. That the Egyptians were subdued by the Cymmerians, who came thither out of Phrygia, and changed their Religion, leauing them both their Hieroglyphicall Characters (wherein also were included Mysteries of holy things) and their Language, both which the Priests obserued in their Lyturgies and Deuotions. Diuine things were not meet to be ascribed to men, and therfore all the Books of their Diuinity were ascribed to Mercury, whose Image was a head ending in a square Statue, a resemblance of that Diuine Wisdome and constancie. They vse to set vp these Images in the high-wayes, therein engrauing some good morall admonitions, for which cause they were called Mercuries and Hermes, as his Dutch  Etymologies declare, Herman signifying nothing but a publike admonishing, and Merkman, that which men ought to marke, and most diligently to attend. The like hee doth in the names of Harpocrates, and other their Deities, some of them through ignorance from Hieroglyp^ikes (as the Emblemes of George, Christopher,Hier. l. 8. He sayth Christopher was first so painted of some Egyptian or Hieroglypher. See Rainold. ^e Id. K. E. and Seror. Litan. and Margaret, amongst the Romists) becomming Gods. Whether these things be true, or doctae nugae, for which Scaliger censureth Goropius, I list not to determine, nor to fill these pages with store of matter of this nature from him, with whom the desirous Reader may himselfe find entertainment: where hee will shew the Mysteries of their Pyramides to signifie the fieri^ soule of the World, and Obeliskes, the Sunne, and other things more then euer the Egyptians themselues conceiued. For how could they without helpe of Goropius his Dutch?
Fran. Patricij Zo^oaster.Franciscus Patricius (as he hath taken great paines, out of Psellus, Ioannes Pieus, and others, for the opening of the Assyrian and Chaldaean opinions, and hath collected three hundred and twenty Oracles, and sacred Sentences of Zoroaster, so hee) hath with no lesse industry published twenty Bookes ofF. P. Her. Trismegist. Gr^colat. Hermes or Mercury Trismegistus. He affirmeth, that there were two of that name, the one Grandfather to the other: the elder of which was counseller and instructer of Isis, and the Scholler of Noah. Hee had a Son named Tat, which begate the second Hermes, which Hermes had a Son also called Tat, by which likenesse in name great confusion and vnlikelihoods haue happened in History, This second Hermes (hee supposeth) liued in the dayes of Moses, but was somewhat more ancient. Both the elder and younger were Writers, as he sheweth out of their Workes: and called Trismegisti, not for that hee  was greatest King, Priest, and Philosopher as Ficinus sayth, nor for their cleere Sentences touching the Holy Trinity, but (as the French vse the word thrice, for the Superlatiue) as men thrice or most excellent in Learning. The same Patricius hath set forth three Treatises
 of Asclopius: of which name were three learned Egyptians, Asclepius Vulcani, Inuenter of Phyuoke, Asclepius Imuthes, Inuenter of Poetry, and another which had no sirname; to which Hermes dedicated some of his Bookes; and the same AsclepiusAscle^ius de sole and daemonib. lib. 1. in the beginning of his ^^st Booke calleth himselfe the Scholler of Hermes. In the Writings of these Egyptians, translated into Greeke, and explaned by the Egyptian Priests, the Greeke Philosophers, especially Platonikes and Pythagoreans, learned their Diuine, Morall, and Naturall Philosophy. Antiquity and Learning hold vs longer in these mens company; the more curious may haue recourse to their owne works. For my owne opinion, I cannot beleeue so ancient Monuments of Ethnike Authors to remayne: but, as in the Sybills, Berosus, Henoch, and many other old Authours lost, some new obtruded on the World in their Names. Yet I leaue to each  man his owne censure.
Twenty thousand Bookes are ascribed to Hermes: some say thirtie sixe thousand fiue hundred twenty fiue. He in his AsclepiusAsc^ep. c. 9. translated by Apulcius, thus writeth. Egypt is the Image of Heauen, and the Temple of the whole World. But the time shall come when the Egyptian deuotion shall proue vaine, and their pietie frustrate: for the Diuinitie shall returne to Heauen, and Egypt shall be forsaken of her gods. And no maruell, seeing that these Gods were Idols, the workes of mens hands, as himselfeCap 13. after sheweth: and when as they could not make soules, they called,Origen. cont. Celsum, lib. 4. sayth, That among other spels they vsed to adiure Deuils in the name of the God of Israel, God of the Hebrewes, God that drowned the Egyptians in the Red Sea. or coniured into them the soules of Deuils or Angels, by which the Images might haue power to doe good or euill. For thy Grandfather, O Asclepius (sayth he) was the first Inuenter of Physicke, to whom is a Temple consecrated in a  Mountayne of Libya, where his worldly man (his body) resteth: for the rest, or rather his whole selfe is gone to Heauen, and doth now heale men by his Deity, at then by his Physicke. The same dothThis might be that Mercury, of whom Tully sayth, Quem Egyptij nesas putant nominare. De N. D. lib. 3. Mercury my Grandfather, preseruing all such as resort to him. Much may the willing Reader learne further of their Superstitions, which hee thus freely confesseth in that Author, whose Prophesie, God bee thanked, by the bright and powerfull Sun-shine of the Gospell, was long since effected.



CHAP. IIII. Of the Rites, Priests, Sects, Sacrifices, Feasts, Inuentions; and other Obseruations of the Aegyptians.

@. I. Of their Apis and other Beasts, Serpents, and other Creatures worshipped.  
THus farre haue we launched out of their History, into their Mysteries. To returne to the Relation of their Beasts and Bestiall Superstitions. LucianLucian. de Astrologia. saith, That Apu represented the Celestiall Bull; and other Beasts which they worshipped, other signes in the Zodiake. They that respected the Constellation of Pisces, did eat no fish; nor a Goat, if they regarded Capricorne. Aries a heauenly Constellation, was their heauenly deuotion: and not here alone, but at the Oracle of Iupiter Amm^n.Strabo l 17. Strabo sayth, That they nourished many Creatures, which they accounted sacred, but not Gods. This nourishment, afterDiod. Sic. l. 1. Diodorus, was in this sort. First they consecrated  vnto their maintenance sufficient Lands. Such Votaries also as had recouered their children from some dangerous sicknesse, accustomed to shaue their haire, and putting it in gold or siluer, offered it to their Priests. The Hawkes they fed with gobbets of flesh, and with Birds catched for them. The Cats and Ichneumons, with bread, and milke, and fish: and likewise the rest.
When they goe their Processions, with these hearts displayed in their Banners, euery one falleth downe and doth worship. When any of them dyeth, it is wrapped in fine Linnen, salted and embalmed with Cedar and sweet Oyntments, and buried in a holy place, the reasonlesse men howling and knocking their brests, in the exequies of these vnreasonable beasts. Yea, when famine hath driuen them to eate mans flesh, the zeale of deuotion hath preserued  vntouched these sacred creatures. And if a Dogge dye in a house, all in that houshold shaue themselues, and make great lamentation. If Wine, Wheate or other food to be found, where
 such a Beast lyeth dead, Superstition forbiddeth further vse of it. Principall men, with principall meates, are appointed to nourish them in the circuit of their Temples.
They bathe and anoint them with odoriferous Oyntments. And they prouide to euery one of them a Female of his owne kinde. Their dead they bewayle no lesse, then their owne children: In their Funerals they are exceeding prodigall. In the time of Ptolemeus Lagi, their Apis or Bull of Memphis being dead, the Keeper bestowed on his Funerall, ouer and aboue the ordinary allowance and offerings, fiftie Talents of siluer borrowed of Ptolemey, that is, twelue thousand and fiue hundred pound of our money after the Egyptian Talent, or after the Alexandrian, eighteene thousand seuen hundred and fifty pound. And in our Age, sayth  Diodorus, an eye-witnesse of these his Relations, some of these Nourishers haue bestowed an hundred Talents on this last expence, which is twice as much as the former. After the death of this Bull; which they call Apis, was made a solemne and publike lamentation, which they testified by shauing their heads, although their purple lockes might compare with those of Nisus, saythLuc. de Sacra. Lucian: and after his buriallSolin. Am. Marc. were an hundred Priests employed, in search of another like the former; which being found, was brought to the City Nilus, and there nourished forty dayes. Then they conueyed him into a close ship, hauing a golden habitacle, in which they carried him to Memphis, and there placed him in the Temple of Vulcan for a God. At his first commingEuseb. praepar. Euang. l. 2. c. 1. only women were permitted to see him, who I know not in what hellish Mystery, lifting vp their garments, shewed him Natures secrets, and from  thence forth might neuer be admitted the sight of him. At his first finding, the people cease their funerall lamentations. At his solemne receiuing into Memphis, they obserue a seuen-dayes festiuall, with great concourse of people. His consecration was done by one wearing a Diadem on his head. They made the people beleeue he was conceiued of Lightning. HeStrabo l. 17. Vid. Naz. Orat. 24. and ad cum Eliam Cret. had a Chappell assigned to him, and called by his name. Hee was kept in a place enclosed, before which was a Hall; and in that another enclosed Roome, for the Dame or Mother of Apis. Into this Hall they brought him, when they would present him to strangers. Psammetichus was the founder of this building, borne vp with Collosses, or huge statues of twelue Cubits, in stead of Pillars, and grauen full of figures. Once a yeereSolinus. Plutarch. he had sight of a Female, chosen by especiall markes, and slaine the same day. On a set day, which he might not out-liue, according  to their rituall Bookes, they drowned him in the bottome of a sacred Fountayne: and then buried him as aforesaid, with much mourning. After this solemnity it was lawfull for them to enter into the Temple of Serapis. Darius, to curry fauour with the Egyptians, offered an hundred Talents to him that could find out a succeeding Apis. Of this Apis, thus writeth SaintDe Ciuit. Dei l. 18. c. 5. Augustine. Apis was the King of the Argiues, who sayling into Egypt, and there dying, was worshipped by the name of Serapis, their greatest God. This name Serapis was giuen him (sayth Varro) of his Funerall Chest, called in Greeke (...), and from thence Serapis, as if one should say, Sorosapis, after, Serapis. It was enacted, that whosoeuer should affirme, that he had beene a man, should be done to death: Hence it is, that in the Egyptian Temples Harpocrates,Vid. Hieroglyph. Gorop. l. 4. an Image holding his finger on his mouth, is ioyned a companion to  Isis and Serapis, in token of concealing their former humanitie. SuidasSuidas. sayth, that Alexander built vnto him a magnificent Temple, of which, and of this Serapis, wee shall largely declare in the next Chapter. Viues out of Nymphodorus sayth, that this carkasse in that Chest, whereof the name Serapis was deriued, was of a Bull, not of a Man. EusebiusEuseb. Chron. nameth two Kings called by this name Apis, one a Sicyonian, the other of Argos: the first more ancient; the other the Sonne of Iupiter and Niobe, called after, Serapis. But ApollodorusApol. Biblieth. l. 1. c. 2. affirmeth him the Sonne of Phoroneus, and Brother of Niobe. And therefore the Sicyonian King is more likely to be the Egyptian Apis Builder of Memphis: for the otherScal. in Eus. dyed in Peloponnesus, which of him was called Apia. Caelius CalcaguinusCael. Cal. de reb. Egyptiacis. affirmeth, that their Apis was but the symbole of the soule of Osiris: and that Serapis is an Egyptian word, and signifieth  ioy and mirth. But who can find truth in falsehood, or certainty in Superstitious errors? The markesViu. in Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 5. of the next Apis were these; All his body was blacke, with a white starre in his fore-head, after Heredotus, or in his right side, sayth Pliny, like vnto a horned Moone: For he was sacred to the Moone, sayth Marcellinus. On his backe hee had the shape of an Eagle, a knot on his tongue like a Beetle. If such an one might seeme impossible to be found, as (no doubt) it was ra^e, and therefore costly; AugustineVbi supra. attributeth it to the Deuils working, presenting to the Cow, in her conception, such a phantasticall apparition; the power of which imagination appeareth inGen. 30.39. Iacobs example.
But what a beastly stirre haue we here (me thinkes I heare some whining Reader say) about BeastsVarijsque coloribus Apis. Ouid. Met. 9. and Buls? I answere, That it deserueth the more full relation, both for the multitude  of Authors, which mention something of this History; for the Antiquitie; and especially, for the practice of the same Superstition,Bulling. Orig. Error. in Aarons and Ieroboams Calues, after their returne from Egypt; the Schoole of this Idolatry. Besides this Apis of Memphis, they in other
 places obserued others: as Mneuis, a blacke Bull, consecrated toSuidas. the Sunne, as Apis was to the Moone; with his haires growing forward, worshipped at Heliopolis: Bacis,Macrob. another, that was fayned to change colour euery houre, at Hermunthus; besides, Onuphis, and Menuphis, other-where. Thus by Sinne, Beasts became Gods, Men became Beasts: if this be not a baser degree of basenesse, to worship Beasts, and in them, Deuils: to content themselues with meane houses, and neuer to be contented with the magnificence and sumptuousnesse of their Temples to Beasts.O^ig. cont. Celsum lib. 3. Splendida fana cum lucis, and Templa cum vestibulis and porticibus admirandis: introgressus autem vide bis adorari felem, etc. that is, They haue glorious  Chappels, with Groues; and stately Temples, wi^h goodly Gate-wayes and Porches: but when you are within once, you shall see nothing but a Cat (or some such Carrion) worshipped, etc. And euen at this day, in Cayro and other places of Egypt, they account it (according to their Mahumetane Superstition) no small point of charitie, to bee bountifull and liberall to Birds, which they will redeemeIoa^h. Vaget. Geographist. to libertie; and to Dogges, Cats, and other Beasts, setting them meate and good prouision at appointed times.
As for the Camell, that hath carried the Alcoran at Mecca in their Pilgrimage, yee haue heardSup. l 3. c. 6. alreadie, how religious they esteeme the touch thereof: DousaG. Dous. Itinerar. saw the like at Constantinople; some plucking off his haires as holy relikes, some kissing him, some wiping off his sweat, therewith to rub their faces and eyes; all entertayning him with frequent concourse, and at last eating his flesh, distributed into small parts for that purpose.  
We are further to know, that although Egypt worshipped beasts, yet not all, the same: theseStrabo. lib. 17. Stuckius de sacris sacrificijsque Gentilium, de his fusius^ Vid. Clem. Paren and Meruetum. onely were vniuersally receiued; three beasts, a Dogge, a Cat, a Bull: two Fowles, the Hawke, and the Ibis; two fishes, Lepidotus and Oxyrinchus. Other beasts haue their Sects of Worshippers: as sheepe among the Thebans and Saits; the fish called Latus, among the Latopolitans; a Cynocephalus, at Hermopolis; (which is a kind of great Ape,Vid Gesner. de quadrup. and Aelian. de an. lib. 10 c. 30. or Monkie, naturally circumcised, and abhorring from fish) a Wolfe at Lycopolis. The Babylonians neere to Memphis, worshipped a beast called Cepus, resembling in the face a Satyre, in other parts, partly a Dogge, partly a Beare: Likewise, other Cities, other beasts, which caused great dissention; whereofIuuen. Sat. 15. see that whole Satyre. Aelian. de an. lib. 10. cap. 21. Iuuenal:
Ardet adhuc Combos and Tentyra, summus vtrinqueInde furor vulgo, quod numina vicinorumOdit vterque locus--Combos and Tentyra doe both yet burneWith mutuall hate, because they both doe spurneAt one anothers Gods, etc.
Strabo saw, in the Nomus, or Shire of Arsinoe, diuine honour giuen to a Crocodile, kept tame in a certaine Lake by the Priests, and named Suchus, nourished with Bread, Wine, and Flesh, which the Pilgrims that came to visit him, offered. Now the Tentyrites, and those of  Elephantina, killed Crocodiles. And in the Citie of Hercules they worshipped an Ichneumon, a beast that destroyeth Crocodiles and Aspes, and therefore euen at this day of much estimation, as BelloniusP. Bellon. ob. obserueth, where you may see his description. These imagined that Typhon was transformed into a Crocodile. At Hermopolis they worshipped a Goat: and Goats had carnall mixture with Women.
Volat. Scalig. writes of a Leaden Crododile, framed by art to chase away these beasts, molte^ after by Achmed. Ben-Tolon. ep. ad VazThe Ombites (more beastly) esteemed themselues fauoured of their Crocodile God, if he filled his paunch with the flesh and bloud of their dearest Children, as Balbi, and others report of the Moderne Inhabitants of Pegu, before related. King Menas built a Citie called Crocodile, and dedicated the Neighbour-fenne to their food. They were as scrupulous in the vse of meates: someDiodor. Sic. l. 1 abstained from Cheese, some from Beanes, some from Onyons, others after their owne fancie. This multiplicitie of Sects is ascribed to the policie of their  ancient Kings, according to that Rule, Diuide and Rule. For it was not likely they would ioyne in Conspiracie, whom Religion (the most mortall make-bate) had disioyned. At Coptus, where the holies of Isis were most solemne, there were (saythAelian. de an. l. 10. c. 23. Aelian) store of great Scorpions, which presently killed such as they stung; but yet the women which there lamented Isis, no lesse then Widowes the death of their Husbands, or Mothers of their Children; and going bare-foot, are neuer hurt by them. Heere they deuoted the Male Goats to their bellies, the Females to their Goddesse. Hawkes were consecrated to Orus or the Sunne, because they flie and looke directly against the Sun-beames: of this bird they fabled that it liued seuen hundred yeeres. They which will, may find in that his tenth Booke,  the Reasons of diuers other their beastly and foule deuotions, to Fowles and Beasts: too tedious for this place.

They held Serpents in so sacred account, thatL. Pig. men^ Isiac. exp. Osiris is neuer painted without them: and IesephusIos. cont Ap. lib. 2. saith, That it was reckoned a happinesse (which I thinke few would enuy them) to be bitten of Aspes, as also to be deuoured of Crocodiles. Venimous was that Old Serpent, which both here, and in other Nations, then, and at this day, hath procured diuine honor to this first Instrument of Hell: As if he would thus exalt this Trophee of his ancient conquest, in despight both of God and Man, in that Creature whereby Man perished, and which God had cursed: except we will rather attribute it to a deuillish malice, or apish imitation of that Brasen Serpent, set vp byIoh. 3.14. Moses in the Wildernesse, the figure of Christ crucified, who brake this Serpents head. Ieremie the Prophet was stoned (someVines in August. say) at Tanis in Aegypt, and was after  worshipped of the Inhabitants there (such was their difference of Sects) for his present remedying the stings of Serpents.
I thinke by this time, either my Relation, or their superstition, is tedious: and yet I haue not mentioned other their gods, both stinking and monstrous. Loth am I to search the Waters for their deified Frogs, and Hippopotam^; or play the Scauenger, to present you with their Beatle-gods, out of their priuies: yea, their Priuies,Ortel. ex Clement. and Min. Foelice. and Farts, had their vnsauorie canonization, and went for Egyptian deities; Lettice sutable to such lips. So HieromeIn Es. c. 46. and cap. 12. and alias. derideth their dreadfull deitie, the Onion, and a stinking Fart, Crepitus ventris inflati quae Pelusiaca religio est, which they worshipped at Pelusium. Lesse brutish, though not lesse idolatrous, was it inA^. Var. l. 13. cap. 22. Strab. lib. 14. mentions a Temple and Image of Homer at Smyrna* with a coyne called Homerium. Ptolomaeus Philopator, to erect a Temple to Homer, in which his Image was placed,  comely sitting enuironed with those Cities which challenged him for theirs. That came neerest to reason in the EgyptianPlut. de Osir. and Is. deities (though farre enough from Religion) when they expressed God like a Man with an egge in his mouth, thereby intimating that God created the World with his Word. So in the Citie Sai they expressed in hieroglyphikes an Infant, an old Man, a Hawke, a Fish, and a Riuer-horse, on the doores of Minerua's Temple, as if Minerua should say, O yee which are borne and die know that God hateth impudence. This also by the way we adde for difference of Egyptian hieroglyphikes and Indian picturesSee Acosta, Gomara, and our Picture booke, Tom. 2. lib. 5. in Mexico, that these expressed Histories, those concealed Mysteries: the Indians describing things as plainly as they could, the Egyptians yeelding a double shell before you come to the kernell; and therefore more implicite and difficult then the other. For that a picture of a  Hawke, a Fish, and a Riuer-horse should represent such creatures is euident: but that one of these should represent God, the second Hatred, the third Impudence, is a mysterie, and if well searched, an absurditie, and a thing much to be admired that wise men should so admire things so ridiculous.


@. II. Of their Sacrifices, their Iewish Rites, and of their Priests.
 THeir sacrifices were so diuersified in their kindes, that PeucerPeut. de Diuinat. Idem Canic. dies S. Maioli, part. 2. Coll^q. 1. saith, they had sixe hundred threescore and sixe seuerall sorts of them: Some they had peculiar to speciall gods;Sard. lib. 3. cap. 15. as to the Sunne, a Cocke, a Swan, a Bull; to Venus, a Doue; to the celestiall Signes, such things as held correspondent similitude: besides, their sacrifices of Red men to Osiris. BusirisTriflesque Eusiridis aras. is said to haue offered Thrasius (first Author of that Counsell, worst to the Counsellor) thereby to appease angrie Nilus, that in nine yeeres had not ouer-flowed. They offered euery day three men at Heliopolis; in stead of which bloudie rites, Amasis after substituted so many waxen Images.
Thus were their gods beastly, their sacrifices inhumane, or humane rather, too much. Other things they obserued of their owne inuention, framing to themselues deformed and  compounded shapes, whose Images they adored. Such were their Canopi, swadled as it were in clowts (so resembling Orus) with heads of dogs, or other creatures. OsirisTab. Isiaca Bembi. In Aegypto Canicipites, Serpenticipites, Afinicipites, etc. and postea. Vanae and contrariae superstitionis, aquam in praecipua veneratione habent, and ea tamen se abluuni. Athanas. cont. Gent. idem Iustinus Mart. Apolog. 2. and Cyprian. ad V. is sometime seene with the head of a Hawke, Isis with the head of a Lion, Anubis alway with the head of a dogge; and contrariwise, beasts pictured with the heads of Osiris and Isis: monstrous misse-shapen figures, of misse-shapen monstrous mysteries.
They borrowed of the Iewes abstinence from Swines-flesh, and Circumcision of their Males; to which they added Excision of their Females, still obserued of the Christians in those parts. Theodoret testifieth,Theod. Ser. 1. That Pythagoras receiued circumcision of the Egyptians, which they receiued of the Hebrewes. AmbroseAm. de Abraeham. l. 2. c vlt affirmeth, That the Egyptians circumcised both sexes at the age of fourteene yeeres (as the Ismaelites at thirteene) because that then  the lusts of copulation begin to burne, which Reason teacheth, to neede circumcision: and therefore (it seemeth) they vsed it in those parts that are the seats and instruments of Lust; and not either in regard of originall corruption, or the promised Seede, which were hi^den
 mysteries to their mysticall superstitions. It is like, the Deuill would thus prophane this diuine Sacrament of Circumcision, as at this day in the Heathen Nations about Congo, and in Iucatan in America, before the Spaniards came there. They so abhorre Swine,Vid. Bre^ew. Enq. cap. 13. that if one by the way touch them, hee presently washeth himselfe and his garments. Neither may a Swine-heard haue accesse into their Temples, or marry with their daughters. Yet doe they offer Swine to the Moone and Bacchus (Isis and Osiris) when the Moone is at full. In this sacrifice they burne the Tayle, Milt, and Leafe; and (which on another day would be piacular) on that day of the full they eate the rest. AelianAel. de Animal. l. 10. c. 16. giueth this reason of their hatred of Swine, because it is a gluttonous beast, not sparing the flesh neither of their owne young, nor of men: as on the contrarie, they worship the Storke for her pietie, in nourishing her aged  parents (that I speake not of their wed-locke chastitie; for breach whereof,Crol de signaturis. Crollius tells, from the relation of an eye-witnesse, That in a wood neere to Spire in Germanie, the Male complayning to a congregation of Storkes, caused them to teare his Mate in pieces.) The Egyptians also had a conceit, That Swines milke would breede the leprosie; and that Swine were beasts odious to the Sunne and Moone. He citeth out of Endoxus, That they spared them, for treading their Seede into the ground; which was their Harrowing and Tillage, when Nilus had newly left the softned Earth, to send these Labourers, their Kine and Swine, to tread in the myrie Earth the Corne which they sowed therein. The EgyptiansDrus. de 3. sectis, lib. 2. sware by the head of their King; which oath whosoeuer violated, lost his life for the same, without any redemption.  
The Priests, in old time renowmed for their learning, in Straboes time were ignorant and vnlearned. No womanIo. Boem. lib. 1 cap. 5. H. Roman. de rep. G. l. 3. c. 4. might beare Priestly function. These Priests might not eate Eg^, Milke, or Oile (except with Sallads:) they might not salute Mariners, nor looke vpon their children or kinsfolks. TheySard. l. 3. c. 18. Herod. l. 2. washed themselues in the day-time thrice, and in the night twice: they were shauen, wore linnen garments alwayes new washed, were daily allowed sacred meates.Du Bartas Colonies. Of their ancient Priests, thus Du Bar^as singeth in Syluesters tune:
The Memphian Priests were deepe Philosophers,And curious gazers on the sacred Starres,Searchers of Nature, and great Mathematickes,  Ere any letter knew the ancient'st Attickes.
TertullianTert. Exhort. ad Castitatem. speakes of the continence of Apis his Priests, and addes, That certayne women, consecrated to the African Ceres, voluntarily relinquished marriage, and from thenceforth might not touch a Male, no, not so much as k sse their owne sonnes.
Their magicke skill appeared in Iannes and Iambres, which withstood Moses; and in Hermes testimonie of himselfe. R. Salomon on Exod. 8. writeth, That Pharao said to Moses and Aaron, Doe you bring straw into Ophraim, a Citie full of straw? And doe yee bring inchantments into Egypt,De Orig. c. 17. etc. which aboundeth therewith? Postellus deriueth the Egyptian and Orientall sciences from Abraham, to whom he dareth to attribute their diuinations by the Aire,  Water, Fire, Earth, Birds: and alleageth Rambams authoritie, That the greatest part of the Alcoran is taken out of the Egyptian learning; and saith, That Moses and Salomon studied the same, and expounded in Scripture, what Abraham had taught them: to which also hee ascribeth the Iewish Exorcismes, in casting out Deuils. But some Deuill, I thinke, hath taught him so to commend these deuillish Arts, as he doth no lesse the Alcoran, and the Iewes Cabala, calling them an excellent Appendix to Moses, and both, of I know not what magicall facultie,Raziel. first infused into Adam in the puritie of his creation, and taught by the Angell Raziel, by him deliuered in verball tradition; written first by the Henoch, the bookes whereof Nimrod stole from Noah, which Abraham might learne either in that Chaldean Nation, or from Melchisedech. But let vs obserue these Priests further.  
When they sacrificed, they made choice of their beasts by certaine religious markes: (a Cow they might not sacrifice, as consecrated vnto Isis:) They kindled a fire, and sprinkling water ouer the Sacrifice, with inuocation of their God, killed it, cut off the head, which either they sold to the Grecians, if they would buy it, or cast it into the Riuer with imprecation, That whatsoeuer euill was imminent to them or their Countrey, might be turned vpon that head. This ceremonieGramay As. seemes to haue come to them from the Iewes. And they haue beene as liberall of their Rites since to the Catholikes (for so they will be called) as appeareth both by this Relation, and by the testimonie, not onely of MoresinusMoresm. Dep. rel. a Protestant, butMagini. Ptol. Pol. de inuentoribus. Beroal. in Apuleium. Maginus, Polidorus, Boemus, and Beroaldus, Popish writers, although dawbed ouer with new mysticall significations; as in Bellarmine, and other the purest Catholikes, is seene.  Their PriestsDraudius in Solinum. were their Iudges, the eldest of which was chiefe in pronouncing sentence. He woreAelian. Var. hist. l. 14. c. 34. about his necke a Saphire Iewell, with the Image of Truth therein engrauen. The
 PriestsAlex. ab Alex. Gen dier. l. 2. c. 8. of Isis, besides their shauings and linnen garments, had paper-shooes: on their heads, Anubis; in their hands a Timbrell, or a branch of Sea-wormewood, or a Pine-apple. They had one chiefe Priest, or Primate of Egypt, as appearethIos. cont. Ap. lib. 1. i^ qui super Egyptiaca sacra* erat constitutus. Hel. hi. Aeth. l. 7. Herod. l. 2. saith, that they had 341. Priests and as many Kings before his time. by Iosephus and Heliodorus, who maketh Thyamis to succeede his father Calasyris in this high Priesthood at Memphis. Manetho also enioyed this Pontificall Hierarchie, as appeareth by his Epistle to Ptolemeus, which after shall follow. Ph^lostratusPhilost. de vit. Apol. lib. 6. c. 3. speaketh of Gymnosophists, which some ascribe to India; Heliodorus to Ethiopia; he to Ethiopia and Egypt. These, saith hee, dwelt abroad without house, on a Hill a little off the bankes of Nilus, where grew a Groue, in which they held their generall Assemblies, to consult of publike affaires, hauing otherwise their studies  and sacrifices apart, each by himselfe. Thespesion was the chiefe of this Monkish Colledge, when Apollonius, after his visitation of the Babylonian Magi, and IndianDomitiano Imperatore. Brachmanes, came thither. These held the immortalitie of the soule, and accounted Nilus for a god. If a man at Memphis had by chance-medley killed a man, hee was exiled, till those Gymnosophists absolued him.
Hercules Temple, at Canopus; was priuiledged with Sanctuarie, to giue immunitie to Fugitiues and Malefactors: Thus elsewhere, Osiris; Apollo, in Syria; Diana, at Ephesus; euery Cardinals house (saithPius 2. Asia. a Pope) in Rome; Saint PeterPol. Vir. l. 3. at Westminster; and other Popish Oratories, priuiledged Dennes of Theeues.


 @. III. Of their Feasts and Oracles.
THeir Feasts were many: of which,Herod. lib. 2. Herodotus reckoneth one at Bubastis, in honour of Diana. To this place the Men and Women, at this festiuall solemnitie, sayled in great multitudes, with minstrelsie and showtings: and as they came to any Citie on the waters side, they went on shore; and the women, some danced, some played, some made a brawle with the women of the place: and thus resorting to Bubastis, they there offered  great Sacrifices, spending in this feast more Wine then in all the yeere besides. Hither resorted of Men and Women, besides Children, seuen hundred thousand. In Busiris was solemnized the feast of Isis; in which, after the sacrifice, many thousands beat themselues: but with what they did beate themselues, was not lawfull to relate. The Cari^ns that inhabited Egypt, did also cut their foreheads with swords, signifying thereby, that they were forreiners. This Citie was in the midst of the Egyptian Delta, and in it, a very great Temple of Isis. A third feast was at Sai, in honour of Minerua, where assembling by night, they lighted candles full of Salt and Oile, and therewith went about the walls of the Citie: This solemnitie was called(...), Light-burning, or if you will, Candle-masse. This night, they which came not hither, yet obserued the setting vp of Lights throughout Egypt. A fourth was at  Heliopolis, in honour of the Sunne. A fift at Butus, of Latona, wherein onely sacrificing was vsed. At Papremus was obserued the solemnitie of Mars, with sacrifices, but till Sunne-set, onely a few Priests were busied about the Image: a greater number of them stood before the doores of the Temple with woodden clubs, and ouer-against them aboue a thousand men that payed their vowes, each with clubs in their hands, who the day before carried the Image out of a gilded Chappell of Timber into another sacred Roome; those few which were chosen for the Idoll-seruice, drawing a waggon with foure wheeles, on which the Chappell and Image were carried. Those that stood at the Porch, forbade these to enter; but the Votaries, to helpe their god, beate and draue them backe. Here began a great club-fray, in which many were wounded, and many (although the Egyptians concealed it)  dyed of the wounds. The cause (forsooth) was, because here was shrined the mother of Mars; to whom, her sonne, at ripe age, resorted to haue lyen with, but was repelled by her seruants: whereupon, hee procuring helpe elsewhere, was reuenged of them. Hence grew that solemnitie.
On the seuenth day of the moneth TybiHospin. de Fest. cap. 7. (which answereth to our Ianuarie and December) was solemnized the comming of Isis out of Phoenicia; in which, many things were done in despight of Typhon. The Coptites then hurled downe an Asse from a steepe place, and abused ruddie men for this cause. They hadPlut. de Os. also in their Bacchanall solemnities, most filthy Rites; in which, being drunken, they carried Images of a cubit length, with the priuie Member of a monstrous size, with musicke, accompanied with the elder Matrons. This Yard,  which they called Phallus, was vsually made of fig-tree. HerodotusLib. 2. saith, That besides their Swine-feast, they obserued another to Bacchus, without Swine, in like sort as the Grecians: in which, they had such cubitall Images made of sinewes, or as CoeliusCoel. Rhod. l. 7. cap. 17. readeth it,
 made to bee drawne to and fro with sinewes or strings, carried by women. In the moneth Thoth (which most-what agreeth to September) the nineteenth dayPlut. ibid. was holy to Mercurie, in which they did eate honey and figs, saying withall, Truth is sweet. On the ninth day of this moneth they obserued another feast; wherein euery man before his doore did eate rosted fish: the Priests did not eate, but burne the same. Before is mentioned the seeking of Osiris. This was an Egyptian feast, obserued in the moneth Athyr (which answereth somewhat to Nouember) from the seuenteenth day (in which they imagined that Osiris perished)  foure dayes were spent in mourning: the causes were foure; Nilus slaking, the Windes then blowing, the Dayes shortening, the Winter approching. Here is the mysterie vnfolded. On the nineteenth day they went by night to the Sea; and brought forth a sacred Chist, in which was a golden Boxe, into which they powred water, and made a showt, That Osiris was found. Then they mingled the Earth with Water, adding spices and costly perfumes, and made an Image of the Moone, applying these mysticall Rites to the nature of the Earth and Water. About the winter Solstice they carried a Cow seuen times about the TempleHosp. cap. 27., in remembrance of the Sunnes circuit, which in the seuenth moneth would be in the Summer Solstice.
The originall of Isis seeking Osiris, is before shewed. Some make Typhon the husband of Isis, which slue Osiris her sonne, or brother (as diuers diuersly esteeme him) for incest committed with her, and cut him in pieces. Anubis her Huntsman, by helpe of his dogs, found out the pieces againe. This (saithM. F. Octau. Arnob. contra gentes, lib. 2. Minutius Foelix) is resembled euery yeere, Nec desinunt  annis omnibus vel perdere quod inueniunt, vel inuenire qu^d perdunt. Haec Aegyptia quondam, nunc and sacra Romana sunt. Truly the Playes of Christ his Crucifying and Resurrection, which are obserued in all Churches of the Roman Religion yeerly, might seeme to haue had this Egyptian originall. Once, Index expurgatorius, hath cut out Viues tongue, where he speaketh against them, asViues in Annot. ad Aug. de Ciuit Dei, lib. 8. cap. 27.Vide ante lib. 1. cap. 17. before vpon like occasion is noted. This feast is also mentioned by Iulius Firmicus, and others.
They had another feast called Pamylia, of Pamyle the Nurse of Osiris, who going to fetch water, heard a voyce, bidding her proclaime, That a great King and Benefactor was borne. On this holy day was carried in procession an Image with three stones, or (as PlutarchDe Osir. saith) with a three-fold yard, in which beastly Rite hee findeth a foolish mysterie, not worth the  telling. But I thinke this Feast of Feasts hath glutted euery man.
The Egyptians had many Oracles of Hercules, Apollo, Minerua, Diana, Mars, Iupiter, and others. The Oracle of Latona at ButysPeucer. de Diuinat. S. Ma. Di. Can. pag 2. co'. 2. told Cambyses, That hee should die at Ecbatana, whereby he secured himselfe for Syria, and yet there dyed, in an obscure village of that name, whereas he had interpreted it of the great Citie in Media. Their Apis and Serapis were also esteemed Oracles. Annibal was deceiued by the Oracle of Serapis, telling him of his death, which he construed of Libya, and fell out in a place of the same name in Bithynia. At Pelusium, if we may beleeue Achilles StatiusAchil. Stat. lib. 2. and 3., was the Temple, Image, and Oracle of Iupiter Caessius; and by an Oracle, he maketh Leucippe, a Virgin, to be appointed for sacrifice. At Memphis, a Cow; at Heliopolis, the Bull Mneuis; at Arsinoe, the Crocodiles were their Oracles. But it were too tedious to relate the rest.  


@. IIII. Of the inuentions and disposition of the Aegyptians.
THe first amongst their Inuentions, wee may reckon the deriuation of their superstitions to others. That the elder Romans entertayned these damnable Egyptian holies, appeareth by the Temples, Chappels, Streets, Coynes, dedicated vnto Isis, Serapis, etc. mentioned by Onuphrius, Rosinus, Victor, Fabricius, Apianus, Amantius, Gruterus,  Golizius, Occo, and other writers of Roman Antiquities. Of Isis and Serapis were certayne publike places in Rome, named Iseum and Serapeum.Antiq. 18.4. Iosephus relateth of one Paulina, a noble woman of Rome, married to Saturninus, deuoted to the superstition of Isis, whom Deci^s Mundus had sollicited in vaine to dishonestie, notwithstanding the offer of two hundred thousand Drachme (which comes to fiue thousand sixe hundred and twentie fiue pound) for one night: but with a quarter of that summe hee corrupted the Priests of Isis; one of which told Paulina. That the god Anubis inflamed with her loue, had sent for her; which message was welcome to her, and to her husband not distastefull. Thus Mundus, vnder pretext of Anubis, obtayning a nights lodging, meeting her three dayes after, merrily iested at her, for sauing his money, but not her honestie: Whereupon Tiberius banished him,  crucified the Priests, and razed the Temple, commanding the Image of Isis to bee cast into Tiber. But these superstitions were reuiued soone after, Vi^ediusSueton. in Vit the Emperour not
 refusing to weare a Linnen religious garment openly in her solemnitie. Vespasian also honoured them, and Domitian in the religious habite of Isis conueyed himselfe vnknowne from Vitellius and his persecutors.
HusbandrieLaur. Coru. by some is ascribed to them, but falsely; Adam, Caine, Noah, and others were in this before them. Astronomie also is not their inuention, butIos. Ant. l. 1.8, taught them by Abraham. GeometrieDom. Nig. Aph. Com. 3. Clein. Strom. l. 1. Bas. in princip. prou. Girana. Cos. l. 2. Cic de. diu. l. 1. A. Theuet. de mundo nouo, c. 4. is more like to bee theirs, driuen to seeke out this Art by Nilus ouer-flowing. Idolatrie to the Starres was first heere practised (saith Lactantius) for lying on the roofes of their houses (as yet they doe) without any other Canopie then the Azure skie, first they beheld, then studied, lastly adored them. Gaudentius BrixiensisG. B. in Exod. trac. 6. applyeth  the destroying of the Aegyptian first-borne, to the perishing of Idolatrie through the light of the Gospell: the Egyptians (saith hee) being the first, which worshipped the Images of dead men.
Magicke is also ascribed to them; of whose timely professours Iannes and Iambres are an instance. Physicke is fetched also from hence; and Writing, both after the vulgar sort, as also that of the Priests, Hieroglyphicall, whereof Horopollo an Egyptian, Pierius, Goropius, Michael Mayerus, Curio, Schualenberg, besides Mercerus and Hoeschelius, with others haue written. AelianusL. 14. 34. accounteth Mercurie the first inuenter of their Lawes. The WomenSopho^le^ in Oedip. vid. Scholiast. ib. ex Nymphod. in Egypt did performe the offices which belonged to the Men, buying, selling, and other businesse abroad; the men Spinning and performing houshold-taske. Claud DuretDel'Orig. de Langues. c. 40. etc. hath  expressed (besides a Discourse of their Region and Learning) two Egyptian Alphabets, if any desire to see the forme of their Letters: whichNazion. Orat: 3 adu. Iul. and, Elias Cret. some thinke that the Phenicians borrowed from Egypt, and lent by Cadmus to the Graecians. But I am not of their minde. This Elogie or commendation is giuen them by Martial:
Niliacis primum puer hic nascatur in oris,Nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis:From Aegypt (sure) the boyes birth may proceed,For no Land else such knauerie can breed.
 And Propertius:
Noxia Alexandria dolis aptissima tellus,The place where Alexandria doth stand,Is noysome, and a Conie-catching land.
Wee may heere adde out of Flauius VopiscusFlau. Vopisc. Saturnius. Trebellius Pollio testifieth the like in his Triginta Tyrannis* a testimonie of the qualities of the Aegyptians. They are (saith hee) inconstant, furious, braggarts, injurious: also vaine, licentious, desirous of nouelties, euen vnto common Songs and Ballads, Verfifiers, Epigrammatists, Mathematicians, Wizards, Physicians both for Christians and Samaritanes; and alway things present, with an vnbridled libertie, are distastefull to them. Hee bringeth also for  witnesse of this assertion, Aelius Adrianus, who in an Epistle to Seruianus, affirmeth thus: I haue learned all Aegypt to bee light, wauering and turning with euery blast of fame. They which worship Serapis, are Christians, and euen they which call themselues Bishops of Christ, are deuoted to Serapis. No Ruler is there of the Iewish Synagogue, no Samaritan, no Christian Priest, which is not a Mathematician, a Wizard, a Chirurgion (or anointer of Champions.) This kinde of men is most seditious, most vaine, most injurious: the Citie (Alexandria) rich, wealthie, fruitfull, in which none liues idle. Goutie men haue somewhat to doe, Blinde men haue somewhat to doe, or haue somewhat which they may make; nor are the goutie-fingred idle. They haue One GOD; him doe the Christians, him doe the Iewes, him doe they all worship. I wish them nothing else, but that they may bee  fedde with their owne Pullen, which how they make fruitfull, I am ashamed to tell. Thus much Adrianus.
The Pullen hee speaketh of, it seemeth, are such, as euen to this day they vse to hatch (not vnder the Henne, but) in Furnaces of dungTimberlie^ booke describeth this at large and Sandy^ and ashes, wherein thousands of Egges are layd for that purpose. That which hee speaketh of the Christians, is either of some Heretickes, or luke-warme Time-seruers to bee vnderstood: or else remember, that it was Adrian, an Ethnike, whose intelligence was from such as himselfe in those times hating the Christians; of whom, through blinde zeale of their Idolatry, what did they? What did they not faine and deuise? Euen more odious then here is expressed, as Ecclesiasticall Histories shew. The Iewes had giuen Adrian cause, by their Treasons, to hate them, and flatterers opportunitie to belie  them. Let him that loues mee, tell my tale. But a man would maruell to heare Adrian blame the Aegyptians so much for that, for which himselfe in Authors is so much blamed; namely, Superstition and Sorcerie. For hee made Images of Antinous, which he erected almost
 in all the world, saithDionis Nicaei Adr. Dion. This Antinous was in high estimation with him (some thinke, his Minion:) Hee dyed in Aegypt, either drowned in Nilus, as Adrian writeth, or (which is the truth) was sacrificed. For whereas Adrian was exceeding curious, and addicted to Diuinations and Magicall Arts of all kindes (in the hellish rites whereof was required the soule of such a one as would die voluntarily) Antinous refused it not, and therefore was thus honoured, and had a Citie in Aegypt newly repaired from the ruines, and dedicated in his Name. Yea, hee reportedAelius Spartianus in Adriano. he saw a new Starre, which (forsooth) was the soule of this Antinous. The Greekes made a God of him, and a giuer of Oracles; whereof Prudentius singeth:
Quid loquar Antinoum coelesti sede locatum, etc.  Prudent. cont. Symmachum. l. 1.Adrianique dei Ganimedem --Cumque suo in Templis vota exaudire Marito?
Iustin. Martyr. Apol. 2.And Iustin Martyr: Antinoum qui modo extitit, omnes metu coacti pro deo colere, cum and quis, and vnde esset, scirent. Hee caused money to bee coyned with the picture of the Temple of Antinous which Adrian had erected, and a Crocodile vnder it. ChoulChoul della Relig. Rom. Antich. expresseth diuers formes of these Antinoan Coines, and one with inscription of Marcellus the Priest of Antinous.
Ammianus MarcellinusAm. Mar. l. 22. ascribeth to the Egyptians a contentious humour, addicted to  lawing and quarrels, Assuetudine perplexius litigandi semper laetissimum. Their vanitie and superstition may further appeare by that which DiophantesDiophantes Lacedem, apud Stuckium de sac^is. recordeth of one Syrophanes a rich Egyptian; who doting on his Sonne yet liuing, dedicated an Image in his house vnto him, to which the seruants at any time, when they had displeased their Master, betooke themselues, adorning the same with Flowers and Garlands, so recouering their Masters fauour. SomeCoelius Rhodig. Lectionum adtiq. l. 16.3. make the Egyptians first inuenters of Wine (which they say, was first made in the Egyptian Citie Plinthis) and of Beere, to which end they first made Mault of Barley, for such places as wanted Grapes. When a man proued more in shew then in substance (as hypocrites, whom the Truth it selfe calleth Whited Tombes) the Prouerbe termed him an Egyptian Temple, because those buildings were sumptuous and magnificent for matter and forme to the  view, but the Deitie therein worshipped, was a Cat, Dogge, or such other contemptible creature. The naturall furiePolyb. Hist. l. 15. c. 31. Exod. 1, etc. and crueltie vsed amongst the Egyptians, hath made them infamous among Authors, both Prophane and Diuine. And Stephanus Bizantinus saith, that they which practised close, subtile, craftie couzenages, were said, (...), to play the Aegyptians: Aeschylus also the Greeke Poet makes them Mint-masters therein: and perhaps those Rogues which wander ouer so many Countries, and liue by their wits and thefts, were thereforeTes. Pot. 3. part. pag 169. hath a whole discourse of them. called Egyptians, rather then for the Nation, being the scumme and dregs of other Nations, disguised by a deuised tongue and habit; called in some Countries Cingari; their life resembling much the Beduini, or Rezuini, roguish Arabians wandring in Syria, and other parts. Bellonius saith, That these wander through all the Turkish Empire, and are no  lesse strangers in Egypt then other places. They are cunning in Iron-worke, and cheating Fortune-tellers: some esteeme them Walachians.
But least I should also impose too cruell a taske on my more willing Readers, I will proceed to other obseruations. I haue heere in this Egyptian relation of their Rites, Manners, and Mysteries, beene the larger, both because Authors are herein plentifull, and especially because Egypt hath beene an olde storer and treasurer of these mysticall Rites for that later vpstart, the Mysticall Babylon, in the West; which as shee is spiritually called Sodome and Aegypt, so, like that Strumpet mentionedProu. 7.10. by Salomon, hath not a little decked her bed with the Ornaments, Carpets, and Laces of Aegypt. Wiser were the RomanesDion. Cass. l. 54. of olde, which made diuers Lawes to expell the Aegyptian Rites out of their Citie, which the  later Popes entertaine.  




CHAP. V. Of the manifold alterations of State and Religion in Aegypt by the Persians, Grecians, Romans, Christians, Saracens, and Turkes.

 @. I. Of the Persians and Graecians acts in Aegypt, and the famous Vniuersitie and Librarie at Alexandria.
THe last Egyptian Pharao was Psammenitus, vanquished by Cambyses, sonne of Cyrus the Persian, who quite extinguished that Egyptian Gouernment, and much eclipsed their superstitious solemnities. ForHerod. l. 3. Cambyses proclaimed defiance, not to the persons onely of the Egyptians, but to their Gods also: yea, hee set their sacred Beasts in the fore-front of his battell, that being  thus shielded by their owne deuotion, hee might easily ruinate the Kingdome. Such a disaduantage is Superstition to her followers, being indeed but a life-lesse carkasse of true Religion, which alway breedeth true Fortitude;Ioseph. Antiq. as Ptolomey and the Romanes vsed the like stratageme against the Iewes on their Sabbath, which (in it selfe a diuine Commandement) they construed to a superstitious Rest, a Sacrifice without Mercie, wherein they might helpe their beasts, but suffer themselues, like beasts, to be ledde to the slaughter.
Cambyses hauing pulled downe their Temples in Egypt, intendedIustin. l. 1. as much to the Oracle of Iupiter Ammon, in which exploit hee imployed fiftie thousand men, which (as the Ammonians report) were ouer-whelmed with a tempest of Sand. Other newes of them was neuer heard. Himselfe meane-while, meanely prouided of victuall for such an enterprise,  made an Expedition against the Ethiopians; in which, Famine making her selfe Purueyour for the Armie, fedde them with the flesh of each other; euery tenth man being allotted to this bloodie seruice. Thus with a double discomfiture altogether discomforted, hee retireth to Memphis, where hee found them obseruing their festiuall solemnitie of the New-found Apis, and interpreting this ioy to haue proceeded from his losse, hee slew the Magistrate, whipped the Priests, commanded to kill the Citizens that were found feasting, and wounded their Apis with his sword, vnto death. Hee practised no lesse hostilitie vpon their Obeliskes, Sepulchres, and Temples. The Sepulchers they esteemed Sacred, as their eternall Habitations: (and no greater securitie could any Egyptian giue vnto his Creditor, then the dead bodies of their Parents.)
 TheStrab. l. 17. describeth the forme of their Temples. Temples, euery where accounted holy, heere were many, and those magnificent. At Memphis they had the Temples of Serapis, Apis, Venus, and the most ancient of them all, of Vulcan, with the Pigmey-Image of Vulcan in it, which Cambyses derided: of Serapis at Canopus, where Pilgrimes by dreames receiued Oracles: at Heraclium, Sai, and Butis, to Latona; at Mendes to Pan; at Momemphis to Venus; a Necropolis, Nicopolis, and other places to other supposed Deities. Cambyses also burned the Images of the Cabyrians and the Temple of Anubis at Heliopilis, whose stately building and spacious circuit Strabo describeth, as likewise at Thebes.
They write, that after, as hee was taking Horse, his sword, falling out of the Scabberd, wounded him in the thigh (where hee before had wounded Apis) and slew him. InThucid l. 1. the  time while the Persians enioyed Egypt, the Athenians, by instigation of Inarus King of Libya, inuaded Egypt, wonne Nilus and Memphis: but after sixe yeeres lost all againe.
Ochas, one of his Successours (called of the Aegyptians, Asse) killed their Apis,Aelian. var. hist. l. 6. c. 8. and placed an Asse in his roome, which kindled such indignation in Bagoas an Egyptian, (one of his Eunuches) that hee murthered Ochus, whom hee hurled to bee rent and torne of Cats that this Beast, sacred to Isis, might reuenge the indignitie offred to Apis. But this Eclipse of the Egyptian superstition, caused by this Persian imposition, had an end, together with that Monarchie. For AlexanderCurt. lib. 4. Arrian. l. 3. did not only leaue them to their wonted Rites, himselfeAdrichom: Theat T. San. sacrificing to their Apis, and solemnizing Games in his honor, but added further glory to their Countrey, by erection of that famous Citie, named of himselfe Alexandria, (See Auson. de clar. vrb. wheras some thinkeLydyat. Emb. Temp.  the Citie No had before stood, destroyed by Nabuchodonoser) second in reputation to Rome, theHerodian. l. 7. receptacle of Iewish, Grecian, and Egyptian Religions, adorned with many Temples and Palaces: his Successours, Ptolomaeus Lagi (of whom the following Kings were
 all called Ptolomaei andLegidarum imperium and regum series: Stra. L. 17. Niceph. patr. Eutrop. l. 6. and 7. Ir. Patrit. Panarch. l. 9. Idem l. 16. Lagidae) Philadelphus, Euergetes, Philopator, Epiphanes, Philomator, Euergetes the second, Physcon, Lathurus, Auletes, the Father of Cleopatra, (whom Iulius Caesar made Queene of Aegypt, the price of her honestie, and Anthonie, his wife, whom, together with her selfe, her ambition ouerthrew) adding to the greatnesse of Alexandria. Platoes Phylosophie was not onely first borrowed of the Egyptians, but was publikely read at Alexandria as well as at Athens: which continued many ages. Sixe hundred yeeres after his death, Ammonius surnamed (of his former occupation being a Porter) Saccus seemed to haue lighted on the bookes of Hermes,Some learned men are of opinion that these pretensed bookes of Hermes, as also the Oracles of Sybill which are extant, were but counterfeits of some Christians, seeking to winne Heathens by such proofe worse then Heathennish. Idem l. 16. and thence learned the Doctrine of the Trinitie: of whom his Disciples Plotinus and Aurelius write, and after them their Schollers Porphyrie and Theodorus Asinaeus; and their Auditors Iamblichus and Syrianus; to this last succeeded at Athens  Proclus, Lycius, and after him the last of the greatest Platonikes Damascius: which haue written many things of the three beginnings.
The same Ammonius with like Philosophicall happinesse are said to haue found the Oracles of Zoroaster, which the two Iulians the Father and the Sonne, Chaldaeans, translated out of their tongue into Greeke, in the time of M. Aurelius the Philosopher. Pythagoras had before learned it of Zabratus in Assiria: which (it seemeth) Plato heard of the younger Architas, and dispersed closely the seedes thereof in his Bookes, so that the elder In^^rpreters conceiued him not till the time of this Ammonius the Porter, from whom heere (as from Socrates a Statuarie in Athens) flowed this Diuine wisedome. Hee taught at Alexandria in the dayes of Clemens Alexandrinus about two hundred yeeres after Christ. Origen was his hearer.  Iamblichus comprehended these Oracles of Zoroaster, in thirtie Bookes or thereabouts: for Damascius citeth the eight and twentie.
The wealth of the PtolomiesStrab. l. 17. raigning in Egypt appeareth by Straboes report of Auletes, his reuenues to be twelue thousand fiue hundred Talents, which yet was counted dissolute and vnthriftie. This by MasterBrer. de pond. Cap. 10. Her. Thal. Brerewood is summed two millions three hundred fortie three thousand and seuen hundred and fiftie pounds of our mony: Wheras the reuenues of Darius Hystaspis (accounted a hard man) is by Herodotus reckoned foureteene thousand fiue hundred and sixtie Euboike Talents, which makes 1820000. pounds, a great deale lesse summe, from that greater Empire. But they had other improuements. AlexanderArrian. lib. 6. Plut. Pomp. Bud. de Asse. is said to spend more then this on Hephestions funerall, by fiftie fiue thousand pounds. Yea, the Roman reuenues  are by Plutarch p summed at eight thousand fiue hundred Myriades, which in our money is two millions, sixe hundred fiftie sixe thousand, and two hundred and fiftie pounds, not hugely exceeding the Egyptian.


@. II. Of the Schoole and Librarie at Alexandria.
HAuing mentioned the Studies and learned men at Alexandria, and wealth of their  Kings, I hold it not amisse to entertaine your eyes in longer view of that Alexandrian Schoole and Librarie. Simandius or OsymanduasDiod. Sic. c. 1. is the first in any Historie mentioned that erected a Librarie, setting this Inscription in the Frontispice thereof, (...), The Medicinary or Physicke-shop of the Minde. Some accuse Homer to haue stollen his Iliads andNaucrates ap. Eustat. in Praefat. Odyss. Odysses out of Vulcans Temple at Memphis, being the workes of Phantasia a woman: the worke of a womanish fantasie so to deceiue, or receiue, of That almost more then Man. But the second Ptolomey, sonne of Ptolomeus Lagi was Author of that famous Library at Alexandria, following (saithStrab. l. 1. Strabo) the example of Aristotle.Athen. l. 1. Atheneus addes the Bookes of Aristotle also bought by Ptolomey of Neleus, which succeeded Theophrastus in this Legacie bequeathed to him from the Philosopher Himselfe. Iosephus  tells vs of the Translation of the Law by theIoseph. Ant. lib. 12. c. 2. Aristaeus. Seuentie or Seuentie two Interpreters, procured by Demetrius Phalareus at the Kings charge: who also obtained the like Translations of otherEpiph. de ponder. Cedren. Chaldaean, Egyptian, and Romane Monuments: the number of which translated Bookes, Cedrenus numbers one hundred thousand. SenecaSen. de Tranq. cap. 9. speakes of foure hundred thousand. Iosephus of fiue hundred thousand in the whole, which by the succeeding care of this Kings Successors, did after amount (it isGel. l. 6. c. vlt. Am. l. 22. Isid. habet falso 70. pro 700. Gellius, Ammianus, and Isidores testimonie) to seuen hundred thousand Volumes: All which by cruell disaster in the Ciuill warres of Caesar, perished by fire; He firing the ships, and they the adjoyning Library; which neither He in his Commentaries, nor Hirtius (as Caesars most dismall fate) once mention: but Plutarch, Dio, Liuie, Seneca, Ammianus, and Gellius forget not these manifold Memorials, thus buried at once, and for euer, in forgetfulnes.  This Library was in the Temple of Serapis, as both Marcellinus, and after him Tertullian, testifie: but that in Tertullians dayes was another famous Library of Cleopatra's Founding,
 called for the likenesse, Ptolemeys; which in likelihood continued till that glorious Fabrike was ruined in the dayes of Theodosius, as Ruffinus, Socrates, and Sozomen haue written. Most of the Bookes of this latter, were brought from Pergamus, chiefe City of the lesser Asia, Seat of the Attalike Kings; one of which, Eumenes there collected two hundred thousand Volumes, (...) (not reckoning, asLips. de Bibliothec. c. 4. Lipsius interprets the place, that Volume for more then one, which contayned diuers Treatises) giuen by Antonius vnto Cleopatra, asPlut. Anton. Plutarch hath related. Ptolemey the fift then liuing, denied Eumenes in enuious emulation, the Egyptian paper, the cause that Parchment was then inuented at Pergamus, by Eumenes his industry, for the vse of his Library, as not onely Plinie and Varro, but the name of these skinnes  called Pergamena of that City, sufficiently witnesse. The Egyptian Paper (of which ours made of ragges hath still the name) was made of a Sedgie Reed growing in the Marishes of Egypt, called Papyrus, which easily diuides it selfe into thinne flakes; these laid on a Table, and moystened with the glutinous water of Nilus, were prest together and dryed in the Sunne. The Greekes and Romanes had their many famous Libraries, which would here trouble our Egyptian Traueller, who in Lipsius his Booke of that Argument may better satisfie himselfe: as also touching their Furnitures of Marble, Iuory, Glasse, and many many curious artificiall Inuentions; besides theSueton. in Tiber. Plin. in Epist. and de Sit. Ital. etc. Images of the bodies of learned Men there placed of Gold, Siluer, or Brasse, neere to more precious Images of their learned Mindes in their written Monuments. These indeed are the best mens best Images, in which theirPlin. l 35. c. 2. Immortall Soules  speake Immortally, yea, Immortality to themselues and others; they being dead, yet speaking, and neuer denying their wise counsels and familiar company to the t Studious, who by this meanes are neuerCic. Ossic. l. 3. Alphons. Rex Hisp. lesse alone, then when alone, and (as King Alphonsus sometimes said) neuer find better Counsellers then these dead.
And euer let their names flourish, that bestow care and cost to keepe those learned Names euer flourishing, and in redeeming these Monuments from Wormes, Mice, and putrifaction, erect vnto themselues Monuments farre beyond the stupendious Pyramides and other monstrous births of artificiall vanity. Cheops is scarsly remembred, nor worthy to be named with this Ptolemey, that fire not being able to consume the honour of his Name, that deuoured his Bookes: whereas Cheops his very name is doubted, and his memoriall rotten, not withstansting  his Pyramis still continues the remembrance of his Actiue and Passiue forgetfulnesse. And let my body want a Sepulchre, if my soule doe not more honour thatSir Tho. Bodlie Founder of the famous Library at Oxford, I might also here mention the Honorable care of D. King, L.B. of London for that of Christ Church and many many other worthy Benefactors in both Vniuersities: but their Memorials are there, euerie Booke, euerie Page, euerie stone, being more complete Panegyrikes of their praise, then the complementall Oration of the best Orator. Bodleian Monument, then all Triumphall Chariots of the liuing, then the Mausolaean, Mogoll, or Memphian magnificence for the dead, or any other Regall or Imperiall interments. There the stones are mute, or speake the Architects prayse, or haue inscribed a few Verses, verball flourishes perhaps of the Poets wit: but here euery Booke hath an Epitaph, nay the whole Booke is an Epitaph, and reall Testimony of the Founders worth; so many thousand dead Authours quickened by such care to speake his deserued prayse, so many liuing Students hauing their Minds daily feasted by such bounty, and the vnborne posterity hauing a better Inheritance purchased and prouided to their minds, then their carefull Parents can for their Bodies. But  how doth this likenesse transport vs from Alexandria to Oxford? In both an admirable Library; in both Prouisions of mayntenance for Collegiate and Academike Students, both necessary companions. For what else is store of Bookes, stately Fabrikes, and costly Furniture without Students, but carkasses without soule? and what They without Bookes and mayntenance, but walking Shadowes and wandring Ghosts? the one is (it is Senecas sentence) aStudiosa quaedam luxuria. studious luxury, the other a riotous study. Diuine then is that Heroike care of Such who (at once both Clients and Patrons of Arts and Learning) by liuing and liuelihood seeme to ioyne and giue life to soule and body together. And such was this Ptolemey, who made part of His Palace a Schoole, hauing conuenient places for sitting and walking (they are the words ofStrab. l. 17. Athen l. 1. Strabo) and a great House or Colledge, in which the Learned conuerse, and dyet together.  This Colledge hath rents in common, and a Priest also Rector of the Schoole, appointed first by the Kings, and after by Caesar. So carefull were these Kings of learned Neighbourhood, that they assigned part of the Palace to this employment, that all the choise learned in the Kingdome (asPhilostrat. de Dionys. sophista. Philostratus speaking of Dionysius admitted one of them by Adrian, affirmeth) were chosen Fellowes into this Colledge, not young Students, but rewarded publikely for their former proficience, as the best deseruing Citizens of Athens had their dyet in the Pritaneum: therein differing from the Seminaries of Diuine and Humane Learning amongst vs. Claudius enlarged the Schoole; and Hadrian vsed much to dispute and question with the learned therein, hereinAthen. l. 15. blamed that he bestowed this preferment on Pancrates a Poet, which  had flattered him in the Canonization of Antinous.



@. III. Of their Deuotions in those Times.
AS for the deuotion thereRuff l. 2. c. 23. Theod. l. 5. c. 22. practised, wee may reade in Ruffinus of the Temple and Image of Serapis in his time destroyed by Theophilus, successor to Athanasius, Bishop  of Alexandria. This Temple was borne vp with Vault-worke, with great lights and secret passages, the space of an hundred steps: on the top whereof round about, were lofty roomes, in which the Keepers of the Temple, and they which made themselues chast ((...)) remayned. Within these were Galleries, or Cloysters, in squared rankes, and in the middest of all was the Temple, lifted vp on costly Pillars, and built of Marble. Post Capitolium nihil orbis terrarum cernit ambitiosius, saithAm. Marcel. l. 22. Dionys. saith as much or more. Inter Serapidis templa celeberrimum apud Alexand. Vetustiss. Memphi hoc fanum subire nec hospit. nec sacerdotib. licet priusquam Apin sepelierint. Pausan. At. another: Except the Capitoll, the World hath not a statelier Piece. Here was the Image of Serapis, reaching with his right hand to the wall on one side, with his left hand vnto the other, being framed of all kinds of Wood and Metals. It had on the East a little window so fitted, that when on a solemne day the Image of the Sunne was admitted to salute this Serapis, the iuggling Priests so obserued the time, that euen then the Sun-beames through this window, should seeme to kisse Serapis. They had also another tricke, by a Load-stone placed in the Roofe, to draw vp  the Iron Image of the Sunne, as if it did then bid Serapis farewell. The superstitious Ethnikes had a Tradition among them, That if euer mans hand did offer violence to that Image, the Earth should presently returne, and resolue it selfe into the first Chaos, and the Heauens would suddenly fall. All this notwithstanding, a Christian Souldier dismembred the same, and burned Serapis openly, the Mice running out of his diuided trunke.
Rome (sayth Ruffinus) esteemed this Serapis to bee Iupiter, and that hee ware a Measure (Modius) on his head, as hee which gouerned all things in measure, or else did liberally feed men with the fruits of the Earth. Others coniectured him to be Nilus; others, IosephOros. l. 1. c. 8. affirme^h, that of Iosephs act Egypt is still witnesse vnto his time, continuing the payment of the fift part of their profits to the King. that fed Egypt in the seuen deere yeeres. Others thought him to bee one Apis, (a King in Memphis) who in the time of famine, with his owne store, supplied the peoples want: for  which benefit they built a Temple to him after his death, wherein they nourished an Oxe, in remembrance of him, whose husbandry and tillage had nourished them. This Beast they called also Apis.
HeStory of Tyrannus, Saturnes Priest. mentioneth the Temple of Saturne, whose Priest called Tyrannus, (vnder pretence of Saturnes commandement) would demand the company of what Lady he liked to beare the God company at night: which the Husband did not much sticke at, esteeming it an honour to haue a God his Corriuall. But Tyrannus shutting the woman into the Temple, by secret passages conueyed himselfe thither into the hollow Image of Saturne, in which hee held conference a while with the woman, and after by a deuice putting out the lights, satisfied his lust, in committing in the darke those workes of darknesse, which after being brought to light, caused the Temples destruction.
They had Brest-plates of Serapis in euery House, in the Walles, Entries, Posts, Windowes;  in stead whereof they after fastened Crosses. The Crosse in the Egyptian Mysteries signified life to come. They had a Tradition, That their Religion should continue, till there came a Signe, in which was Life.Socra. l. 5. c. 16 And by this occasion many of their Priests were conuerted. SozomenSoz. l. 7. c. 15. Marcellinus reporteth that Theodosius by Edict, abolished this Temple of Serapis. reporteth the same, That in purging of Serapis Temple at Alexandria, the Crosse, beeing found among other their Hieroglyphickes, was occasion of the conuersion of many vnto the Christian Faith. ThisNicep. l. 12. 26 Theod. l. 5. 22. Hist. trip. l. 10. cap. 29. Temple, and the Temple of Bacchus, were turned into Christian Churches. Olympius a Philosopher with a company of seditious Ethnikes, fortified themselues in Serapis Temple, and caused many by force to sacrifice: and when the Christians burned their Images, he answered that the Images were but corruptible matter, but the Vertues,  or Diuine Powers which inhabited them, were fled to Heauen. This I thought to mention for their sakes, who to their Image-worship haue borrowed the like Heathenish plaister. Ruffinus addeth, That in destroying the Temples, they found Reliques of their bloudie Superstition, the heads of Infants cut off, with the lips gilded.
The deuotion of Canopus was not inferiour to that of Alexandria. Here, through the subtiltie of the Priest, the Chaldeans were vanquished. For whereas they challenged their God Fire to be the strongest, as deuouring other Woodden and Mettal-gods, hee conueyed an Earthen pot full of holes, which he had stopped with Waxe and filled with water, into the Image: and when the Chaldaeans made their fiery tryall hereof, the Waxe melting, the Water issued, and quenched the fire. Hence it is that they made the Image of Canopus with feet  and necke short, and a belly like a barrell, or water-vessell.

TacitusC^r. Tac. l. 4. c. 35. vid. Nat. Sir H. Sauile. reporteth certaine Miracles wrought at Alexandria by the instigation of Serapis: the curing of a lame and blind man, whom that God had mooued to seeke this helpe at Vespasians hand, which he also performed. He consulting with this Oracle, saw suddenly behind him in the Temple one Basilides, whom by present enquiry hee found to lye sicke fourescore miles thence in his bed. The name yet was an ominous signe to him of the whole Empire, as deriued of (...). The originall of this God is by some imputed to Ptolomaeus Lagi, who hauing in Alexandria erected Temples, and instituted Religious Rites, seemed in his sleepe to see a tall young man, warning him to send into Pontus, to fetch thence his Image, suddenly after vanishing in a flame of fire. When the Egyptian Priests could not satisfie him  in the interpretation of these things, Timotheus an Athenian, whom hee had sent for to bee chiefe Master of Ceremonies, willed him to send to Sinope, wherein was an ancient Temple of Pluto, hauing in it the Image of Proserpina. Ptolomey neglecting this; and with a second Vision terrified, sent to Scydrothemis King of SinopeDionys. cals him Iupiter of Sinope, on which Eustatius commenteth that Sinopites is the same with Memphites; for Sinope is a hill of Memphis: or else of this Pontike Sinope, etc adding this Storie. Theoph. Patriarch of Antioch l. 2. cals Sarapis, Sinop^ profugus. for the same; being (in the way) further hereunto incouraged by the Delphian Oracle. Scydrothemis protracting the businesse, was by diseases and manifest anger of the Gods forced to assemble and perswade his people to suffer the carrying away of their God. But whiles they resisted this enterprize, the ambitious Idoll, without once taking leaue, conueyed himselfe into the ship, which also, together with him, hee made to arriue at Alexandria in three dayes, where this Temple was built to him, in the place wherein sometime had stood Isis Chappell. SomeAthen. l. 1. c. 5. 6. esteemed him Aesculapius  for his cures, some Osiris, some Iupiter,Achil. Stat. 5. some Pluto: but Serapis was his Egyptian appellation.Of Philadelphus incredible pompe, and Philopators ship read Athen. l. 5. c. 5. 6. Ptolomeus Philadelphus, his Sonne, bestowed cost in that famous Library at Alexandria before related, byA. Gel. l. 6. 17. Ado. Vien. Caesars Souldiers casually burned. Cornelius TacitusCor. Tac. An. 2. Of Memnons Image see Ortel. in expedit. Alexandri Mag. Dionys. Eustath. Iuven. Sat. 15. telleth no lesse Miracle of Memnons stony Image at Thebes, or as others say, at Abidus, which being striken with the Sun-beame, at the Sun-rising yeelded a vocall sound. This Image was halfe cut off by Cambyses: PausaniasPausan. Attic. sayth that he saw it, and largely describeth it. Augustus, hauing destroyed Anthony and Cleopatra, broughtSex. Aur. Victor. Sueton. Tran. Aug. Egypt into a Prouince, and scowred all the trenches of Nilus. Hee caused the body ofThis body Ptolom. tooke from Perdicca^ and burried it at Alexandria in a Golden Tombe. Strab. l. 17. Great Alexander to bee brought forth, which he crowned with a Crowne of Gold, and strewing with flowers, worshipped it. Hee built Nicopolis in memory of his Actian Victory: instituted there Quinqueniall  Games; enlarged Apollos Temple: and consecrated the place where he had pitched his Tents to Neptune and Mars, adorning it with spoyles.
OniasIos. Ant. 19.6. one of the Iewish Priests (according to the Iewish manner) literally interpreting EsaiesIsa. 19.13. Prophesie of the Altar in Egypt, built a Temple at Bubastis in fashion of that at Ierusalem, but lesse, by the permission of Philometor, and furnished it with Priests and Leuites after the Iewish Religion. AtIos. ant. l. 12. 2. Alexandria also the Iewes were free and had their Synagogues, as at Leontopolis likewise, and other places.Procop. de bello Persico l. 1 Precopius sayth, that Dioclesian the Emperour bestowed Elephantina and the parts adioyning on the Blemi and Nobatae, whose Religion was a mungrell of the Greekish, Egyptian, and their Owne: but he caused them to cease humane Sacrifices which they vsed to offer to the Sunne.
 And thus was the state of Religion in Egypt during the conquests of the Persians, Greeks and Romans, each rather seeking to settle heere their Empires then Opinions. But when the Sunne of Righteousnesse, the Sonne of God, the Sauiour of Man, appeared to the World, he honoured Egypt with his infancy, as after with a Religious conquest, by weapons (not carnall) casting downe the holds which these Hellish spirits had heere so long possessed; thus fulfilling truely what Esay had prophesied, and Mercury foretold. Alexandria became a Patriarchall Sea (the first Bishop whereof was Saint Marke) enioying in Libya, Pentapolis, and Egypt, the same power that the Romane Bishop had in Italy, by Decree of theCon. Nic. Can. 6. first Nicen Councell. Heere also liued the first Heremites (theHist. Tripar. cap. 11. Paul. Diac. l. 8. first and chiefe of which was Anthony, an Egyptian Inuenter of this Order) in the sandy Desarts, by occasion of those bloudy persecutions  wherein many thousand lost their liues. Of these Heremites reade Io. Cassianus, and Seuerus Sulpitius de vita Martin. l. 3. But when as the Mahumetan Religion and Armes began first to peepe into the World, EgyptVincent. Spec. lib. 4. was made a slaue to those Superstitions vnder which  it groneth till this day.



@. IIII. Of the Moderne Aegyptians, of Cairo and Alexandria.
THe Saracens diuided Egypt into three parts; Errif, from Cairo to Rosetto; Affahid, the Land part from Cairo to Bugia; Maremma, or Bechria, as Nilus runneth to Damiata. It wasLeo Afric. c. 8. subdued vnder the conduct of Hamrus the sonne of Hasi Generall of the Arabian forces to Homar or Aumar the second Caliph. Hee onely exacted Tribute,  permitting freedome of their Conscience to all. He built vpon the bankes of Nilus a Towne called by the Arabian Fustato, that is, Tabernacle; because in the Desart places, through which he passed, he was constrained to lye in Tents. The common people call this Towne Mesre Hatichi, the Ancient Citie: for so it is in respect of Cairo,The Arabians and Turkes doe call Cairo, Mis^ir: the reuenue whereof amounteth to aboue a Million, and runneth into the Hasnad or priuate Treasurie of the Great Turke, and not into the publike Treasurie: Lazora Soronzo. He hath vnder him there sixteene Sanzacki and 100000 Timariots, or horsemens fees to maintaine so many horse for the Turkes warres at their owne charge. Knolles. which was after built two miles from hence, by one Gehoar, who of a Dalmatian slaue had beene aduanced to be a Counsellor vnto Elcain the Mahumetane Calipha, and was Generall of his Army about the foure hundredG. Tyr. saith, it was bui^t in the yeere of Mah. 358. and made the Seat Royall 361. yeere of their Hegira. Hee called it Elchahira, which signifieth an imperious Mistresse. Hee walled it round, and built in it that famous Temple called Gemih Hashare, as Hamrus had done before at Fustato. In this Towne of Fustato standeth the Sepulchre of a famous Saint of their Sect called Nafissa, of the Line of Mahomet, whose beautifull Shrine the Schismaticall Patriarches  of Egypt adorned with siluer Lampes, Carpets of Silke and other precious ornaments. No Mahumetan commeth to Cairo eyther by Water or Land, but he adoreth this Sepulchre, and offereth thereat, insomuch that the yeerely Oblations and Almes heere offered for the reliefe of the poore kindred of Mahomet, and mayntenance of the Priests that keepe it (which want not their counterfeit Miracles to delude the peoples zeale) amount to one hundred thousand Saraffi. And when Zelim conquered Cairo, the Ianizaries rifling this Sepulchre, found in it fiue hundred thousand Saraffi in ready Coine, besides other riches. Some report that this Nafissa being a Dame of honour, yeelded her body, without reward, to any that required the same,Pilgrim. to Mecca ap. Hak. bestowing (as she said) this Almes for the loue of the Prophet Mahomet. Lettice sutable to such lips: Like Prophet, like Saint. But Leo would haue you thinke her  an honester woman.
Fustato is reckoned as a Suburb to Cairo, contayning (in Leo's time Anno one thousand fiue hundred twenty sixe) fiue thousand Families: besides many Sepulchres adored of the fond people, which couer the pauement with rich Carpets. Hither resort euery Friday great multitudes for deuotion, and bestow liberall Almes:P. Mart. Leg. Bab. l. 3. They heere sprinkle cold water with sweet herbes and leauy boughes.
Bulach is another Suburb of Cairo vpon the bankes of Nilus, of like distance, and hath in it foure thousand Families with stately Temples and Colledges. Beb EllochPerhaps this is that Babylon in Egypt where Sanutus saith the Merchants remayned: the Soldane with his Souldierie in Cairo. standeth a mile from Cairo, and hath about three thousand Families. Gemeh Tailon was adorned by Tailon sometime Gouernour of Egypt with a sumptuous Temple and Palace. Beb Zuala, another  Suburbe, containeth twelue thousand Families. Cairo, it selfe within the Walles, hath not aboue eight thousand Families, and is full of stately and magnificent Temples, Heere is an Hospitall built by Piperis, the first Soldan of the Mamalukes Race: the yeerely reuenues whereof amount to two hundred thousand Saraffi, or as some reckon, fiue hundred Ducats a day. It is open to all sicke and diseased persons, and heire to all that die there. The Plague is sometime so hot at Cairo, that there dye twelue thousand persons daily. This was the state of Cairo in Leo's time. SolomonS^l. Schu. Schuveigher affirmeth, that at his beeing in Cairo, Anno a thousand fiue hundred eighty one, there died daily betweene seuen and ten thousand: nor is any place more plagued with the French Disease. Besides that Hospitall, and Nafissas Sepulchre, are three other famous, Zauia della Inachari, Imamsciafij Giamalazar. This is the generall  Vniuersitie of all Egypt.Hak. Pilgrim. to Mecca. In this place, Anno one thousand fiue hundred threescore and sixe, in the moneth of Ianuary, by misfortune of fire were burned nine thousand written Bookes of great value, wrought with Gold, worth three or foure hundred Ducats a piece one with another. This was interpreted as an ominous token of their ruine. They thinke also that Mecca will in short time be conquered by the Christians, and her deuotions shall bee remooued to Rosetto. NeanderNean. Or. Terrae Par. 3. his conceit is ridiculous, that Cairo should hold as much people as all Italy, and that there are two and twentie thousand Temples. Iohn Euesham out of their owne RegistersBaumgarten. tels a report (but doubteth of the truth) of 24000. which perhaps was a Cipher added to his account for 2400. numbreth but two thousand foure hundred: and though Cairo considered together with these Suburbs is great, yet it is not all the way continued with houses and buildings,P. Mart. but hath Gardens also and Orchards betweene. Iodocus a Meggen reporteth,  that a man can hardly walke the streets by reason of the multitudes of peopleW. Lithgow speakes of 100000. Christians in this City, besides ^aracens, Iewes, and Heathens. and beasts. They bring their water from Nilus into the Citie on Camels: on Mules, and Horses
 the chiefe men ride, and on Asses the poorer. Neither will they permit a Christian to ride on a Horse. They sell all by waight, euen wood for the fire, of which is great scarsitie. And although the Temples and some Houses are faire, yet the greater part of the Towne is ill built. Because they may not by their Law drinke wine, they compound a drinke of drie Raisons steeped in water and other mixtures; yea, and secretly will make bold with the former. He saith, that (besides other calls from their steeples to deuotion) they ascend at mid-night to call, that the people may encrease and multiply, and therewith their Religion.
Beniamin Tudelensis numbred in Cairo 2000. Iewes in his time (440. yeeres since) in two Synagogues and Sects of the Hellenists and Babylonians. He saith that there then raigned in  Misraim or Cairo Amir Almumanin Eli sonne of Abitalib, all whose subiects were called Moredim or Rebels, for their difference from the Bagdad Caliph. His Palace was called Soan. And he came forth but twice a yeere, on their Easter solemnitie, and then when Nilus ouerfloweth, which extendeth fifteene dayes iourneyes when it ascendeth twelue cubits on their measuring pillar, and but halfe that way is watered, if it ascendeth but sixe cubits. An Officer euery day signified the increase, with proclamation of praise to God therefore. The water of Nilus serueth for drinke and medicine against repletions. Old Misraim (he saith) is two leagues from new Misraim, but altogether waste. Baumgarten thinks there are in Cairo 8000. which liue onely by carrying water. And there are diuers which either of their owne vow, or by some Testators charitie offer freely to all that will drinke in siluer vessels: and sprinkle  the streets twice a day because of the heate and dust. There are more in Cairo (hee reporteth such a rumour) which want houses to dwell in, then Venice hath Citizens. There are esteemed to be 15000. Iewes: 10000. Cookes which carry their cookerie and boile it as they goe, onLike such a^ sell Godlings, etc. in London. their heads. In nine or ten houres one can scarcely compasse it. But you must know that this was in the time of the Soldan, before the Turke had conquered it.
Now though I haue beene alreadie tedious, yet for the Readers fuller notice of this Countrey and Citie, I haue here added some of the later and exacter Obseruations of that learned Gentleman, Master George Sandys, to whom wee haue elsewhere beene indebted.M. G. Sandys. Hee relateth, that trauelling from Alexandria to Cairo, they paid at the gate a Madeyne a head, indifferently for themselues and their Asses: they passed through a Desart, producing here and  there a few vnhusbanded Palmes, Capers, and a weede called KallKali. which they vse for fuell, selling the ashes to the Venetians, who mixing them equally with the stones brought from Pauia by the Riuer Ticinum, make thereof their Christalline glasses. On the left hand they left the ruines of Cleopatras Palace, and beyond that of Bucharis an ancient Citie: and passing a guard of Souldiers, and after that ferried ouer a Creeke of the Sea, they came to a quadrangle arched, and built by a Moore for the reliefe of Trauellers, and there reposed themselues on the stones till mid-night, and then passed alongst the shore, before day entering Rosetta,Rosetta. where they repayred to a Caue belonging to the Frankes, in an vnder, darke, mustie roome, where they were entertayned on the hard floore. This Citie stands vpon the principall branch of Nile, called heretofore Canopus, which about three miles thence entereth the Sea, hauing  the entrance crossed with a barre of sand (as at Damiata) changeable with the windes and surges, the Ierbies or Boates being therefore made without keeles, flat and round in the bottom, a Pilot sounding all the day to direct for the Channell. The houses are of bricke, flat-roofed (a thing generall in these hotter countries) jetting ouer to shaddow the narrow streets, exceedingly furnished with prouisions, built by a slaue of an Egyptian Chalife. Neere to this stood Canopus, that Citie famous in the worst sense, if we beleeue Iuuenal; where,Famoso non cedit turba Canopo Luxuria, Iuuen, S. 15. to eschue vice, saith Seneca, was to incurre infamie. Here had Serapis a Temple, visited in his Often festiuals by a world of luxurious people from Alexandria, in painted boats, downe the artificiall Channels.
Here hyring a Ierby, the next day but one they came to Cairo. This arme of Nilus is as  broad as the Thames at Tilburie, slow, often troublesomely shallow, and euer thicke: hauing on each side many meane Townes, seated on Hills of mud throwne vp, to preserue them in the ouerflow. Ten miles from Rosetto is that Cut which runneth to Alexandria. Vpon the bankes along as they passed, were infinite numbers of deepe and spacious Vaults into which they let the Riuer, from whence they conuey it by trenches into their seuerall grounds, being drawne vp into higher Cisternes with wheeles set round with Pitchers, turned about by Buffoloes. The Moores had much labour in drawing vp the Boate, wading often aboue the middle, at euery stronger hale crying Elough, thinking by this name of God to finde his assistance, and to chase away Deuils and impediments.Moores in Egypt. Many of these Moores are broken by reason of their hard labour, and weake foode. They are descended of the Arabians, and vnderstand  their language: a deuout, ignorant, laborious people, tawnie, meane statured, nimble-footed, shrill tongued, spare of dyet, reputed base by the Turkes, not suffered to weare weapons in Townes, not admitted to Souldierie or Magistracie. In Cities they practise
 merchandise, little differing in habite from Turkes. There dwell also in Egypt Arabians, Iewes, Christians, both Greekes, Armenians, and the truest Egyptians, the Copties. The Countrey people follow husbandrie, are wrapt in a ruffet Mantle, both men and women; these hiding their faces with beastly clowts, with holes for their eyes, hauing easie trauell (those which are borne in the eighth moneth liuing, elsewhere deadly) to that purpose setting a plant in the roome, which growes in the Desarts, low, leafelesse, browne, branched like Corall, and set in water, doth then strangely display it selfe. A nastie people crusted with dirt, and sooted with smoke by reason of their fuell and want of chimneyes in their base cottages. The women thinke it a great comelinesse to bee fat, and therefore in the Cities being wrapt from the crowne of the head to the foot in linnen Robes, they spreade their armes vnderneath  to appeare more corpulent. They couer their faces with blacke Cypres bespotted with red. The better sort weare hoopes of gold and siluer about their armes, and aboue their ankles; others of copper, with pieces of coine halfe couering their foreheads, and plates about their necks. Both men and women brand their armes for the loue of each other, diuers women stayning their chinnes with knots and flowers of blue, made by pricking of the skinne with needles, and rubbing it ouer with inke, and the iuyce of an herbe, which will neuer out.
CairoCairo. (which wee had almost forgotten in this generall view of the moderne Egyptians) is seated on the East side of the Riuer, representing the forme of a Crescent, stretching South and North with the adioyning Suburbs fiue Italian miles, in breadth scarce one and a  halfe where broadest: the walls (if it bee walled) rather seeming to belong to priuate houses; the streets narrow, the houses high built, more faire without then inwardly commodious and most of stone neere to the top; at the end almost of each street a gate, which shot (as euery night they are) make them defensiue, as so many Castles. Their locks and keyes be of wood euen to doores platted with Iron. The MosquesTheir Mosques are magnificent, the stones of many being carued without, supported with pillars of marble, adorned with what Art can deuise, and their Religion tolerate. Yet differ they in forme from those of Constantinople, some being square, with open roofes in the middle of a huge proportion, the couered circle tarrast aboue; others stretched out in length, and many fitted vnto the place where they stand: adioyning to which are lodgings for Santons, Fooles, and mad men, whom their deuotion  honoureth. Here be also diuers goodly Hospitals both for building, reuenue, and attendance. Next to these in beautie are the great Mens Seraglios, by which if a Christian ride, they will put him from his Asse with indignation and contumelie. The streets are vnpaued and exceeding durtie after a showre (for here it rayneth sometimes in winter,Raine in Cairo. and then most subiect to plagues) ouer which many beames are laid athwart on the tops of houses, and couered with mats, to shelter them from the Sunne. The like couerture there is betweene two high Mosques in the principall street, vnder which when any great Man passeth, they shoote vp arrowes that sticke there in abundance.A stately Palace. The Nile, a mile distant, in the time of the inundation flowes in by sundrie channels, which growing emptie or corrupted, they haue it brought on Camels: their Well water being good for no other vse but to wash houses or clense the  streets. In the midst of the Towne is a spacious Caue, called the Besestan, in which are sold all finer wares,A stately Palace. and old things as at out-cryes, by the Call, Who giues more? There are three principall gates, neere to the Northermost of which sometime stood that stately Palace of Dultibe wife to Caitbeus the Sultan, which had the doores and jawmes of Iuorie, the walls and pauements checkered with discoloured marble; Columnes of Porphyre, Alablaster and Serpentine; feelings flourished with Gold and Azure, inlaid with Ebonie: but ruined by Zelim the Turke, and the stones and ornaments transported to Constantinople. Neere to this is the lake Esbiky, square and large; then onely a Lake when Nilus ouerfloweth, frequented with barges of pleasure: at other times as profitable as then pleasant, affoording fiue haruests in a yeere.Orchards in Cairo. Within and without the Citie are a number of delicate  Orchards watered as they doe their fields; in which grow varietie of excellent fruits, as Oranges, Limons, Pomegranates, Apples of Paradise, Sicamor figs, and another kinde (growing on Trees as bigge as Oakes, boared full of holes, the fruit not growing amongst the leaues, but out of the bole and branches) Dates, Almonds, Cassia fistula (leafed like an Ash, the fruit hanging downe like Sausages) Apples no bigger then berries, Galls growing on Tamariskes; Plantains, that haue a broad flaggie leafe growing in clusters, and shaped like Cucumbers, the rinde like a Pease-cod, solide within without stones or kernels, to the taste very delicious (holden by the Mahumetans the forbidden fruit in Paradise) and many other Trees, some bearing fruit all the yeere,Date Trees, naturall and common euen in the Desarts of Egypt. and almost all their leaues. To these adde whole fields of Palmes, and yet no preiudice to the vnder growing Corne: these are naturall (others planted, and  onely Orchards) pleasant in forme, in fruit profitable: of body strait, high, round and slend^r (yet vnfit for buildings) crested about, and therefore easily climbed: the branches
 like Sedges, slit on the neat her side and euer greene, growing onely on the top as plumes of feathers, yeerly pruned, and the bole at the top bared. There are Male and Female, both bearing Cods, but this onely fruitfull, yet not without the Males neighbourhood, towards whose vpright growth shee enclines her crowne, hauing in the beginning of March, her seedes commixed with his. Their Dates grow like fingers, whence they haue their name, ripe in the end of December, which began to Cod in Februarie: the tops of such as are fruitlesse, they open, and take out the braine which they sell for a Sallad, better then an Artichoke: of the branches they make bedsteds, Latices, etc. of the webbe of the leaues, Baskets, Mats, Fans, and the like; of the outward huske of the Cod good cordage, of the inward,  Brushes: all this they yeerly affoord without empayring the Tree.
At the South end of the Citie stands the Castle,Castle of Cairo. once the Mansion of the Mamaluke Sultans, ascended vnto by one way onely, and that hewen out of the Rocke by the easie steepes on horse-backe to bee ascended. From the top the Citie and Countrey yeeld a delightfull prospect. It is so great, that it seemes a Citie of it selfe, immured with high walls diuided into partitions and entered by doores of Iron, wherein are many spacious Courts, in times past the places of exercise. The ruines testifie a qucudam sumptuousnesse; many pillars of solide marble yet remayning, so huge, that they cause lust wonder, how they were thither conueyed. Here hath the Bassa his residence, and herein the Diuan is kept on Sundayes, Mundayes, and Tuesdayes: the Chauses as Aduocates preferring the suites of  their Clients. The Bassa commandeth as absolute Soueraigne, hath vnder him sixteene Sanziacks, and a hundred thousand Spacheis. The reuenues of this little Countrey amount to three millions of Shariffes, one to the Great Turke, the second to the Bassa, the third for payes and sending forth the Carauan to Mecca. The present Bassa is Mahomet, a man well in yeeres, and of seuere conditions. He cut off the heads of foure thousand Spacheis at his first entrance for insolencies, and sent the great men to Constantinople, strangling such as refused, vsing the Arabians which hated the other, in his executions. Drunkennesse is punished with death. If a robberie bee committed, they which are appointed to guard that quarter, suffer for it, which makes them (to saue themselues) sometimes apprehend innocents, who with holes boared through their armes stretcht wide on staues, in which are candles  stocke burning downe to the flesh, are led to execution. His rigour made him confine himselfe to the Castle, yet so approued of the Grand Seignior, that he hath giuen him his daughter in marriage (a childe of foure yeeres) solemnized with all possible ceremonies. He will hardly suffer a Christian to turne Mahumetan, thinking, perhaps, they doe it rather for preferment then deuotion.
No Citie can be more populous, nor better serued with prouision of all sorts, then Cairo, the fairest Citie in Turkie, yet now as it were withered by age and sicknesse, in comparison of her yonger and more flourishing times. Most of the Inhabitants are Merchants or Artificers. All of a trade keepe their shops in one place, which they shut about fiue a clocke (except Cookes) solacing themselues the rest of the day. Few but such as haue great families,  dresse meate in their houses, which the men buy readie drest, the women being too fine fingered to meddle with huswiferie. These ride abroad vpon pleasure on easie-going Asses, and tie their husbands to due beneuolence, otherwise procuring a diuorcement. Many Physitians are in Cairo, by reason of the many Simples brought hither. They haue a kinde of Roe, wherewith they perfume themselues in the morning, as a preseruatiue against both Infection and Deuils. There are many which get their liuings by shewing feats with Birds and Beasts: which teach Rauens to vse their throats and tongues together, so that they will make a man admire at their speech: Dogs and Goats to goe and turne on the tops of little pillars, not aboue the breadth of a mans hand; Camels taught to daunce when they are yong, by setting them on a hot hearth, playing meanewhile on an Instrument, the heat then  and musicke after, causing this motion. Asses are not Asses, but beyond Bankes his Horse in trickes, taught by their suttle Masters. But Cairo hath carried vs too farre, an Imperious Mistris indeed to our Readers patience. Yet will we further adde this short note out of the two Maron^tes Translators of the Nubian Geographers.
Metsr is the name of Cairo and all Egypt, so called of M^sraim the sonne of Noa,Cairo. Gab. Sionita and Io. Hesronita. Salt of Nilus. Balsam. as saith Mohamed S^razita. This Citie is gouerned by a Bascia and twentie fiue thousand Spahies and Ianizaries. It is rich in Cassia Trees, Sugar Canes and Corne, many Lands adioyning yeelding haruest twice a yeere, Hay foure times, Herbs and Pulse in manner alway greene. Adde store of Salt very white, the water of Nilus inclosed in pits, and by the onely heate of the Sunne in three dayes being turned into it. In former times it was famous for Balsam  plants, now remooued to Mecca by command of the Othomans; and none are found in all Egypt but seuen shrubsMaster Sandys saith, there is now but one, l. 6. c. 8. @. 2. in the Bassa's garden, kept with great diligence. The leaues are like
 to wilde Marjoram, the juyce is taken by a little incision in the trunke or branch. Abu-Chalil-Ben-Aali writes, that from the fifteenth to the two and twentieth of Rabij Atthani (^u^e) there falls a dew which leaues no token thereof in the earth, yet by vulgarVid. sup. pag 897. experience is found by weighing the Sand or Earth of Nilus bankes, and is an euident token of the encrease of Nilus. The Aire also is then made more wholsome; Plagues and Feuers cease, and those which were sickeThis is in Syria and ascribed to the Sunnes entrance into Leo. of them, recouered.
AlexandriaOf the Egyptian Cities see Marmolius his 11. booke, the later part of Alexan. see the discourse and descri^tion of G. Braun and F. Hogenberg. in C.O.T. lib. 2. cap. ^6. is very vnwholesome, as the graue of that Alexandria wee before mentioned. Vnder the foundations are great habitations, as if they were two Alexandria's built one vpon another. Vnder the houses of the Citie are Cisternes sustayned with mightie Arches to receiue the inundation of Nilus, belonging (saith G. Braun) to euery house: the  cause of much sicknesse to the Inhabitants, especially since the diminishing and decay of the Citie, most of the Cisternes now being fennie for want of vse. When the Saracens had spoyled it, it remayned long desolate, vntill a subtile Caliph proclaymed that Mahomet had left great indulgences to such as would here inhabite. And thus he replenished the Citie with Inhabitants, building houses for them, as hee did Colledges for the Students, and Monasteries for the Religious. Here yet remayneth a little Chappell, wherein they say that the high Prophet and King, AlexanderIllic Pellei proles vesana. Philippi Felix praedo iacet terrarum, etc. Luc. the Great lyes buried: to which resort many Piigrimes that adore the same, and bestow there their almes. The Arabians and their Alcoran also call Alexander, Two-horned, the reason whereof seemeth to be that his ambitious seeking to bee accounted the sonne of Iupiter Ammon: neither doe the vulgar Arabians know him by the  name Alexander, but by that title of Two-horned. And such was his Image in the Cyrenaike coynes. This body was taken from Perdiccas by Ptolemaeus Lagi, and there intombed in gold: which Cybiosartes taking away, it was couered with glasse, so remayning till the time of the Saracens. In old time they had a custome, mentioned byGallen. de theriaca. Gallen, of executing condemned persons which they would quickly despatch; to apply to the brest an Aspe, and then cause him to walke a few pases: and suddenly he is at his long home. This he there saw: a practice not much vnlike the Athenian draught of Hemlock. There is in Alexandria (as Master Enesham relateth) a pillar of marble, called by the Turkes, King Pharaos needle, foure square, in height ninetie foote. Master Sandys saith, there lyes another by it, like vnto it, halfe buried in rubbidge: both Hieroglyphicall Obeliskes of Theban marble, almost as hard, and of a deeper  red then Porphyr: in the same place where Alexanders Palace stood. And without the said Citie foure hundred pases, another round, called Pompeys Pillar, standing on a square stone fifteene foote high: the compasse of the pillar is seuen and thirtie foote, the height, an hundred and one, causing no small wonder how it should be erected on that stone. This happily was set vp in memorie of Great Pompey, who by the Egyptian treacherie was slaine at Pelusium, almost in the sight of Ierusalem (asPa. Eberus hist. Iudaica. 52.53. Eberus noteth) and that Countrey of the Iewes which he had vniustly wronged and subdued to Romane seruitude; although his hands were purer touching the holy places and treasures, which his curious eyes would needes behold, then those of perjured Crassus, which before had suffered deserued vengeance by Parthian execution. Iodocus a MeggenPeregr. c. 15. saith, that the Channell which bringeth water from Nilus  continueth fiftie miles: the Cisternes which receiue it, are as you haue heard: and it is thought (as this our Author affirmeth) that those parts of Alexandria which the ground hideth, cost more then that which is open to the view. Yet doe these Cisternes now much decay. The Citie sheweth faire without, but within (they are Ba^mgartensLib. 1. cap. 14. wordes) like a heape of stones: few houses are whole. The Custome is farmed by the Iewes at two hundred thousand Madeins a day (a coyne of siluer trebling the value of an Asper, thirtie of them amounting to a Riall of eight) the Port is fre^ to friend and enemie. Ten in the hundred is paid in kinde of all thing for custome, onely money payes but one and a halfe, whereof they take an exact account, that they may ghesse at the value of returned commodities; then paying eleuen in the hundred more, euen for such Goods as are in propertie vnaltered. The places  anciently famous in Alexandria, besides the Musaeum and Serapium before mentioned, as their Vniuersitie and Librarie, were the Isaeum and other their Temples, which with the Palaces are said to take vp the fourth part of their Citie. Beniamin Tudelensis speaketh of a faire building without the walls in his time, called Aristotles Schoole, wherein were twentie Schooles, and betweene them marble pillars: sometimes much frequented (as he saith, but I thinke, deceiued)This errour grew from the Schoole of Aristotelicall Philosophie, whereof Anatolius was here Professor. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 32. Niceph. l. 6. c. 36. to heare Aristotles Reading. He mentions Vaults a mile long. He found there three thousand Iewes. Thebes, that sometime was so famous a Citie, contayneth not now aboue three hundred Families: and still retayneth some bones of the carkasse of old Thebes, many pillars, walls, inscriptions in Latine, Greeke, and Egyptian characters. Memphis, her next successor, is vtterly ruinate.  



@. V. Of the Saracens, their Acts and Sects: of the Mamalukes and Cophties.
THe Mahumetanes entred Aegypt about Anno 637. After, their state sinking vnder the weight of it selfe (which is the ordinary sicknesse of Greatnesse) they grew to dissentions and Sects, as is said in our Saracen History. For the seate of the Saracenicall  Caliphas beeing by Macamat remoued to Bagdat, which hee had builded,The first succession of the Aegypti^n Calipha's vncertaine. there arose new Caliphs in Damasco; in Egypt (whose seate was after at Cayro:) in Cayroan, to whom the Africans yeelded subjection, and after at Marocco. But in Elcains time, while hee sought to winne the East from the Caliph of Bagdat, his Lieutenant rebelled against him, and hee was faine to liue in Egypt, where Gehoar had built Cayro. The Sect of Hali had before also preuayled in Egypt, for which case Nafissus father was forced to flee the Countrey, yet this fect after was restored by Asmulinus, and Solinus his sonne, first Caliph of Egypt. But when the Westerne forces, vnder Godfrey of Bullen, grew terrible to the East,Car. Ch^on. l. 4 c. 10. 11. 53. the Egyptians payd tribute to the Christians, which Dargan the Sultan detayning, was by Almericus King of Ierusalem ouerthrowne in battell.Knolls T.H. Noradine of Damasco sent Saracon  his sonne to helpe Sanar the Sultan against this Dargan, which Saracon was by the Caliph appointed Sultan, who before had slaine the Sultan, and Saladine his Successour slewIac. a Vitriaco. or. hist. c. 8. the Caliph (for comming to him with pretence of doing him reuerence, hee smote him to the ground with an Iron Mace) and rooted out his Posteritie to settle his owne. This History is diuersly reported. PeucerusPeuc. Car. Chro. maketh the Egyptian Caliphs to bee Schismaticall from their first entrance, which was (as hee saith) in Anno 703. which raigned in Egypt foure hundred forty and seuen yeeres, of the profession of Hali. Curio writeth otherwise, asRead. l. 3. c. 1^ in their History wee haue shewed. So also doth Leo, dissenting from them both, a man learned in his owne Religion. Hee saith that the Caliph of Cayro had contmued two hundred and thirty yeeres, when as Saladine slew him, and subjected himselfe to the Caliph  of Bagdet, the onely Caliph then remayning. This Saladine was nephew to Saracon, who chased the Christians out of Syria. His Children raigned after him, of which Melechsala was last, who first inuented the Order of the Mamalukes, which were Cireassian slaues bought in their youth, and trayned vp to Armes, Artes, and Religion of the Saracens, whom hee made of his Guard. But they slew their Master, and vsurped the Kingdome to themselues, alwayes electing one of their Company, the first of which Mamaluke Kings was Turquemenius, who was slaine of his fellow Cothus, and hee of Bendocader, who was also poysoned, etc.
Leo sayth, that Saladines Family raigned an hundred and fiftie yeeres, and Piperis was (sayth hee) the fi^st Mamaluke King. Campson Gaurus, and Tomumb^^s, the l^st of th^se  Kings, were ouerthrowne by Zelim the Turke, Anno 1517. whose Successours still hold Aegypt, and haue a Bassa resident at Cayro, from whence was carried by water many Ornaments to Constantinople. The Caliph was at Bagdet, so heere, retayned some spirituall preeminence, much like the Rex sacrorumL. Fenestella d^ Sacerd. Rom. amongst the Romanes, whose Title was Royall, and his Office in their superstitious ceremonies to performe those Rites which the Kings had vsed personally to doe: but this titular King was subject to higher Powers of the Pontifex People, and Senate. Baumgarten saw him in white attire with a forked Diadem or Mitre,Mart. a Baum, lib. 1. cap. 17. a blacke and long beard, with a great retinue comming to salute Tongobardinus a great Mamaluke (which sometimes had beene a Deacon in Spaine, and now had embraced the world, and the world him, possessing Honours, Wealth, and fiue and thirtie Wiues) in Cayro.
Peter Martyr sayth, that theLeg. Bab. 3. Caliph selleth the Soldan this Dignitie at a price, and ascending the Throne, doth giue and commit vnto the Soldan there standing on foote, the absolute power of life and death, and then descending, difrobeth himselfe, attiring the Soldan with the same Robes. So it appeareth, that the name and power of the Caliph, all the time of the Mamalukes (as the Ghost of it selfe) had some almost breathlesse shadow left: the life and substance being in the Soldan.
There is (sayth Leo) in Cayro, and in all Aegypt foure Sects, differing from each other in Canon and Ciuill Lawes, all Mahumetans. Hee which professeth one of these Sects, cannot at his pleasure betake him to another, except being learned hee shew reasons therefore. Each of these Sects hath his peculiar Iudge, from whom yet lyeth an appeale to a higher  Iudge, being Gouernour of the Sect called Essafichia. Whosoeuer attempteth ought against the Precepts of his owne Sect, is secretly punished by the Iudge thereof: And although the Priests of these seuerall Sects vse differing Liturgies and Rites,Example for C^ristians, in ending Controuersies of Religion. yet doe they not take
 one the other for Enemies, with hatred or mutinies: but if any question arise, Learned men by conference debate the same. No man vpon paine of grieuous punishment may reproach any of the foure Doctors, first Authors of those foure Sects. There is one Sect of religious men in Cayro, called Chenesia, which liue vpon Horse-flesh: therefore are lame Iades bought and set vp a fattening, and sold to these Chenesians, which Sect is rise in all Asia. There goe certayne Women vp and downe the Citie crying, whose office is to Excise or Circumcise the women, which is obserued in Aegypt and Syria, both by the Mahumetans, and Iacobite-Christians. Neither haue the Turkes (although in superstition by themselues acknowledged short of the Arabians and Aegyptians) beene altogether idle in their Deuotion, which they testifie by their Pilgrimages, andGood works among Turkes. Almes-workes. Bellonius telleth of one  Turke that caused water to bee brought daily on Camels backes for the ease of Trauellers in that desart space betweene Alexandria and Rosetto. Egypt hath in it many Iewish Synagogues, who speake the Spanish, Italian, Turkish, Arabian, and Greeke languages, and are great Merchants. Thus wee see the judgements of God by the Persians, Grecians, and Romanes for their Pristine Idolatrie, and a greater Iudgement for their Heresie, hatched by Arrius, punished by a Saracenicall Apostasie.
Amongst the differing Sects of the Mahumetans (of which wee haue spoken in the third booke) Africa, and especially Egypt, and herein Cayro most of all is pesteredLeo, lib. 3. with them, which may bee called the Naked, or the Wicked Sect, roguing vp and downe naked, and practising their fleshly villanie, in the open fight of the people, who yet hold them for Saints.  The just hand of Diuine Iustice, that when men forsake God, not Religion and Truth alone, but Reason, but Sense shall also forsake them.
Before wee leaue those Soldans of Cayro, or rather because you haue stayed so long heere, let vs bestow some spectacle on you worthy the sight, as a refreshing to your wearied eyes. They are the same which the Soldan in ostentation of his magnificence made to the Turkish Embassadour,Mar. Ba. l. 1. c. 20 Anno 1507. from Baumgartens relations, which was an eye-witnesse thereof. There were assembled threescore thousand Mamalukes all in like habite: the Soldan himselfe all in white,^ertomannus al^o m^ntions this actiuitie of the Mamalukes. with a mitred Diadem, and not farre from him their Pope or Calipha in a lower seate: and beneath him the Turkish Embassadour. The place was a spacious Plaine, in which were three heapes of sand, fiftie paces distant, and in each a Speare erected  with a marke to shoote at, and the like ouer against them, with space betweene for sixe Horses to runne a brest. Heere did the younger Mamalukes gallantly adorned, vpon their Horses running a full career, yeeld strange experiments of their skill, not one missing the marke, first with casting Darts, and after with their Arrowes, as they ranne: and lastly trying their slaues. Others after this, in the like race of their running Horses, shot with like dexteritie diuers Arrowes backwards and forwards. Others in the middest of their race alighted three times, and (their Horses still running) mounted againe, and hitte the marke neuerthelesse. Others did hitte the same, standing on their Horses thus swiftly running. Others three times vnbent their Bowes, and thrice againe bent them whil^^ their Horses ranne, and missed not the marke: neither did others, which amidst their race, lighted downe  on either side, and againe mounted themselues: no, nor they which in their swiftest course leaped and turned themselues backwards on their Horses, and then (their Horses still running) turned themselues forwards. There were, which whiles their Horse ranne, vngirt their Saddles thrice, at each time shooting, and then againe girding their saddles, and neuer missing the marke. Some sitting in their saddles, leaped backwards out of them, and turning ouer their heads, setled themselues againe in their saddles and shot, the former, three times. Others layd themselues backwards on their running Horses, and taking their tayles, put them into their mouthes, and yet forgot not their ayme in shooting. Some after euery shot drew out their Swords, and flourished them about their heads, and againe sheathed them. Others sitting betwixt three swords on the right s^de, and as many on the left, thinly  cloathed, that without great care euery motion would make way for death, yet before and behinde them touched the marke. One stood vpon two Horses running very swiftly, his feete loose, and shot also at once three Arrowes before, and againe three behinde him. Another sitting on a Horse neither brydled nor saddled, as hee came at euery marke arose and stood vpon his feete, and on both hands hitting the marke, sate downe againe three times. A third sitting on the bare Horse, when hee came to the marke, lay vpon his backe and lifted vp his legges, and yet missed not his shoote. After all this they ranne with like swiftnesse (for all these things, which, where is the Vaulter that can doe on his imaginary Horse standing still? these did running) and with their slaues carried away those markes, as tryumphing ouer their innocent enemy. One of them was killed with a fall, and two fore wounded  in these their feats of Actiuitie. They had an Olde graue man which was their teacher. If I haue long detayned thee in this spectacle, remember that the race of Mamalukes should
 not bee forgotten, the rather, because their name is now rased out of the world; and this may seeme an Epitaph on their Sepulchre, after whom none perhaps are left able to doe the like, nor in all Franciscus Modius his Triumphall Pandects to be parelelled.
As for the Christians in Aegypt, yee may reade in the HistoriesHist. Sar. G. Tyr. Foxe Act and M^n. Vitriac. Sanut etc. of the Holy-landwarres, what attempts were often made by the Westerne Christians against these vnbeleeuers. Concerning the present state of Christianitie there, Leo, Boterus,G. Bot. Ben. Pory in Leon. Chytr. Chron. and Master Pory in his Additions to his Englished Leo, may acquaint you; and better then others Master George Sandys. Besides the forreine Christians, which resort to these parts for traffique there, are thought to bee fiftie thousand Natiue of the Countrey, which haue Churches,  and Monasteries, whereof there are three Christian Churches at Alexandria. They are called Cofti, and Christians from the Girdle, because of their Circumcision, which together with Baptisme they admit. In their Liturgie they vse the Chaldaean language. But they reade the Gospell againe, in the Arabian. They are accounted of Eutiches Heresie. Their Patriarchall Sea is Alexandria: whichAbdias Fab. Dorotheus Baron. lib. 6. Whit. 55.2. from Saint Marke to this day hath had a continued succession, as appeareth by the late Letters of Gabriel to the Pope, calling himselfe the fourescore and seuenteenth of the Patriarchs from Saint Marke. Thus writeth Baronius with a great many swelling words, which may puffe vp his Romane Sea.
But how credulous is Superstition? and that neuer-erring Sea hath (how often?) beene gulled this way, or sought to gull and coozen others with such Iesuiticall fictions of I  know not what conuersions, and submissions, as Baronius would make you beleeue of this Gabriel. Thus had Mahomet his Gabriel, and thus our age hath another Gabriel obtruded vpon the vulgar simplicitie: (farre fetched belike is good for theyr Lady-mother) But Alexandria hath knowne no Gabriel in these times, Patriarch there. George Dousa held good acquaintance with Meletius, and his Predecessour was Siluester; so that this Romish Gabriel which ascribeth so much to that Sea, was a Romane Gabriel indeed, which Alexandria neuer knew. Neither did Meletius the Patriarch know any such Papall Supremacie, but writeth learnedly against the same, as in an Epistle of his to Iohn Dousa (wherein hee maketh mention of our EnglishM. E^ward Barton. Embassadour) extant with George Dousas Iournall may appeare.
 How Christian Religion was first planted in Aegypt by Saint Marke, and the Apostles, and their Successours, and how persecuted by the Ethnikes: after by the Arrians; and how Ethnike Religion was againe by Valens permitted to all that would embrace it, the fore-named Ecclesiasticall Histories make mention: how it was persecuted by the Persian inuasions, and after by the Saracens in time brought to this present passe, and how it now continueth, wee may reade in many both oldBaron. Annal^ Papaeus Edagr. Pantaleon, etc. and new Authors. Zaga Zabo an Ethiopian Bishop saith, that the Patriach of Alexandria resideth at Cairo: where their Ethiopian Metropolitane f receiueth of him his Confirmation. And in their Ethiopian Liturgie, they mention them, both in this sort: Pray for our Prince, the Prince of our Archbishops,Dam a Goes. Fran. Aluares c. 98. Hemingij Catechismus in fine. Catholicae Tradi^ the Lord Gabriel, and the chiefe of the Church of Alexandria, and for the chiefe of our Countrey, our venerable  Archbishop Marke, etc. And thus much of this Egyptian Prelate, as a taste of that which is to bee declared in our Christian Relations. Adrianus Romanus,Theat. Vrbium, and Sa^^^^s, in his Theatrum Vrbium, sayth, that besides the Patriarch of the Coptites, heere is also a Patriarch of the Greekes and Arabians, which haue their Liturgie in Greeke, but scarce vnderstand the same The Cop^ite Patriarch hath his title of Alexandria, but his residence in Cayro. But it is more then time to leaue this the first and worst of Nations in Superstition: Zealous in all, but not according to knowledge: as else-where shall appeare, in their Christianity folded in manifold Iewish ceremonies; and heere hath beene manifested in their present Mahumetan, and ancient Ethnike bloudy, beastly, stinking Deuotions, so eagerly pursued (let this bee our Conclusion) thatIuuen. Sa^. 1^ Inuenal in his time writing of a Religious quarrell irreligiously bandied betweene  the Combites and Tentyrites, at the end of a seuen dayes Festiuall obserued Day and Night: after many wounds and blowes, One in flight falling downe, and so into the Enemies hands, was presently plucked in pieces and eaten rawe: that euen their sacrifices of Men, in respect of this were milde, as morsels to their Gods, but this in despight of Deuotion, or despightfull Deuotion, became a humane Sacrifice to inhumane, beastly, diuellish Men. Onely let vs obserue the Aegyptian Chronologie, and so make an end.





CHAP. VI. The Aegyptian Chronologie, out of Manetho high Priest of the Aegyptians, and others.
AFter this so long a Historie of Aegyptian affaires, I haue heere added the order of times, wherein those things happened, that this our Relation might bee the more compleat, although perhaps it may seeme to some more then tedious already. Varro diuided Times into three sorts; the first hee called Vncertaine;  the second Fabulous; the third Historicall. Ioseph Scaliger, a man happely more studious in this subject of Times, then all Times before haue yeelded vs, reckoneth the two former for one, as not easily to bee distinguished. He hath also published to the world not onely his owne learned Obseruations on Eusebius Chronicle, but such FragmentsExcerpta Barbaro-Lat. Manusc. Chron. Causab. Collectanea hist. etc. as out of Cedrenus, Syncellus, and others, hee could finde both of Eusebius Chronicle in Greeke (for before we had onely the Latine Translation of Hierome, much whereof also is vtterly lost) as also of Africanus, from whose store-house Eusebius tooke his Chronicle, both for matter and words, almost by whole-sale. And whereas Annius had before couzened the world with counterfeits of Berosus, Manetho, Metasthenes, with other fabulous tales, falsely fathered on the Ancients: hee hath helped likewise to some Reliques of  those Histories, which others haue inserted into their workes; the very bones of such carkasses being worthy of admiration, if not of veneration. The true Manetho therefore in three Tomes wrote the Aegyptian Historie vnto Ptolomeus Philadelphus: his Greeke Epistle Dedicatory being but short, I haue thus translated:
To the Greeke King Ptolomeus Philadelphus(...), 1. Venerable, appropriated after to Augustus and his successours. Augustus, Manetho High Priest and Scribe of the sacred Sanctuarie throughout Aegypt, of the Sebennite Family, a Heliopolitan, to my Lord Ptolomeus, Greeting. It behoueth vs (mightie King) to giue account of all those things which you counsell vs to search out. The sacred Bookes, written by our fore-father Trismegistus Hermes, which I haue learned (according as you, enquiring what things shall come to passe in the world, haue commanded me) shall be declared: Farewell, my Lord King.
Hence appeareth the time of Manetho, and his pontificall Dignitie, with the originall of  his Antiquities borrowed of Hermes, and the occasion of his writing in the Greeke, as to a Graecian King.
HeePatricius out of a holy book setteth downe this Genealogie: Horus the sonne of Osiri^, he of Chus, and b^ of Cham or Chamephes. first setteth downe the yeeres of the raigne of their Gods. Vulcan, Sol, Agothodamon, Saturne, Osiris, and Isis, Typhon. Then of the Demi-gods: Orus, who raigned fiue and twentie yeeres: Mars, three and twentie: Anubis, seuenteene: Hercules, foureteene: Apollo, foure and twentie: Ammon, thirtie: Tithoes, seuen and twentie: Sosus, two and thirtie: Iupiter, twentie. Things both false in themselues, and in the Copie imperfect. After these hee reckoneth in order two and thirtieAegyptian Dynasties. Dynastiae, Lordships, or gouernments in Egypt.
1 The first of the Thinites; of eight Kings, whose names and yeeres of raigne are, Menes,  threescore and two: hee was slaine of an Hyppopotamus, or Riuer-Horse. Ath^this his Son, seuen and fiftie. He built a Palace in Memphis, and wrote of Anatomie. Cenicenes his sonne, one and thirtie. Enephes, his sonne, three and twentie. In his time was a great famine. Hee built the Pyramides in Cochon. Saphaedus, his sonne, twentie: Semempsis, his sonne, eighteene: Bieneches, his sonne, sixe and twentie. Sum. tot. two hundred threescore and three. Of Menes, the first of these, it is reportedCal. Calcag. de reb. Aeg. that hee first inuented the vse of money: for which long after hee was solemnely cursed by a Councell of Priests in the time of Cnephatus, and at Thebes a pillar was erected in the Temple to testifie the same.
2 The second Dinastie of the Thinites; vnder nine Kings. Whose names and yeeres of their raigne are in order as followeth, Boethus, eight and thirtie yeeres. Catechos, nine and  thirtie: in his time was ordayned the worship of Apis, at Memphis, and Mneuis at Heliopolis. Binothris, seuen and fortie: Tlas, seuenteene: Sethenes, one and fortie: Chaeres, seuenteene: Nephercheraes, fiue and twentie: in his time Nilus is said to haue had his waters mixed with honey. Sesochris, eight and fortie: Ceneres, thirtie: Summe, three hundred and two.
3 The third, of the Memphites. Echerophes, eight and twentie: Tosorthros, nine and twentie. He is supposed to be Aefculapius, for his skill in Physicke; studious of Painting and Architecture. Tyris, seuen: Mesochris, seuenteene: Zoyphis, sixteene: Tesertasis, nineteene: Aches, two and fortie: Siphuris, thirtie: Herpheres, sixe and twentie.
4 The fourth Dinastie of the Memphites. Soris, nine and twentie: Suphis, threescore and three: he made the greatest Pyramis. Suphes, threescore and sixe: Mencheres, threescore and  three: Ratoeses, fiue and twentie: Bicheres, two and twentie: Zebercheres, seuen: Tamphthis, nine: Sesochris, eight and fortie,

5 The fifth, of the Elephantines. Vsercheres, eight and twentie: Sephres, thirteene: Nephercheres, twenty: Sisiris, seuen: Echeres, twenty: Rathuris, one and forty: Mercheres, nine: Tacheres, forty and foure: Vnos, three and thirty.
6 The sixt, of the Memphites. Othoes, thirty: Phios, three: Methusuphis, seuen: Phiops, a hundred: Menthesuphis, one: Nitochris, twelue; she built the third Pyramis.
7 The seuenth, of seuenty Kings, that reigned so many dayes apiece.
8 The eight, of seuen and twenty Kings, which reigned an hundred forty and eight yeers. Their names are not expressed.
9 The ninth Dynastie, was of the Heracleopolitans: of which, were nineteene Kings,  that reigned foure hundred and nine yeeres. The first of them was Achthoes, a cruell Tyrant, deuoured by a Crocodile.
10 The tenth, was of nineteene Kings: whose reigne endured an hundred fourescore and fiue yeeres.
11 The eleuenth, of the Diospolitans: whose sixteene Kings reigned three and forty yeeres. Here endeth the first Tome of Manetho: whose second Tome containeth the twelfth Dynastie of the Diospolitans; The first of which was Cesongoses, six and forty:Dynast. 12. Ammamenes, eight and thirty: Sesostris the great Conquerour, eight and forty: Lachares, eight: Ammares, eight: Ammenenes, eight: Semiophris, foure.
13 The thirteenth, of threescore Kings, which reigned foure hundred fifty and three yeeres.
 14 The fourteenth; of threescore and seuenteene Kings, contayned an hundred fourescore and foure.
15 The fifteenth, of Phoenicians, Shepherds, the first of which was Saites, nineteene: Anon, three and forty: Pachnan, threescore and one: Staan, eight: Arcles, forty nine: Aphobi^, threescore and one: In all two hundred forty and two. And the totall summe of the yeeres of these fifteene Dynasties is three thousand three hundred and seuenteene.
16 The sixteenth Dynasty was of other shepheards, whose thirty two Kings reigned fiue hundred and eighteene yeeres.
17 The seuenteenth, was of other shepherds vnder thirty three Kings, and the Theban Diosophites, an hundred fifty and one yeeres.
 18 The eighteenth of the Diospolites. Amo^, fiue and twenty: Chebros thirteene: Amenophthi^, foure and twenty: Amersis, two and twenty: Misphris, thirteene: Misphragmuthosis, six and twenty: Thuthmosis, nine: Amenophthis, one and thirty. This is supposed to be Memnon, and the speaking Statue. Oros, seuen and thirty: Acherres, two and thirty: Rathos, six: Chebres, twelue: Acherres, twelue: Amerses, fiue: Rammeses, one: Ammenoph, nineteene: in all, two hundred fourescore and seuen.
19 The nineteenth: Sethos, one and twenty: Raphsaces, threescore and one: Ammenophthes, twenty: Rameses, threescore: Ammenemes, fiue: Thuoris, six.
20 In the third Tome. The twentieth Dynasty lasted one hundred and fiue and twenty yeeres. The Kings were twelue.
 21 The one and twentieth, of the Tanites: Smerdes, six and twenty: Psusennes, two and forty: Mephelcheres, foure: Amenophtis, nine: Opsochon, six: Psineches, nine: Susennes, fourteene; called Sesac in Scripture: in all, one hundred and ten.
22 The two and twentieth, of the Bubashtes: Sesonchis, one and twenty: Vsorthon, fifteene. The third, fourth, and fift, are not named: to them are ascribed fiue and twenty yeeres: In this space Zara the Ethiopian ouer-ran these parts. T^kellothis, thirteene: his successor, two and forty: in all, one hundred and sixteene.
23 The three and twentieth, of the Tanites: Petubastes, forty: Osorch^s, eight: Psammus, ten: Ze,--one and thirty: in all, fourescore and nine.
24 The foure and twentieth, of Bo^choris the Saite, who reigned foure and forty yeeres,  was taken and burned of Sabbacon.
25 The fiue and twentieth, of the Ethiopians: Sabbacon, eight: Seuech, fourteene: Tarach, eighteene: in all, forty. This Tarach perhaps was he which built Tarracona in Spaine, if we beleeue TaraphasF. Tarap de Reg. Hisp. Collection out of Eusebius.
26 The six and twentieth, of the Saites: Stephinates, seuen: Nechepsos, six. Thus farre out of Manetho; here followeth out of Herodotus: Psammeticus, forty foure: Nechao, seuenteene; he slue Iosias: Psammis, sixteene: Vaphres, fiue and twenty; with him Zedekiah entred league. Herodotus calleth him Apnes. The Maforites, by their Hebrew points (through ignorance of forreine Historie, as Scaligor saith) haue made it Hophra, of whom IeremieIer. 44.30 prophesied that destruction which Amasis executed (as Herodotus reporteth) who reigned foure  and forty yeeres. The summe of the yeeres of this Dynasty, is one hundred fifty and nine.
27 Here followeth againe out of Manetho: The seuen and twentieth Dynasty of the Persians: Cambyses, foure: Darius Hystaspes, six and thirtie: Xerxes, twenty: Artabanus, seuen
 moneths: Artaxerxes Longimanus, forty: Xerxes, two moneths: Sogdianus, seuen: Darius Nothus, eleuen, in all, one hundred and thirteene.
28. The eight and twentieth, of the Mendesians: Amyr^aeus Saites, six.
29 The nine and twentieth, Nepherites, six: Achoris, twelue: Psammites, one: Nepherites, two moneths.
30 The thirtieth, of the Sebennites: Nectanebis, eighteene: Teos, two: Nectanebos eighteene.
31 The one and thirtieth, of the Persians: Artaxerxes Ochus, ten: He recouered Egypt in the seuenteenth yeere of his Reigne: Arsos, foure: Darius Codomannus, six: subdued by Alexander. Hitherto Manetho. The whole summe of whose one and thirty Dynasties amount  to fiue thousand three hundred fifty and fiue yeeres.
32 The two and thirtieth Dynastie, of the Macedonians: Alexander Mag. fiue: Ptolemeus Lagi, forty: Ptol. Philadelphus, eight and thirty: Ptol. Euergetes, sixe and twenty: Ptol. Philopator, seuenteene: Ptol. Epiphanes, foure and twentie: Ptol. Philometor, fiue and thirty: Ptol. Euergetes 2. nine and twentie: Ptol. Physcon, seuenteene: Ptol. Alexander, ten: Ptol. Cleopatrae, eight: Ptol. Dionysius, thirty: Cleopatra, two and twenty: in all, three hundred and one.Sen in Ludo Cla. Caes. vid. Turneb. ad. l. 18. c. 13. and B. Rhen. Some of these Ptolemeys made incestuous Marriages with their owne sisters; which it seemes was not vnusuall in Alexandria: whereupon Seneca scoffeth, Athenis dimidium licet, Alexandria totum. Whereupon Turncb. affirmeth, That at Athens they might marry their owne sisters by ther father (as Lycurgus permitted only the sisters by mothers side, and forbad  to marry with the fathers daughter) but at Alexandria, all sisters were permitted to their licentious beds. Thus Cleopatra was wife to Ptolemey Philometor her elder brother, and after that to her younger brother, by whom she was cast off, and her daughter taken in her stead.
If the former Catalogue doe not agree with the Relations of Iosephus,Cont. Ap. Theoph. l. 3. * Theophilus, or others, who haue cited some parts of Manetho in their Workes, it is not much maruell; the Grecians being alway audacious, readie to preuert Authors to their own purposes; besides the ouersights of Writers, through negligence or ignorance in forreine names. Neither is Manethoes Word an Oracle, who reckoneth so long time before any time was: but either it is to be ascribed to the arrogancy of the Egyptian Priests, desirous to bee accounted no lesse ancient then the Chaldeans: for Berosus and Manetho (as if they had beene agreed) deriue their Histories  from the like Antiquity (saith Scaliger out of Syncellus) which would better appeare, if we had the entire bodies, and not a few scattered bones of their Histories: or else wee may ascribe it to their confounding of Histories; applying to an order of Succession, the diuers reignes of seuerall Dynasties, which happily gouerned at the same time in seuerall parts of Egypt; as in so small a Region as Canaan, Ioshua destroyed 31. Kings. This ScaligerCan. Isag. l. 3. coniectureth; LydiatL. de Emen. T. Some suppose, the first of these Dynasties were soon after the Creation, and soone after the floud. Genebrard. Chron. l. 1. affirmeth. Neither yet is Scaliger to be blamed, for acquainting the World with these fragments of Manetho; considering, that the middle part therof holdeth not onely likelihood in it selfe, but in great part correspondence with the Scriptures. If the Egyptians deuised otherwise to Herodotus and Diodorus, it was easie for them to deceiue strangers, or bee deceiued themselues. The like History of prodigious Antiquities, AugustineDe Ciuit. Dei, lib. 12 cap. 10. relateth of an  Egyptian Priest, that told Alexander of the continuance of the Macedonian Kingdome eight thousand yeeres, whereas the Grecians accounted but foure hundred and fourescore. Yea, the Scriptures themselues haue not escaped that mis-reckoning of Times; almost all Antiquitie being carried downe the streame of the seuenty Interpreters, which adde many hundred, yeeres to the Hebrew Text, either of purpose, as someBroughtons Concent. suppose, or as AugustineDe Ciu. Dei, l. 15. c. 13. thinketh by errour of him that first copied the Scriptures out of Ptolemeys Library.
Sir WalterL. 1. c. 8. @. 11. See also the Chronologie at the end of his Booke, and other Egyptian Antiquities in that History. Raleigh, in that his laborious and learned Worke, called The History of the World, supposeth, That Egypt first tooke that name, at such time as Aegyptus or Ramesses chased thence his brother Danaus into Peloponnesus, which some reckon 877. yeeres after the Floud; some, more. As for the prodigious Antiquities which they challenge, hauing refuted  Mercator and Pererius, he enclineth to this opinion touching their ancient Dynasties, that they are not altogether fabulous: but that Egypt being people^ before the Floud two hundred yeeres after Adam, there might remayne to the sonnes of Mizraim some Monuments in Pillars or Altars of stone, or metall, of their former Kings or Gouernours: which the Egyptians hauing added to the List and Roll of their King ^ter the Floud, in succeeding time (out of the vanitie of glory, or by some corruption in their Priests) something beyond the truth might be inserted. Petrus Alexandrinus (lately set forth in Greeke and Latine by Raderus) writes, That Mizraim hauing giuen beginning to the Egyptian Nation, did after goe into the East, to the Persians and Bactrians, and is the same that was called Zoroastres by the Greekes, Inuenter of Iudiciall Astrologie and Magicke. He hauing giuen order for the  keeping of the ashes of his burned body, as the pledge of the Empire so long to continue with them, called vpon Orion (which he saith was Nimrod, by the Persian Superstition beleeued,
 thus honoured after his death) and was consumed with Lightning, the Persians reseruing his ashes to this day; the cause (saith the Note on that place) why the Persians worship the fire* Yet the Author mentions another cause, from Perseus, which kindled fire by Lightning; and preseruing the same, built a Temple to it. Hee saith also, That Picus or Iupitar, his father, taught Perseus to diuine by a Cup (like to that which is mentioned of Ioseph in Egypt) and the same Picus was father to Hermes, or Mercurie, King of Egypt, with other Legends, too long for this place. This Mercurie) he maketh the same with Faunus, the first finder (he saith) of Gold, and that in a golden Vesture he foretold diuers things, and that the Egyptians worshipped him, hauing before made him their King; which place he held thirty nine yeeres. After  him reigned Vulcan, 1680. dayes; for at that time the Egyptians knew not to number by yeeres. He first made a Law against Adulterie; and that the Egyptian women should haue but one husband. He was Inuentor of Iron and Armour, Stones and Clubs being before that time the only Weapons. His sonne Sol succeeded, a great Philosopher; after him, Sosis; and next, Osiris; then, Orus; Thules, Conqueror of Africa; and after that, Sesostris, of the race of Cham, the same as he supposeth with Trismegistus. Thus much I haue thought here to adde out of him, where the Reader may further satisfie himselfe; if that can satisfie any, which can nothing certifie, or make certaine, in these Antiquities; wherein we may find many opinions, scarcly any truth, but in the Word of Truth, the Scriptures.
That which we read of the Dynasties of Shepherds, Scaliger interpreteth of that baser seruile  sort, which MosesGenes. 46.3^* saith were abominable to the Egyptians, and seeme to haue beene strangers, that inhabited some fenny places which Nature had fortified, if we beleeue Heliodorus;Hist Aeth. l 1 Idem Achill. Stat. lib 3. and thence made forrages into the Countrey (the custome of Borderers) and were called therefore Robbers. These (it seemeth) driuen to their shifts, by the hard and tyrannous vsage of the Egyptians, procured (as wee reade of the Tartars) their owne Freedome, and thraldome of their Lords. The Romanes in their times were forced to mayntaine a Garrison against them, therefore called (...). And Ierome mentionethIn vita H^^ar. the Bucolia, where no Christians dwelled, but onely a fierce Nation. IosephusIos. cont. Ap. Euseb. Chron. and Eusebius thinke them to bee the Israelites; which is vnlikely, because they liued in seruitude, and neuer raigned there. Lydiat supposeth the Philistims vnder Abimelech and Phicol to be the men.
 Nothing is more obscure in the Egyptian Chronologie, then the time of the departure of Israelites thence vnder Moses, whom IustinParaen. ad Genes. Martyr affirmeth out of Diodorus to haue bin the first that wrote the Egyptian Lawes. TatianusOrat. contra Graec. Assyrus (who after became an Heretike) saith (and alledgeth Ptolemey Mendesius, a Priest, for his Author) That this departure was in the dayes of Amasis, King of Egypt, who liued in the time of Inachus; Theophilus and Iosephus,Theoph. l. 3. out of Manetho, in the Reigne of Tethmoses; Eusebius,Eus. Niceph. pat. in the reigne of Cenchres; Cedrenus saith, Petisonius: Others, otherwise; according to the diuers interpretation of Manetho. The Scripture sheweth, it was foure hundred and thirty yeeres, from the promise first made to Abraham, as all that I know, both elder and later, Greeke and LatineAdo. Funct. Beroal. Perk. Bunt. Codom. More. Pont. Phrigio Wolph. Epit. Chron. gr. Dogli. Munst. Herman. Contract. Lamb. Schaf. Marian. Scotus Petr. Alexandr. Rader, etc. Chronographers, except Genebrard and Adriehomius, reckon it. Lydiat thinketh, That the drowning of the  Egyptian Pharo was the cause of those tumults in Egypt, about Succession, which are ascribed to Egyptus and Danaus. OrosiusOrosius, l. 18 cap. 10. reporteth, That the prints of the Chariot-wheeles of the Egyptians, then pursuing the Israelites through the Sea, did yet in his time remayne in the Sands on the shore, and vnder-water; which no curiositie or casualtie can so disorder, but that Diuine Prouidence doth re-imprint them in their wonted forme.
Hard it is to apply the yeeres of theOf the Egyptian Kinge, etc. see Marmols eleuenth Booke to the 12. Chapter of Daniel. Angelo^ crat. lib. 2. Egyptian Chronologie, to the true account of the Worlds generation, by reason of the disagreement of Authors, touching the Egyptian Kings, vntill Sesacs time; which (after Lydiat) was in the yeere of the World 3029. although euen from hence we haue but slippery footing. Augustus (after the same Author) made Egypt a Prouince, in the yeere 3975. Vnder which Roman gouernment it continued, vntill the Saracens  conquered it, in the time of Omar the third Chalipha, who began his reigne, after Scaligers computation, in his CatalogueIos. Scalig. Can. Isag. l. 2. of the Chaliphaes, in the yeere of Christ 643. The names of the Caesars belong to another place; and it were tedious here, to relate the yeeres of their seuerall Reignes. Otmen, the fourth Chalipha, beganne in the yeere of Christ 645. whom the rest succeeded in order, vntill the yeere 869. And then the Chaliphaes were diuided; Mutamed reigning in Bagded,Among all the 13. Prouinces subiect to the Chalipha of Bagdet, Egypt had the second place, as Constantinus Porphyrogenitus sheweth out of Theophanes. Constant. de admin. Imp. c. 25. and Tolon in Egypt, who dyed in the yeere of Christ 883. and of the Hegeira 270. whom succeeded Hamaria his sonne: and after him, his sonne Aharun, whom Muchtaphi the Bagdet Chalipha slue, about the yeere 907. Afterwardes, about the yeere 943. Achishid Muhamid, sonne of Tangi, reigned in Egypt, to whom a few yeeres after succeeded his sonne Abigud,  whom Meaz Ledin Illahi, of the posteritie of Phetima, Mahumets Daughter, depriued in the yeere of our Lord 971. To whom succeeded his sonne Aziz, 975.Leo calleth him Elc^in. Elhacham,
 in the yeere 996. Etaher Laazizdin Illahi, 1030. Musteratzor Billahi, 1035. Musteale 1095. Elamir Bahacam Illahi, 1101. he was but fiue yeeres old: the Protector of the Kingdome was Aphtzala Wizir: Elhaphit Ladin Illahi, 1135. Ettaphar succeeded: and hee being slaine, Elphaiz; who died in the yeere 1160. and Etxar Ledin Illahi, his Sonne was the last of the Phetimaan race. To him succeeded Asareddin Shirachoch, of the Family of Ainb (which were Curdi:) after his death, Iusaph Tzelat Eddin was constituted King by the Chalipha; and the Bagded Chaliphaes were againe acknowledged in Egypt. This is that Saladine that tooke Ierusalem, in the yeere of Christ 1190. Heg. 586 He conquered Mesopotamia, etc. hee died in  the yeere of our Lord 1193. And as Cardinall VitriacoSee Vitriaco his third book, of the greatnesse of this Saladine, and of Saffadin his brother, which slue his ten Nephewes, sonnes of Sal. and succeeded in this exceeding Monarchie of many many Kingdomes. affirmeth, reduced the Schismaticall Sect in Egypt to vniformity with the Baldac Chalipha. Elaphtzal succeeded him in the Kingdome of Damascus; Melich Elaziz, in Egypt; Taher Giazi, in Halep, or Aleppo; Melich Elaziz exchanged Egypt for Damascus, with his Vncle Etadel. The Egyptians made Aphtzal their King, in the yeere of our Lord 1202. After Eladel succeeded Elchamel, 1219. who died in the yeere of our Lord 1237. Heg. 635. Essaloch followed: and after him, Elmutam, 1242. The Turkmen conspired against him: he fled into a Tower of Wood; which they fired: and halfe burned, he leaped into a streame that passed by, and there perished: Tureoma^ Azeddin Ibib was made King in his place, in the yeere of our Lord 1245. Heere beganne the Reigne of the Mamalukes, or slaues. Hee being slaine, another slaue succeeded, whom they called Melich Elmutaphar. This seemeth to be he, that Leo calleth Pip^ritis. Thus farre out of  Scaliger, collected by him out of Abraham Zacuthi, which addeth much light to the Egyptian Historie of these times, wherein I could neuer before satisfie my selfe concerning the erection and alteration of the Schismaticall Egyptian Chaliphaes, which with much labour (little auayling) I had sought. Iacobus a Vitriaco Bishop of Accon, or Ptolemais, aboue foure hundred yeeres since, and a Roman Cardinall, in his Orientall HistoryOrient. Hist. cap. 5. affirmeth, That Haly, disdayning to be accounted the successour of Mahomet, whom hee thought inferiour to himselfe, began a new Sect of his owne, which he established in Egypt; the other Mahumetans erecting another at Baldac; but Baldac was of a later erection, and these things haue no probabilitie.
These Kings were not called Chaliphaes (as the posterity of Phetima or Fatima) but Sultans.  A certaine Catalogue of the Names, Times, and Affaires of these Mamaluke-Sultans, I cannot perfectly exhibit. PeucerusPe^c. Chron. l. 4 nameth in order these names; Turquemenius, Cathus, Bendocader, Melechsait, Elpis, Melechseraph, Melechnasar, Melechadal; and after many others, Caithbeius, a stout enemy of the TurkesP. Mart. Leg. Bab. lib. 3.. This Caithbeius was chosen Sultan in the yeere of our Lord 1465. and reigned three and thirty yeeres. Two of his principall Mamalukes, Achardin and Campsous, full of emulation, were a principall cause of the ruine of that Dynastie. For whereas the Sultan was alway chosen out of the Mamalukes, by most voyces amongst themselues, Campsous fearing lest Achardin should haue succeeded after Caithbeius, fained, That his Master had taken order on his death-bed, that his Sonne Mahomet should obtaine the roome; and vsed meanes to effect it, both by the voyces of those Mamalukes he could suborne, and confirmation of their Chalipha, whose hornes these Soldans had shortned,  abridging his power (as before is said.) This Mahomet proued so cruell a Tyrant, and those two Mamalukes so banded themselues in Factions, that all became confused; and within six yeeres after Caithbeius his death, the Sultans Throne was fiue times vacant. Tomumbeius kils Mahomet; Campsous Ciarchesius is chosen; Zauballat, President of Damascus, rebelleth, and by Temumbeius meanes imprisoneth him, and vsurpeth the Scepter: but for his crueltie, soone after is depriued and captiued by Tomumbeuis, and after, strangled; He also succeding in Authority, Tyranny, and Destiny.
After Tomumbeius, was elected Campson Gaurus, whom ZelimIoac. Camerar. nar^at. Tur. etc. the Turke ouerthrew, and slue in battaile; in whose place, another T^mumbeius was chosen: but soone, together with his whole State, came into the Turkes power. Thus being diuided in many Factions among themselues, and exercising all cruelties and pillages vpon the people,Of the Egyptian misery in these times, reade Vertoman. and Mart. eye witnesses. they made  themselues a prey to their Neighbours, who like Aesops Vulture, watched this opportunity to seize on these Lions, hauing now bled out their strength in mutuall and ciuill conflicts, in the yeere of our Lord 1517. The Egyptians affirme,Treasurie of ancient and modern times, L. 5. C. 31. That a little before Selim besieged Cairo, for the space of eight dayes together, a great number of Crocodiles were seene in all parts on the banks of Nilus, and much dispersed abroad in the fields, taking and tearing great store of prey, as a presage of this Turkish seruitude. Solyman succeeded, in the yeere of our Lord 1519. (or 1520. as others say.) Selim the second, 1566. Amurat the third, 1574. and in the yeere 1595. Mahomet the third; to whom, Achmet, who now is the Egyptian and Turkish Soldan. Of these you may be more fully informed in M. Knolles his Turkish Historie, as also  in our former Relations.



CHAP. VII. Of the Oracle of IVPITER AMMON; and of Cyrene: and diuers Peoples adioyning, mentioned by the Ancients.
ALl that lyeth betweene Africa Minor and Egypt,Lib. 1. c. 8. Pomponius Mela doth call  Cyrenaica, including vnder that title Marmarica, which PlinioPlin. l. 5. c. 5. reckoneth by it selfe: who also calleth the former Pentapolitana, and saith, it is renowmed by the Oracle of Hammon, which is fiftie miles distant from Cyrene; by the Fountayne of the Sunne, and those fiue Cities, Berenice, Arsinoe, Ptolemais, Apollonia,Cyrene was built (as Tzetzes affirmeth) by Battus. Cyrene. This Region is now called Barca and Mesrata:Leo, lib. 6. Io. Boem. Drus. Ob. lib. 11. c. 15. Hier. in Ier. 3.2. of which, this is inhabited, and rich; the other it most-what desart, and poore. Their Religion was like the Egyptians in times past. The Arabians that liue there now, attend on their purchase, being the greatest Theeues in Afrike. But this is vsuall to the Arabians in all places of their abode (or wandring rather:) for which cause, it seemeth, Hierome saith, the word Arabi signifieth Theeues, and is therefore taxed of Drusius, in his Obseruations;  Arabi no otherwise signifying Theeues, then Chananeus a Merchant, or Chaldaeus a Mathematician; because such commonly were their studies and courses. BereniceDom. Nig. was sometime sacred, famous for the Garden of the Hesperides; neere to which, is that Riuer of Lethe, so much chaunted by the Poets. Nigh to this place also, are the Psylli, a people terrible to Serpents, and medicinable against their poysons, both by touching the wounded partie, and by sucking out the poyson, and by enchanting the Serpent.
The Oracle of Iupiter Ammon is famous among the Ancient. The place where this Temple was, hath on euery side vast and sandie Desarts; in which, they which trauelled, as wee finde in ArrianusArrian lib. 3. Curt. lib. 4. and Curtius, seemed to warre with Nature: for the Earth was couered with sand, which yeelded an vnstable footing, and sometime was blowne about with the  windie motions of the Aire; Water was hence banished, neither Cloudes nor Springs ordinarily affoording it. A fierie heate did possesse and tyrannize ouer the place, which the Sands and Sunne much encreased. Neither was here Tree, or Hill, or other marke for Trauellers, to discerne their way, but the Starres. In the middle of this Desart, was that sacred Groue (which Silius Italicus callethThe fortune-telling Groue. Lucus fatidicus) not aboue fiftie furlongs in circuit, full of fruit-bearing Trees, watred with wholsome Springs, seasoned with temperate Aire, and a continuall Spring. The Inhabitants, called AmmoniansLucan calls them, Garamantes, lib. 9. Templum Libycis quod gentibus vnum. Inculit Gacamantes habent, stat Corniger illic, etc., are dispersed in cottages, and haue the middest of the Groue fortified with a triple wall. The first Munition contayneth the Kings Palace; the second, the Serail, or lodgings for his women, where is also the Oracle; the third, the Courtiers inhabite. Before the Oracle is a Fountayne, in which the Offerings  were washed, before they were offered. The forme of this God was deformed with Ramshornes, crooked, as some paint him: according to Curtius, without forme of any creature, but like aVmbilicus. round Bosse, beset with jewels. This, when they consult with the Oracles, is carried by the Priests in a gilded ship, with many siluer Bells on both sides of the ship. The Matrons follow, and the Virgins singing their dis-tuned Procession, by which they prouoke their god to manifest what they seeke. These Priests were about fourscore in number. Alexanders ambitious pilgrimage to this Oracle, is sufficiently knowne by the Relations of Curtius and Arrianus. This we may adde out of Scaliger,Scal. E. T. lib. 5. pag. 401. That after that, the Cyrenaeans, to sooth this prowd King, which would needes bee taken for the sonne of Ammon, stamped his shape in their coynes, with two hornes of a Ramme, and without a beard: whereas before  they had vsed the forme of Iupiter, with a beard and hornes; wherein the other Easterne people followed them. The Syrians vsed the like stampe with the name of King Lysimachus, which Scaliger (who hath giuen vs the pictures of these Coynes) thinketh to be Alexander.
Rammes-hornes are said to bee ascribed to him, because Bacchus wandering in these Desarts with his Armie, was guided to this place by a silly Ramme. Likewise PausaniasPausan. lib 4. in his Messenica saith, that one Ammon (which built the Temple) a Shepheard, was authour of this name to their God. PlutarchsDe Os. and Is. supr. cap. 3. reason of Amus we haue before shewed. OthersPlinie, Choul, etc. deriue this name from (...) the Sand; which may well agree with all Idoll deuotion, as being a sandie foundation, although it is here intended to the situation.Drusius addeth another reason of the name Hammon, the Egyptian name of the Sunne: Iupiter idem qui Sol, saith Arnobius, and Minutius Foelix, quaest. heb. lib. 3. But that which I haue before noted of Ham the sonne of Noah, soundeth more probable, as being Progenitor of all  these Nations; and of this minde also isPeucer de Diuinat. Peucerus. ThisStrab. 17. Strabo in his time saith was not in request, as no other Oracle besides. For the Romanes contented themselues with their Sybils and other diuinations. This Oracle was not giuen by word, but by signes. This defect
 of Oracles in generall, and especially of this, occasioned that Treatise of PlutarchPlut. de defec. Orac. of this subiect, enquiring the cause of the Oracles fayling. Neuer had he read, thatIerem. 10.11. the Gods which had not made heauen and earth, should perish out of the earth: nor had he eyes to see that Sunne of Righteousnesse, the Light of the world, whose pure beames chased and dispersed these mists of darknesse. And therefore are his coniectures so farre from the marke, as not able with a naturall eye to see the things of God. TheDiod. Sic. lib. 3. cap. 5. antiquitie of this Oracle appeareth, in that Semiramis came to it, and inquired of her death; after which, the Oracle promised to her diuine honours. Perseus also and Hercules are reported to haue consulted the same in their aduentures against Gorgon and Busiris. Besides this Groue,Curt. ibidem Pompon. Mela. Plin. Solin. etc. there is another of Ammon, which hath in the middest a Well, they call it the Fountayne of the Sunne; whose water at Sunnerising  is luke-warme, and cooleth more and more till noone, at which time it is very cold: and from thence till mid-night, by degrees exchangeth that coldnesse with heate, holding a kinde of naturall Antipathy with the Sonne;Our Bathes in England (as some affirme) are hotter in the night then in the day. hottest in his furthest absence, coldest in his neerest presence. Plinie and Solinus place this Fountayne in Debris, a Towne not very farre from those parts amongst the Garamants. Lucretius mentions it, and Philosophically disputeth the cause thereof.

Lucret. lib. 6.--nimirum terra magis quod
Raratenet circum hunc fontem, quam caetera tellus,
Multaque sunt ignis prope semina corpus aquai, etc.

The substance whereof is, that the fire, vnder that subtile earth by cold vapours of the night,  is pressed and forced to that waterie refuge, but by the Sunne beames receiuing new encouragement, forsaketh those holds and holes, and for a little while takes repossession of his challenged lands. The Ammonian women haue such great brests, that they suckle their children ouer their shoulder; their brest not lesse, if Iunenal be beleeued, then the childe;
In Meroe crasso maiorem infante mamillam.In Meroe, the monstrous PappeIs bigger then the childe in lappe.
PausaniasPausan. lib. 3. reckoneth an Ammonian Iuno among the Libyan Cities, as well as this Iupiter. He addeth, the Lacedemonians had this Ammon in much request, and built to him diuers  Temples, as at Gytheum one, which had no roofe: and the Aphytaeans did him 40 lesse worship then the Libyans.
Ortelius,In Typo Expeditionis* Al. Mag. who hath bestowed a Description of this Temple, supposeth that his Image was painted with hornes, but that Vmbilicus was accounted the Deitie it selfe, or the signe of his presence, which shapelesse shape he sampleth by many like in other Nations. The ship he coniectureth to signifie, that the Religion was brought from some other place. But if Ammon be that sonne of Noah, it might rather bee a memoriall of the Arke, wherein Noah and his sonnes were preserued: as that also of Ianus, (who is imagined to be Noah) may more fitly be interpreted, then according to the Poets glosse:
Pub. Ouid.Sic bona posteritas puppim formauit in aere,Hospitis aduentum testificata Dei.So well-dispos'd Posteritie did frameA ship, to shew which way their strange God came.
The ancient frugalitie of the Cyrenians is commended in Authors.Seu. Sulpit. Dialog. Filesaecus de Paroec. Orig. cap. 4. Sulpitius bringeth in Postumianus, in his Dialogues, telling, That landing there by force of weather, hee went with the Priest vnto the Church, which was very homely, couered with base twigs or boughs, not much better then the Priest (their hoste) his Tent, in which a man might not stand vpright. Enquiring after the disposition of the people, they learned, that they were vtterly ignorant of buying and selling, of fraude and stealing. They neither had, nor cared to haue,  gold or siluer; and when he offered ten pieces of gold to the Priest, hee refused it: onely was content to accept a little rayment.
The Hammientes are not much distant in place, or differing in name, from the Ammonians: which built their houses of Salt, digging the salt-stones out of the Mountaynes, which they with morter apply to their buildings. Mela ioyneth to these aforesaid the Atlantes, which curse the Sunne at the setting and rising, as bringing damage to them and their fields. A practice not vnlike to the women of Angola at this day, who (as Andrew Battle, which liued there, testifieth) salute the New Moone when they first see her, by holding vp their hinder parts naked against her, as the cause of their troublesome menstruous purgation.
These Atlantes haue no proper names, nor feede of such things as haue life. He affirmeth  of the Garamantes, that they had no wiues, but liued in a beastly communitie. The Augila acknowledge no other Gods but Ghosts, or Soules departed, by which they sweare; with
 which they consult as Oracles; to which they pray at their Tombes, receiuing answeres by dreames. The women the first night of marriage are prostituted to all that will see them, the more the greater honour, but after, must obserue their owne husbands. The Trogleditae dwell in Caues, and feede on Serpents, and rather make a sound or noyse, then humane voyce: they vsed Circumcision: they named not their Children by their Parents names; but by the names of sheepe, or other beasts which yeeld them nourishment. Their wiues and children (saith Agatharchides) are common: onely the Kings wife is proper; yet if any had lyen with her, his punishment was but the losse of a sheepe. In their Winter they liue on bloud and milke which are mixed and heated together at the fire. In their Summer they kill the scabbed  and diseased of their Cattell. They entitle none with the name of Parents, but the Bull and Cow, the Ram and Ewe, and the Male and Female of the Goates, because of these they receiue their nourishment, and not from their Parents. They goe naked all but the buttocks. Such as want that skin which others circumcise ((...)) they depriue of the whole flesh, so farre as the circumcision should haue extended. Their funerall Rites were, to tye the necks of the dead to their legs, and couer them with heapes of stones, setting a goates horne on the top, with laughter rather then mourning. Their old men which can follow the flockes no longer, they strangle with an Oxe-taile, which medicine they minister likewise to those that haue grieuous diseases, or maymes. And vnto these doth Plinie adde the Blemmyae, with faces in their brests, the Satyres, Aegypanes, Himantopodes, and other monsters, scarce worthy  Relation or credit. These parts I haue thus ioyned in one Discourse, as liuing (for the most part) a wilde life, as the Arabians and Tartars doe at this day: and for Religion hauing nothing notable that I finde, but as you haue heard. ProcopiusProcop d^ Bel. Pers. lib. 1^ writeth of the Blemyes and Nobatae, that Iustinian placed them in Egypt, about Elephantina; that they before obserued the Greekes deuotions, Isis also and Osiris, and Priapus, and sacrificed to the Sunne; which Rites the Emperour prohibited. But hee mentions no such Monsters. The Arabians which vnder Elcain about the foure hundred yeere of their Hegeira, gaue a D^cat a man to passe into Africke, are Lords and Inhabitants of the Desarts to this day, liuing (as wee say) a dogs life, in hunger and ease, professing Mahumets sect.
The AdrimachidaeIo. Boem. G Draudius in Solinum. Caelius Rhod. lib. 18. cap. 38 liued neere to the Egyptians both in situation and custome. The Nasamones  had many wiues, with which they had companie publikely. The first night of the marriage, all the guests had dealing with the Bride, and rewarded her with some gift. The Guidanes had a more beastly custome, whose women glorying in their shame, ware so many frindges of leather as they had found Louers. The Machlye^ ware the haire on the hinder part of their head, as the Iaponians now doe. The Auses vsed the contrarie: whose Virgins in the yeerly feast of Minerua, diuided themselues into two companies, and skirmished with staues and stones. If any Virgins dyed of the wounds, they accounted them false Maides. The most martiall Virago of the companie, they arme and crowne, and place in a Chariot, with great solemnitie. They vsed not marriage, but had women in common: the childe being reckoned his with whom shee chooseth to liue. To adde a word of the Cyrenians, they held  it vnlawfull to smite a Cow, in honour of Isis, whose Fasts and Feasts they solemnely obserued: and in Barca they abstayned both from Beefe and Hogs flesh. They searedThe like doth Villamont report of the Turkes. the crownes or temples of their children, to preuent the distilling of the rheume.
In their sacrificing, they first cut off the eare of the beast, as first fruits, and hurled it ouer the house. Their gods were the Sunne and Moone. The Maxes shaue the left side of their heads, leauing the haire on the right side. The Zigantes feede on Apes, whereof they haue plentie.
The Megauares make no account of Sepulchres, in stead whereof they couer the corps with stones, and set vp a Goates horne on the stone heape. They haue many skirmishes for their pastures, which are ended by the mediation of old Women, who may safely interpose  themselues, and end the fray (or battell, if you will so call it.) When men are so old that they can no longer follow the herds, they strangle him with a Cowes taile, if he will not preuent them by doing it himselfe. The like medicine they administer to such as are dangerously sicke. Of the Macae, Caelius thinkes the Roman Priests borrowed their shauen crownes. Other things which our Authors adde of these people and others adioyning, as seeming too fabulous, I list not to expresse. Silius Italicus in his Poems,B. Aldrete Ant. Var. lib. 4. and Aldrete in his Antiquities of Spaine and Afrike, expresse diuers of their ancient Rites and Names, and that which seemes to vs most fitting, shall in this Historie be inserted. This part of the World, as least knowne to the Ancients, yeelded both Poets and Historians most matter of their Fables, in explayning whereof Aldrete hath written in Spanish very learnedly, as also of the later times, when the  Romans, Vandals, and since the Arabians, haue preu^yled.



CHAP. VIII. Of that part of Barbarie, now called the Kingdome of Tunis and Tripolis.

@. I. The name Barbarie: the Kingdome of Tunis, and Antiquitie  of Carthage.
ALl the Tract of Land, betweene Atlas and the Sea (stretching in length from Egypt to the Straits) isLeo. lib. 1. called Barbaria, either of Barbar (which signifieth to murmure) because such seemed the speech of the Inhabitants to the Arabians, or of the word Bar, which signifieth a Desart, doubled. It comprehendethMaginus. both Mauritania's, Africa minor, Libya exterior, besides Cyreniaca and Marmarica, whereof wee haue spoken. The Inhabitants some fetch from Palestina, some from Arabia. It was conquered by the Romans, and taken from the Greeke Emperors by the Vandals, and from them againe by the Saracens and Arabians,  and is now partly subiect to the Turke, partly to the Xeriffe. It is vsually diuided into foure Kingdomes, Marocco, Fesse, Tremisen, and Tunis; for of Barca is said alreadie: The Cities of Barbarie (it is Ios. ScaligerIos. Scal. Ep. ad Casaub. his testimonie) speake Arabike, but not pure, nor yet so degenerate as the Italian is from the Latine: but the Countrie people vse the old African tongue, nothing like the other.


HONDIVS his Map of Barbarie.
map of Barbary, North Africa, with inset maps of the Gulf of Tunis and the Nile Delta
BARBARIA



The Kingdome of Tunis contayneth all that which the Ancients called Africa, Propria, or Minor, and Numidia Antiqua: the Romanes (perhaps vaine-gloriously vaunting, or ambitiously ayming at the Empire of the Vniuerse) stiling their first footing and possession in Asia and Africa, by the name of the whole; which others haue beene forced to distinguish by adding Propria or Minor. So they called Attalus his Legacie, Asia, and this Prouince (yea Carthage it selfe had that name) Africa. The soyle is fertile, especially the West-part. The Inhabitants are sound and healthfull, seldome vexed with any sicknesse. Hereof are reckoned fiue parts; Bugia, Constantina, Tunis, Tripolis and Ezzab. This Ezzab is the most Easterly part, hauing many Townes and Regions, amongst which, some account Mesrata.  From these parts vnto Capes, is the Tripolitan R^gion. The chiefe Towne is Tripolis, wherein the great Turke hath his Bassa, or Vice-roy, a receptacle of the Pyrats,Nic. Nic. was there present. which roue and rob in those Seas; in the yeere 1551. wonne from the Knights of Malta by Sinan Bassa. From Capes to Guadilbarbar is the Tunetan Territorie. From thence vnto the Mountayne of Constantina is that Region, hereof bearing name: and from thenceLeo, lib. 5. to the Riuer Maior, about an hundred and fiftie miles space, doth Bugia extend it selfe, so called of BugiaBugia an Vniuersitie. the principall Citie, sometime adorned with Temples, Hospitals, Monasteries, and Colledges of Students in the Mahumetane Law. Here is also Necaus a very pleasant Citie; and Chollo, very rich Constantina is an ancient Citie, contayning eight thousand Families, and many sumptuous buildings, a greatSuidas Aldrete Dion. l. 43. Temple, two Colledges, and three or foure Monasteries, much resorted  to by Merchants. Euery trade hath their peculiar streetes. A little from the Citie is a hote Bath, hauing in it abundance of Crabfishes, or little Tortoyses, which the women take for euill spirits, and ascribe vnto them the cause of their sicknesse, or ague, if any befall: and therefore kill white Hens, and set them on an earthen vessell, with their feathers, enuironing the same with little Wax-candles, and so leaue them neere to this Bath, or Fountayne. How euer it fare with their Feuer, their meat shall not stay long, but some or other that see the womens deuotion, will enuy the euill spirits so good cheere, and for that time will be the spirits themselues, to dresse and eate their prouision. Not farre hence is a Marble building, with Images grauen therein: the people haue a conceit, that it was sometime a Schoole, and those Statues the Schollers, by Diuine judgement so transformed for their wickednesse.
 In this Region is situated Bona, sometime called Hippo, famous through our Christian World for the most famous of the Fathers, that since the Apostles dayes haue left vs their writings, Aurelius Augustinus a name fitting to him, which indeed was Aureus and Augustissi^us, Bishop of the See, while hee liued; and yet liuing (in his Workes) a Bishop, not of Hippo, but of the Westerne Church. Wittie, Learned, Wise, and Holy Father, that hast with Thee carryed these Titles from Hippo! where, after Thee, the Arrian Vandals, and since, the Saracens haue liued and Lorded; and at this day is possessed of such as haue no possession of W^^, Learning, Wisedome, or Holinesse: but haue testified their banishment of all these, by ascribing them to Fooles and Mad men, whom they honour and admire as Saints.Nic. Nicolay. lib. 1. This Bona (then brooking this name better) contayneth now three hundred Herthes, and a sumptuous  Mosque, to which is adjoyned the house of the Cadi.
Tunis is now a great Citie, since the ruines of Carthage, neere vnto which it standeth. CarthageVrbs Carthag^ peninsulae ad figuram accedens, binc mari, inde lacu maxima sui parti cingitur. Isthmus quo Africae iungitur, patet stadia 25. Itaque est in huius spatii latere, quod vergit ad mare, Vtica modico ab vrbe interuallo: in alter^ secundam lacum est Tunis. Polyb. hist. ib. 1. cap. 37. (as the more ancient) deserueth first Relation: of which, wee may yet say withBell. Iugurth. Salust, Silere melius puto, quam parum dicere: wee may not say much, and a little will bee too little for such Greatnesse. It was built threescore and twelue yeeres before Rome, as the common account goeth, by Dido and herPoeni, quasi Phoeni. Phoenicians: an emulous competitor with Rome for the Empire of the World. It contayned (saithP. Oros. l. 4. cap. 22. Orosius) in the circuit of the walles twentie miles; Linier Epitome sayth, foure and twentie; all engirt with the Sea, except three miles space, which had a wall of squared Stone, thirtie foot broad, and fortie cubites high. The Tower Byrsa enuironed aboue two miles, and had in it the Temples of Iuno, Aesculapius,  andThere were in Carthage the Temples of Iuno Memoria, Apollo: Silius addeth of Elisa and of Venuc Coelestis, or Vrania, the Phoenician Astroarche and Syria Dea. Belus. Of the greatnesse of their name and power, those three Punike warres are witnesses; in the second of which, Anniball (whom his father Hamilcar, then Generall in Spaine, had caused to sweare at the Altar of Iupiter, neuer to hold friendship with the Romans, he then being but nine yeeres old, as Aemilius Probus, or as other will haue it, Cornelius Nepos reporteth:) he, I say, passed ouer the Pyrenaean Mountaynes, through France, and ouer the Alpes, into Italy. with an Armie of an hundred thousand foot-men, and thirtie thousand Horse. The Riuers Ticinus and Trebi^, the Lake Trasimenus (running with Roman blood, by three ouerthrowes of Scipio, Sempronius, and Flaminius the Romane Consuls) witnessed the PunikeOf the Punike warres and greatnesse the Romane Histories are full: so also Polybius and others among the Greekes. Erant tunc temporis Carthaginensium imperio subiectae omnes Africae prouin^^ae admare nostrum fitae a Philanorum ara, qua est e regione maioris Syrtis, ad Columnas vsque Herculis. quod spatium vltra 16000. sta^durum patet. Iidem freto ad colummas traiecto omnem ^ram Hispaniae subegerant vsque ad Pyrenaeos, Polyb. hist. lib 3. cap. 39. might. But the victory at Cannae against Varro did pierce the brest, and had rent the heart of Rome, had Anniball known to haue vsed the victory as well, as to haue gotten it.  There did Rome seeme to breath her last: the Sunne, the Wind, the Dust helping the Carthaginian
 with Natures forces, yea, the Riuer Gellus, against Nature, stayed it selfe, as congealed indeed, whether with wonder, feare, of necessitie, accepting a Bridge or Damme rather of Roman bodies for a passage to the African Armie. These were golden dayes to Carthage, when threeModii. bushels of Gold-Rings, taken from the fingers of the slaine enemies, were sent hither as aPolyb. l. 3. c. 11 and seq. (...) t^^nslatione Casauboni, and Romani hist^ i^if^re omnes, ^aec pene. present. A swoune meane-while did Rome sustaine; and easily in fiue dayes might Hanniball haue dined in the Capitoll: and poore helpe could shee finde when she reuiued, had not Capua, with feasting the Conquerour, detayned Rome from Conquest, when they despoyled the Temples for Armour, armed their slaues, and bestowed their priuate state on the publike Treasurie: all which could not make FabiusCunctator. fight with Annibal, but by not fighting he learned to ouercome, knowing, that a shield was better weapon then a sword in  that case. ScarceStad. in Idorum. in seuenteene yeeres could Italy shake off this burthen, till Scipio by new policie warred against Hannibal, not inHannibal in Italia semper superior: quod nisi domi ciuium fuarum inuidia aebilitatus esset, Romanos videtur superare potuisse Aemil. Probus in Hannibale. Italy, where he was, but in Africke and Carthage, whence his force was; thereby procuring Annibals returne, as the outward members are forced to yeeld their bloud, to succour any sudden oppression of the heart.
But how is my heart oppressed with sudden passion, thus to transport the Reader, with my selfe, from Africke into Spaine, France, Italy, there to behold this Tragedie? Let the matter it selfe answere: and now we are returned to Carthage, and finde the Tragedie heere. For in the third Punike warre the Romans (saythLib. 2. cap. 15. Florus) rather fought with the Citie it selfe then with Men. And alas, what could that Hermophrodite-armie doe, wherein were fiue and twentie thousand armedOsor. l. 4 c. 23. Women? Yet had women then the greater courage: Hasdrubal  the King yeelded His wife, with her two children, and much people, burned themselues in the Temple of Aesculapius, that could not cure this disease of his Citie and suppliants the like fate befalling the first and last Queenes of Carthage. Seuenteene dayes together did Carthage burne,Prosperitate ac securitate rerum corruptis moribus plus nocuisse monstretur tam cita euersa, quam prius nocuerat tamdiuaduersa Carthago. August. de Ciuit. Dei. li 3. c. 21. seuen hundred yeeres after the first building.
In this last warre, after they had deliuered vp their Nauie and weapons, being commanded to remoue ten miles from thence, Anger kindled new forces, and taught them to supply the want of Iron, with Siluer and Gold, in making weapons, with pulling downe their houses to build a Nauie, the Matrons giuing their haire (the feminine Ornament) to make bands for their manly and warlike Engines; their priuate glory, for publike necessitie; all which serued but to augment the pompe of this funerall of Carthage. Caesar did after restore it with a Ronian  Colonie, neuer attayning the TyrianLeo lib. 5. glory, afflicted with Vandals and Gothes and by the Saracens made desolate, vntill the time of Elmahdi, an hereticall Calipha, who procured the inhabiting hereof. But not aboue the twentieth part was inhabited: The rest remayneth as scattered ruines, dispersed bones, of the carkasse of old Carthage. Master Pountesse, a friend of mine, told me, That hee hath beene rowed in his Boat ouer the walls of Carthage, or their ruines, the Sea hauing made the last conquest by eating into the Land. The Conduits are whole (saith Leo) which bring water from a Hill thirtie miles from Carthage, twelue miles vnder the Earth, the rest aboue. And now (saith he) are not aboue fiue and twentie shops, and fiue hundred houses therein, one faire Temple, one Colledge, but without Schollers, the inhabitants poore, proud, and superstitious. MasterAp. Hak. Euesham saith, That this Citie is now ruinated  and destroyed. Hee mentioneth those Arches wherein water was hither conueyed, and one street three miles long.
As for the Sea-discoueries attempted by the Carthaginians; Hanno compassedRamus. sheweth, by a comment also of a Portugal Pilot that this was but coasting the West part of Africke, etc. all Africa from the Spanish to the Arabian Straits, and committed his discoueries to writing; H^milco at the same time was employed in the search of Europe. Diodorus SiculusDio. Sic. l. 5. c. 7 writeth a whole Chapter of their discouery of a pleasant and fertile Iland Westward, in the Ocean; which cannot more fitly agree with any other Region then some part of the West-Indies, as may seeme at the first view. But a man shall haue much to doe to finde that Iland, a harder discouery now, then it was then to the finders, at least as the Storie lies. And someGen. Chron. thinke, that the Indians of America were a Colonie of the Carthaginians. Aristotle hath also the like  Relation in his Booke De admirandis Auditionib. In the beginning of the WarreDom. Nig. they had three hundred Cities in Libya, and seuen hundred thousand persons in their Citie.
The Carthaginians (as all acknowledged, and their very name Paeni doth prooue) were Phaenicians: which Countrey wee haue before shewed to bee famous, as for many other things, so for the first letters and the first (that is, the Hebrew) language. The letters which the Hebrewes since the Babilonian Captiuitie haue vsed, PostellusPostel. de Originib. would haue to bee the first, but secret till those times, and then by Ezra made common: butScal ad Eus. Chron. Brere. de Pond. Scal. proleg ad Em. T. ed. vlt. others more probably hold the Phoenician or Samaritan the first: and that the present Hebrew were the Assyrian or Chaldaean Characters, which the Iewes brought thence with them. Now for proofe that their ancient Language was Phoenician, and consequently Hebrew: Dido is but  the feminine, saith Scaliger, to Dauid: and Elisa is the Hebrew Elisha. Iosephus relateth out of Theophrastus, that the Tyrians and Sydonians might not vse other but their owne Countrey
 oathes, of which hee reckoneth Corban, which the Scriptures also mention. And Scaliger saith, that the Punike Scene in Plantus his Penolus (although they had then much declined from the Hebrew puritie) is neerer the Hebrew then the Syriake, and that hee could for the most part restore it to the right Punike, which also hath happily beene attempted by Master Selden in his Dis Syris, and by Bernardo Aldrete a Spaniard in his Varias Antiquedades de Espau^a, Africa, YOtras prouincias lib. 2. cap. 2. Where he in a large Catalogue compareth the Hebrew, Syriake, Phoenician, and Punike termes together. Of their Baalsamen and other notes of this language, we haue spoken before in our first Booke. The name Carthago, as Genebrard and Aldrete obserue, in Syriake, signifies the middle Citie, Kartha a Citie, Go* middle:  Solinus saith, New Citie.
Wee haue alledged the testimonie of Procopius for the Chanaanites fleeing before Ioshua; and the Punikes (saythExposinch. at. ad Rom. Salust. Iugurth. Augustine) called themselues (euen in his time) Chanani. Salust ascribeth to the Phaenicians, Hippo, Hadrumetus, Leptis and other Cities on the Sea-coast, besides Carthage, which they built either to enlarge their Empire, or to preuent a fulnesse at home.
Concerning the Religion of the Africans: in Ancient times, Leo saith, That they worshipped the Fire and the Sunne, as did the Persians (erecting, in honour of each of these, faire and sumptuous Temples, in which the Fire was continually kept burning, as in the Temple of Vesta at Rome. The Numidians and Libyans sacrificed to the Planets. And some of the  Negroes worshipped Guighimo, which signifieth the LORD of Heauen. These afterward (hee sayth) were of the Iewish Religion, and after that, of the Christian, till the 268. yeere of the Hegira, that some Negro Kingdomes became Mahumetane, although there remaine some Christians to this day: those which were Iewish, both by the Christians and Mahumetanes, were vtterly destroyed. But those of Barbarie (whereof wee especially entreat) remained (saith hee) Idolaters, till two hundred and fiftie yeeres before Mahomets birth, when they became Christians. This must be interpreted of the vniuersall and publike profession about the time of Constantine: For otherwise Africke had in it Christians before. Dorothaeus in Synopsi saith, That Epaeneius, one of the seuentie Disciples, was a Bishop of Carthage; and that Simon the Apostle preached in Mauritania, and among the Africans, as Matthias also in  Aethiopia. But the Gothes soone corrupted Christian Religion with Arrianisme, the forerunner of Mahumetanisme, both heere and else-where. The Moores (saithAlex. ab Alex. Gen. dier. l. 6. c. 4 another) worshipped Iuba as a God; and the Poeni, Vranus; the Libyans, Psaphon. This Psaphan (otherwise a base fellow) had taught Birds to sing, Psaphon is a great God, and let them flie into the Woods, where chanting their lesson, they inchanted the rude people with this superstition. AelianusAelian. l. 14. c. 25. telleth the like Historie of Annon a Carthaginian, whose birds, at libertie in the Woods, forgat this their Masters Lesson. The PaeniDom. Niger. Perfidi Poeni prouerb. See l. 1. c. 18. being (as is said) Phoeni or Phoenicians, brought (in all likelihood) the Phoenician Religion with them from thence. Yee may reade in our first booke of Moloch: whence come the Carthaginian names of Milicus, Imilce, Amilcar, Bomilcar. Yea, Athenodoros reports of Amilcas a Carthaginian Deitie, which is like  to be this Moloch or Milcom, in a little differing Dialect. Some are of opinion that these sacrifices had their beginning from a diabolicall imitation of Abrahams offering his onely sonne Isaac. For so Porphyrius and Philo Biblius relate out of the Phoenician Annals, that an ancient King called Israel, in great danger of warre, offered his onely sonne. Porphyrius cals him Ieud, as Moses also, Gen. 22.2. Iehid. that is, vnigenitum, which hee had by Anobreta: whom Scaliger interpreteth Sara. Neither is it any great maruell, that the names and Story should bee thus peruerted, to any that reade what relations, Iustin, Strabo and others write of the Iewes, or how the Deuill is the great Seducer of the world, bringing darkenesse out of light it selfe. Silius mentioneth these their damnable Rites of humane Sacrifices.




Mos fuit in populis quos condidit aduena Dido,


Poscere caede Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus aris


(Infandum dictu) paruos imponere natos.



Carthage, t'appease the offended Deities,
Was wont to offer humane Sacrifice:
And tender Babes (abominable shame)
Were made the fewell of the Altars flame.


So Ennius in that verse of his, cited byMarcel. in verb. Puell vid. Lactant. l 1. c. 21 Cyrill. adu. Iul. l. 4. Euseb. de praep l. 4 Tert. Apologet. Nonius Marcellus, Ille suos Diuis mos sacrificare  puellos. Tertullian writes, that this custome continued till the time of Tiberius, who being Proconsull, crucified the Priests authors of this villanie, on the very Trees which shadowed the Temple in this bloody groue: yet this continued to Tertullians dayes, but more closely:
 Sed and nunc in occulto perseuerat hoc sacrum facinus. Ipsi parentes sui offerebant, and libentes exponebant, and infantibus blandiebantur, ne lachrymantes immolarentur. These are the words of Tertullian. To Saturne (saithSar. l. 3. Sardus) were humane Sacrifices offered by the Rhodians, Phoenicians, Curetes, and Carthaginians: the Sardi theirSuida^. Colonie, offered the fayrest of their Captiues, and such as were aboue threescore and tenne yeeres olde, who to shew their courage, laughed; whence grew the Prouerbe, Sardonius risus: this was done also to Saturne. The Carthaginians in time of plague, offered their Children to Saturne, which Gelo caused them to leaue. Yea such was their zeale in this superstition, that if they had no Children of their owne, they bought for this purpose of the poore, the Mother assisting this Butcherly sacrifice, without once sighing or weeping, for then shee had lost the price, and her Child neuerthelesse.  And least the crying of the Children should bee heard, all resounded with Instruments of Musicke. Thus Plutarch in his treatise of Superstition. Being ouercome by Agathocles, they sacrificed two hundred of the chiefe mens Children, to Saturne. Clitarchus and others write, cited by Suidas, That in their solemne supplications at Carthage, they put a childe into the armes of Saturnes Brazen Image, vnder which was set a Furnace or Ouen: which being kindled, the childe in his burning, seemed to laugh. This custome might haply bee the occasion of that desperate act before spoken of in the destruction of Carthage by the Romanes, so many perishing in Aesculapius Temple. Other their Rites are likely to bee the same with those which we haue reported of the Phoenicians, somewhat perhaps in time  inclining also to the Greekish superstition. Their deuotion to Venus, the Phoenician Goddesse,  AugustineAug. in Psal. 98. mentioneth in these words, Regnum Veneris quale erat Carthagini, vbi nunc est regnum Christi?
See Ortel. in Parergo.Carthage was called Iustiniana, of Iustinian, Iunonia of Gracchus, Hadrianopolis of Hadrian, and of Commodus, Alexandria Commodiana Togata. It was sacked the second time of Capellianus, President of Mauritania; thirdly, vnder Gensericus, of the Vandals; fourthly, of the Maurusians; fiftly, of the Persians; sixtly, of the Aegyptians; lastly, of the Mahumetanes.
TunisGeorge B^aun hath described this and Algier, etc. in Ciuit. Orb. Ter. was a small Towne, till after the destruction of Carthage it grew in some reckoning (as before is sayd.) It hath in it about ten thousand Housholds. Abdul Mumen joyned it to his Kingdome of Marocco. And when that Kingdome declined,Leo. l. 5. the Vice-Roy  (which before was subject to Marocco) now vsurped the State to himselfe, calling himselfe King of Africa. In our FathersSleid. Com. l. 9. Fr. Sur. Com. Doglioni. dayes, Muleasses, sonne of Mahomet, King of Tunis (by murther of his elder brother Maimon, and either killing or putting out the eyes of twenty other his brethren) obtayned the Crowne. But Rosette the onely brother remayning when with his Arabians he could not gaine the Kingdome, he went with Barbarossa to Solyman the Turke, who so vsed the matter, that Muleasses was chased out of his Kingdome, and Tunis subjected it selfe to Solyman. But Muleasses craued and obtained ayde of Charles the fift, who in the yeere 1535. passedDe hac expeditione Diarium scripsit Ioan. Etrobius. with an Armie into Africke, and repossessed Muleasses of his Kingdome, who became the Emperours Vassall.
Our Histories tell of Edward the first his arriuall at Tunis, and Henry the fourth with English  Archers; at both which times the Tunetanes were forced to composition. It was, before either of them were Kings. Froissart, for Henry, hath his Sonne Iohn de Beaufort.
Muleasses, about the yeere 1544. crossed ouer the Sea into Sicily, leauing his sonne Amida in the gouernmentSurius Com.. The costlinesse of his dyet was admirable, and of his Perfumes. One Peacocke and two Phesants, dressed after his order, were obs^rued to amount to a hundred Dukats and more. He was a superstitious obseruer of his Religion, and of the Starres which portended to him the losse of his Kingdome, and a miserable end. To auoyd this, he departed out of Africa (for feare of Barbarossa) but so fell into the danger. A rumour was spred at Tunis, that hee was dead; whereupon Amida possessed himselfe of the Kingdome. Muleasses hasted home to recouer it, and lost himselfe: for hee was taken Captiue, and after both his eyes put out with a burning knife, and of his two sonnes Nahasar and Abdalas he was committed  to Prison. But Abdamelech his brother got the Kingdome from Amida, and soone after dyed, to whom succeeded Mahomet his soone, a childe: whose Tutors were so tyrannicall, that Amida was againe sent for by the Tunetans, and Muleasses is brought to Sanctuary, whence by the Spaniards meanes hee was conueyed to Guletta, and thence to Sicilia, where he was maintayned at the Emperours chargeKnolles p. 902. He deriued his Pedigree from the Chorean Family, in right line from Homar, Mahomets Disciple. Amida obtayned the Kingdome, thus tossed betwixt Moores, Turkes, and Christians, but was after taken and sent prisoner to Sicilia, Mahomet (brother of Amida, now a slaue in Sicilia) was made King of Tunis, vnder the Spaniard, 1573. by Don Iohn of Austria: but the next yeere after Selym the Turke tooke  Guletta, holden by the Spaniards almost fortie yeeres; and at last tooke Tunis also: Mahomet the new King was sent to Constantinople prisoner.

It hath (saythLeo l. 5. Leo) many Temples, especially one of singular beauty and greatnesse, furnished with store of Priests and Reuenue: also, many Colledges of Schollers, and Monasteries of Religious persons, to which the people yeeld liberall Almes. They are so befooled, that they esteeme Fooles Saints: and while I was at Tunis, the King built a faire Monastery for one Sidi el Dahi (which went vp and downe with his head and feete bare, hurling stones, and crying like mad man) endowing the same with great Reuenue for him and all his kindred.
 Biserta is an ancient City, supposedMaginus, by some to be Vtica, where Cato slue him selfe.


@. II. Of Cairaoan, and the Kingdome of Tripolis.
CAiraoan hath beene a City famous, built by Hucba, Generall of the warres of Ozmen, or Otman, the third Calipha, thirty sixe miles from the Sea, and from Tunis, one hundred, to secure themselues from any sudden inuasion, which the commoditie of the Sea might cause them. He built therein an admirable Temple, on Pi^ats  of Marble. To Hucba in this gouernment succeededMucas or Muza. Muse, to whom Iulianus Earle of Cepta offered his seruiceIo. Vasaeus. Chron. Hispan. Rod. Tolet l. 3. 19. for the conquest of Spaine, and being found faithfully vnfaithfull with some few Souldiers lent him, was after employed with Tarif of whom the hill was called Gehel Tarif, now Gibraltar) who with an Army of twelue thousand tooke Seuill, and after that ouerthrew King Rodericus, and being enriched with spoyle, was dispossessed thereof by Muse, who by this newes of his successe was mooued to follow him into Spaine, as the Spanish WritersRod. Lantius hist. Hi. p. 2. c. 37. Alfons a Carthagena c. 44. Fr. Tarapa Magorn, etc. (though not altogether agreeing herein) declare, and subdued the same in thirty moneths space. When Muse or Muza departed with Tarif out of Spaine, the Moores there fell into such contentions, that in twenty yeeres space there were no lesse then fifteene Kings: and one of them setled his Throne in the bloud of three hundred Competitors. Iezul  the sonne of Muza, and after him his Brother, and Nephew, succeeded each other in this gouernment, which Elagleb (that followed them) turned into an independent and free Signory, by occasion (as is said) of the Chalifa's leauing Damasco, and remoouing the Seat Royal, or Popedome to Bagdat. This House here ruled a hundred and seuenty yeeres, at which time Mahdi an hereticall Chalifa depriued them. These Saracens wan Sicilia in those times to the Cairaoan Dominion.
About the foure hundred yeere of the Hegira, Elcain was Chalifa in Cairaoan, whose Captaine Gehoar conquered vnto him Barbary, Numidia, and as farre as Sus Westward: and after being employed in the East; subdued Egypt and Syria. Hee, for securing himselfe and his Army, built Cairo. After this he sent to his Lord Elcain to come thither in person, assuring  him, That the Calipha of Bagdat was not able to abide his presence and puissance. Elcain listening to Gehoar, appointed a Lieutenant in Cairaoan, and went to Cairo. But his Lieutenant of Cairaoan rebelled and offered his obedience to the Chalifa of Bagdat, who therefore gaue him large Priuiledges, and made him King of all Africa. Elcain in these Straits knew not which way to turne him, till by counsell of his Secretary he tooke this course. The Arabians at that time were exceedingly multiplyed, insomuch that the Country otherwise barren, could not sustaine them and their Cattell. To these hee gaue leaue to passe into Africa, paying for euery Poll a Duckat, and taking an oath of them, to bee enemies to his Rebell. These in short time sacked Tripolis and Cabis, and after eight moneths siege, Cairaoan also; and remayned Lords of Africa, till Ioseph the first, King of Marocco, who gaue aide to the  Kinsmen of that Rebell, wonne the Cities from the Arabians, which still kept possession of the fields. The Lord of Cairaoan fled Westward, and reigned in Bugia, and the parts adioyning; and others of his kindred ruled in Tunis, till the Kings of Marocco swallowed all; that City being built presently after the Arabians had destroyed this, in the yeere foure hundred twenty foure of their Hegira, as LeoLeo l. ^. reckoneth. CairaoanSurius Comment. hath in it an ancient Temple, and Colledge of Priests. Hither the great men among the Moores and Numidians are brought to be buried; hoping by the Prayers of those Priests to climbe to Heauen. For this cause (Boterus sayth) they enter into this City vnshod, with great reuerence.
The Arabians haue filled Africa with themselues, their Armes, Arts, and Language. Arabike Letters, asPofiel. de Orig. Postellus affirmeth, were borrowed of the Chaldees; and first with Mahomet  and his Law, began to bee called Arabike. Hee findeth in the same, I know not what Cabalisticall Mysteries, yeelding more certaine predictions, then from the Heauens, or Orracles, and is much studied (he saith) in Tunis, Marocco, and Cairo.

Tripolis of Barbary (for there is another of thatPl^n. l. 5. c. 20. name in Syria, so called, because the Arcadians, Tyrians, and Sidonians inhabited it) was so named of three Cities, whose Colonies planted it, Abratonum, and Tophia, and Leptis magna: or asSolin. c. 36. D^a^dius Martin. del Rio. others, Cesa, or Taphra, or Oea, Sabrada, and Leptis. It was built by the Romans, conquered by the Gothes, and after by the Saracens. And after the destruction thereof, the Africans built a new Tripolis, wherein were many faire Temples, Colledges for Students, and Hospitals. Corne is alway deare, because their fields are Sand.Io. Leo, l. 5. It was subiect vnto the King of Tunis, till the King of Fez carried away the King of Tunis prisoner. At which time the Genouese Fleet of twenty Sayle tooke Tripolis, and sold it to the Fezan for fifty thousand Duckats. But the Kings of Tunis recouered it after. Zacharias being King, played the Tyrant, and therefore was expelled,  and a certaine Citizen was aduanced to the Throne; who at first gouerned modestly, but declining to tyrannie was murdered: And a Courtier of Prince Abubacer, who had made himselfe an Heremite, was forced to be their King, who ruled Tripolis, till Ferdinando sent Peter Nauarre, who came thither in the Euening, and the next day tooke it: and the King remayned captiue till Charles the fift freed him. Charles gaue the Citie to the Knights of Malta, whom the TurkesNic. Nicolay l. 1. c. 18. G. Bot Ben. Of Tripolis read T. Sanders in Hak. to. 2. p. 1. dispossessed by force, Anno 1551. and there haue their Beglerbeg or Vice-roy to this day. This was one and forty yeeres after Nauarre had taken it.
The Kings of Tunis liued in great delicacie among their women, Musicians, Players, and such like, committing the gouernment to the Munafid, or high Steward, and other Officers. When he cals for a Musician, he is brought in hood-winked like a Hawke. The Inhabitants  are exceeding prodigall in Perfumes. They haue a compound calledLhasis. Lhasis, one ounce wherof being eaten, causeth laughing dalliance, and makes one as it were drunken, and maruellously prouoketh to lust. In the Kingdome of Tunis is placed the Lake Tritonia, where Minerua is said to haue shewed her selfe the Inuenter of Spinning, and of Oyle, and therefore worshipped.
Ezzab is the most Easterly part of the Tunetan Kingdome, the chiefe Prouince whereof is Mesrata. The Inhabitants are rich, and pay no Tribute. There grow Dates and Oliues, and they traffique with the Numidians, to whom they carry the Wares which they buy of the Venetians. The Great Turke swayeth with his Ottoman Scepter, at this present, this Kingdome of Tunis, and all Africa, from Bellis de G^mera, to the Red Sea (except that little which  the Spaniard hath.) At this day theyLeo. l. 1. are Mahumetan, and haue beene about these nine hundred yeeres past, from the time of Hucba. The Inhabitants of the Cities differ much from the Mountayners and ruder Rustickes. For they are studious, especially in matters of their Law, as in times past they were also in Philosophy and the Mathematickes. But these last fiue hundred yeeres their Princes and Doctors haue prohibited many Sciences, as Astrologie and Philosophy: according to the Mahumetan custome they vse much washing and resorting to the Temples. They are very faithfull in their promises, and exceeding iealous. They goe through the World as Merchants, and in many places are entertayned as Readers and Masters in diuers Sciences, and are well esteemed in Egypt, Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, Turkie. The younger sort yeeld much reuerence to their Elders and Parents: and will not hold discourse of loue, or sing loue-songs, in their presence. But these Citizens are very proud and reuengefull.  The Lords esteeme more of their beasts, then of their common people. The Country people in the fields and mountaynes liue hardly in labour and want. They are beastly, theeuish, ignorant, vnfaithfull. Their women before they bee married, may liue as wantonly as they list: yea, the father maketh hatefull loue to the daughter, and the brother is(...). Bas. Ep. vnlouingly louing to the sister. The Numidians are trayterous, homicides, theeues, and for reward, will doe any thing. Such also are the Libyans; without any kind of Letters, Faith, or Law, without Heauen or Earth; liuing (if that may be called a life) like wild beasts, for ignorance; like Deuils, for wickednesse; like Dogges, for pouerty. These things reporteth Leo of them, who liued among them: which may prouoke vs to thankefulnesse to that Great God, who hath giuen Vs such abundance for body and soule, in things present and future, temporall  and eternall.  




CHAP. IX. Of the Kingdome of Tremisen, Algier, and other places, ancienty called Mauritania Caesariensis.

 @. I. Of Tremisen, and of the ancient Maurusij.
THe Kingdome of Telensin or Tremisen,Io. Leo. l. 4. Maginus. Boter. Dom. Niger. Strab. l. 17. beginning Westward from the Riuer of Zha and Muluia; Eastward, it bordereth on the Great Riuer; Southward, vpon the Desart of Numidia; and Northward, vpon the Mediterran Sea. It was by the Romans called Mauritania Caesariensis: the name came of the Inhabitants called Mauri, and of the Greekes, (...): some say(...) obscurus. of their  colour, because it is obscure and darke. They were supposed to come hither first with Hercules out of India. More likely it is that theyArias Mont. in apparatu. Tremel and Iun. descended of Phut, the sonne of Cham, Gen. 10.6. Plinie mentions a Riuer named Fut in these parts, descending from Atlas. Salust saithSalust. bell. Iugurth. they came with Hercules, who being dead in Spaine as the Africans report, his Armie being gathered of many Nations, was diuersly diuided. The Medes, Armenians and Persians of that number, sayled into Africa, of which the Persians dwelt neere the Sea, their ships with the keeles turned vpwards seruing them for houses, and mixed themselues with the Getuli, entitling themselues Numidians. The Libyans adioyned themselues to the Armenians, and to the Medi, whom by corruption of Language they called Mauri. These Getulians and Libyans, he saith, were before very rude, wandring vp and downe without Law  or Ciuility, liuing like beasts, lying and feeding on the ground: which testimony of Salust, Mela in like words confirmeth. But of these and other African people, let them which please learne of that Author, and of such as haue written Notes vpon him, as Gruterus, Glarianus, Riuius, Ciacconius, Putschius, and others, VitruuiusVitruuius l. 8* cap. 2. nameth Mauritania, Maurusia. OrteliusOrtel. Thesaur. testifieth, That in ancient Coines it is read Mauretania, and soCornel. Tacit. hist. l. 2. Tacitus readeth. Ptolemey diuideth it into Mauritania Caesariensis, whichVictor. Persecutionis l. 3. Victor Vticensis calleth Maior, and Tingitania.Plin. l. 5. c. 1. and 2. Pliny ascribes this diuision to Caligula; Dion, to Claudius Caesar: of whom it was sirnamed Casariensis of the Mother Citie Caesarea, where hee planted a Roman Colony, before called Iol, the Royall Seat of Iuba, a man famous, for that hee first reigned ouer both these Mauritania's; but more famous for his Learning, whereby he still liueth in the learned  Monuments of Pliny and others; Authour of much of our African report. Hee in his childhood was led in triumph at Rome; his fatherCaesar. Comm. de bello ciuili Africano l. 5. Or^siu^ l. 6. c. 16. R. Volater. l. 12. Iuba, the successour of Bechus, had before slaine himselfe in the Ciuill Warres. Augustus restored him to his Fathers Kingdome, to which he left his sonne Ptolomey, borne of the daughter of Antonius and Cleopatra, whom Ca^gula slue, and then diuided Mauritania into two Prouinces, whereof this is called, as is said, Caesariensis, of the Colonie of Claudius Caesar. That which ProcopiusProcop. de bell^ Persico and Vandilico. l. 4. hath written of the originall of these Maurusij, as he termes them, although in our first Booke mentioned, here also so may seeme to deserue Relation.
When Iosua or Iesus; the sonne of Nun or Nane, had inuaded the Land of Canaan, the people fled into Egypt, and there multiplying* pierced into Africa, replenishing with people all  that Coast, vnto the Pillars of Hercules, vsing a semi-Phoenician Dialect; For all the Seacoast from Sidon to Egypt, was anciently called Phoenicia: They built the Towne Tinge in Numidia, where they erected two Pillars of white stone neere a great Fountayne, wherein was ingrauen in Phoenician Letter^, Wee flee from the face of Iesus the Thiefe, the Sonne of Nane. These are supposed the first Inhabitants of Africa, and for that cause Antaeus their King, which encountred in single combate with Hercules, was said to bee the Sonne of the Earth. Afterwards, when the Phoenicians came hither with Dido, they were here receiued for kindreds sake, and permitted to build Carthage; which after grew so mighty, that it subdued and expelled the Maurusij themselues. The Romans made the Carthaginians, and other Africans Tributaries, and caused the Maurusij to inhabit the furthest parts of Africa: but in  processe of time, they obtayning many victories against the Vandals, seated themselues in Mauritania, till Iustinian remooued them. Thus farre Procopius. Paulus DiaconusPauli Diaconi Iustinianu^. recordeth also the same History, sauing that he sayth, the Egyptians would not receiue them, and
 therefore they passed into Africa. The Maurusij in the time of Iustinian were destroyed, and captiued in such multitudes, that a Maurusian slaue was valued at the price of a sheepe. The Author of this was Salomon, an Eunuch, according to a Prophesie which they had amongst them, that one without a beard should destroy them. But captiuity could not much empare their happinesse, whose very freedome was misery.Procop. Eadem Coelius Rhodig. l. 18. b. 38. Suidas. saith, that they were bold: and fought fleeing and returning vpon aduantage, like as we read of the Parthians. For they liued in small base cottages, exposed to the Summer Sunnes, and Winter snowes, sleeping (except a few of the better sort) on the bare ground, alway wearing the same garment, howsoeuer the season differed, and that torne and ragged: wanting bread and all other necessaries, neither grinding nor boyling that Corne they had. Thus miserable were their bodies, and their soules more. For they had neither feare of God, nor reuerence of Men, nor respect of pledge, nor regard of  oath, nor peace with any, but where feare constrained them. They had their women Prophetesses, which diuined by their Sacrifices; a thing vnlawfull for their Men to attempt. Of the numbers of their wiues they bragged, thatIn Epistola ad Solomonem. the Christians which had but one wife, might feare the losse of their children, they which might haue fifty wiues, need not misdoubt Issue and Posteritie. And yet they were by many wars brought to small numbers, and a few Tribes or Families.
Leo l. 4.Leo sayth, that after the Romanes were expelled, the ancient Gouernours called Beni Habdalguad of the Family of Magraua repossessed these parts; who were after dipossessed by Ghamrazen, Sonne of Zeijen, whose Posterity reigned here almost three hundred and eightie yeeres. But they were much vexed by the Kings of Fez, and Tunis. It was in later times  called the Kingdome of Telensin, or of Tremisen, stretching in length from East to West three hundred and eighty miles, in breadth not aboue fiue and twenty. The Kings could neuer satisfie the Numidians couetise, whose friendship they haue with great cost sought. It hath two frequented Hauen-townes, Oram and Mersalcabir, both taken and holden by the Spaniards. They were taken in the time of Ferdinando King of Spaine; for which cause Abuchemmen the Telensin King was expelled by his owne Subiects, and Abuzeijen placed in his roome, which he could scarcely warme, before he was slaine by Barbarussa the Turke, who conquered this Kingdome.Anno 1515. But Abuchemmen sought to Charles the fift for aide, by whose helpe he recouered his Kingdome, and payed a Tribute to the Emperour. But Habdulla his Successor detayned the Tribute, and submitted himselfe vnto Soliman the Great Turke. Algier  remayned to Barbarussa.


@. II. Of BARBARVSSA; of Algier and the parts adioyning.
THisMonst. Cosmog. lib. 6. Barbarussa or Barbarossa, was a meane fellow of base condition, who in his youth sold Cheeses in Spain for his liuing, and by his industry attained to great matters. There wereKnolls p. 625. of them two Brethren, born at Mytilene in Lesbos, their Mother  a Christian, their Father a Renegate Grecian, Horucius Barbarussa, and this Hariadenus Barbarussa. They first stole a Galliot, and so committing themselues to Sea, by Piracy vnder Camales, a Turkish Pirate, they grew rich: and from one Galley, came to haue a Nauie of their owne, with which they scoured the Coasts of Barbary. At the same timeSurij Comm. in Annum 1534 P. Iouius lib. 33. two brethren contended for the Kingdome of Algier, one of which requested ayde of Horucius, who so helped him against his brother, that he helped himselfe to the Kingdome, by the murther of the King his Patron and Alley, which he did not long enioy, being taken and slaine of the Spaniards, and his head sent into Spaine. But Iris Brother Hariadenus succeeding him, became mighty both by Sea and Land, to the great dammage both of the Mores and Christians; and Soliman moued by his fame, sent for him, and made him Admirall of all the Turkish  Seas, and Sea forces, vnder whom hee grew dreadfull, not to these parts of Barbary alone, which he subiected to the Turke, but to those Countries of Christendome which are washed with the Mediterran: euen Rome it selfe quaking for feare of a second Hannibal, who after so many ages should by Sea from Africa auenge the angry Ghost of old Carthage.
In the yeere 1538. the Pope, Emperour, and Venetians, had with ioynt forces set forth a Nauy of aboue two hundred and fifty Sayle against him, but by mutuall discords the wonted aduantage of the Turkes against the Christians) they made themselues both sport and spoyle to this Turkish Pyrat. The Sea could no longer endure the successe of this Barbarian, but mad to see the Christians vnchristian madnesse, and vnwilling to submit his proud waues to the base thraldome of this base Turke, swelling with indignation, conspired with the Neighbour  Element, which pretended equall quarrell for so often darkening his light, and poysoning his breath with those hellish smokes, and for vsurping those thunders, which had wont
 to be the ayrie priuiledge of his middle Regions: these both agreed in their disagreeing, with tempestuous furie to spoile the Spoilers: the windes from the Acroceraunian Hills, and the Seas on the Dalmatian shore, so girt in the Turkes, with their equall vnequall siege, that twentie thousand of them were captiued and shut vp in Neptunes prisons, to become foode to his Familie; and the new Conquerors on euery shore, made their markets of Turkish commodities, and by wracks testified to the Earth, that they had wrecked themselues on her and their enemies. And yet did Barbarussa recouer himselfe by new forces, and hauing won Rhegium, came to Ostia, where he rode three dayes; the Romanes trembling meanewhile, and readie to leaue Saint Peter alone to locke out the Turks if they came. So much more fortunate  were his proceedings, then of Haly Bassa, who in the fight at Lepanto, lost his life and Nauie, whereofKnolls saith fortie sunke; an hundred threescore and one Gallies. and sixtie Gallio^s taken, pag. 883. Michael Isselt, Com in An. 1571 eightie fell to the Seas share, and an hundred and thirtie saile to Don Iohn and his Partners; the greatest blow that euer th^ Turke at Sea receiued, and had the greatestKing Iames in his Poem of Lepanto. Ho^er to sing it. But me thinkes I feele some Cynthius pulling me by the eare, and asking if the Pirats haue robbed me of my Religion, the most proper subiect of my Discourse. Truly that irreligious Crue, while they seeke to win other things, care not to lose that. But this Algier hauing beene of old, and still continuing a receptacle of Turkish Rouers, could not be passed ouer, especially in these Piraticall times, without some obseruation, being also the gate whereby the Turkish forces first entred into Barbarie.Io. Leo, l. 4. Iohn Leo writeth a little otherwise of Barbaussa and Algier.
 The Moores call this Citie Gezeir, the Spaniards Algier: and of old was called Mesgana of that African Familie which founded it. It contaynethIt hath now ei^htie thousand persons, as Boterus affirmeth, and by report now exceedes. about foure thousand Families: the buildings very sumptuous; Innes, Bath-stones, and Temples very beautifull: euery Occupation hath a seuerall place by it selfe. It hath adioyning Playnes very pleasant and fertile, one whereof is fiue and fortie miles long, and almost thirtie broad. For many yeeres it was subiect to the Kingdome of Telensin: but hearing that Bugia was gouerned by a King, they submitted themselues to him, paying him a Tribute, otherwise in manner free. Then did they build themselues Gallies, and molested with Piracies the Spanish Ilands of Majorica, Minorica, and Ieuiza. Ferdinando therefore prouided an Armada against them, and built a Fort within shot of the Towne: whereupon they requested peace, and promised Tribute. But  Barbarussa, when Ferdinando was dead, was sent for by the Citizens, and made Captaine ouer all their Forces. Hee soone after murthered Selum Etteumi, an Arabian Prince, which had beene created Gouernour of Algier, when Bugia was taken by the Spaniards: and possessed himselfe of the gouernment, and there coyned money, calling himselfe King; the neighbouring people yeelding him obedience and tribute. This was the beginning of Barbarussas greatnesse: and at the most part hereof Leo was present, and lodged in his house which had beene Embassadour from Algier to Spaine, from whence he had brought three thousand books written in Arabike. And whiles I was at Tunis, I heard that Barbarussa was slaine at Telensin, and his brotherThis was H^riaden th^ Turkish Admirall. Cairadin succeeded. It was told me also, that the Emperour Charles the fift had sent two armies to surprise Algier, the first whereof was destroyed in the Playne,  the second slaine, and made slaues by Babarussa, in the yeere of the Hegira 922. Thus farre L^^. In the yeere 1541.Nic. Villagagnon de bac expedit.Surii Comm. in Anno 1541. Of Charles his African exploits see Iouius, E^ropius, Caluetus Stella, Nic. Mameranus, etc. Charles himselfe with his Imperiall Nauie passed the Seas, to like both purpose and effect, more ouer-comming himselfe in the patient bearing his losses, then his enemies whom he sought to assaile. He was mooued to this Expedition by the complaints of his Subiects, against the Turkish Pirats, which vnder Asanaga, Barbarussa's Lieutenant, infested all those Seas. But the tempestuous weather both at Land and Sea disappointed him, and after the losse of many, both men and ships, was forced to returne, and to make roome for his Souldiers, caused his Horses (their gallant breede, notwithstanding) to bee cast ouerboord. Thus doth AlgierAlgier is described by G.B. in his Ciu. Vrb. Ter. still continue a sinke of Pirats; and now, saith Maginus, there are in it not many lesse then fiue and twentie thousand Christian slaues, which in likelyhood  at this time are increased.
Tripoli is also a seate of a Turkish Viceroy or Beglerbeg, and of Turkish Rouers. In the Kingdome of Telensin is the Desart of Angad, wherein are store of Roes, Deere, and Ostriches, Arabian Theeues and Lions. The Castle of Izli was sometime stored with Inhabitants, and stately walled. Since, it was inhabited with Religious persons, much reuerenced by the Kings of Telensin, and the Arabians, which giue free entertainment for three dayes vnto all Trauellers. A little off runneth a Riuer, out of which they water their fields, which else would yeeld them no fruit. Guagida betwixt two stooles had vnquiet sitting, paying tribute both to the Kings of Telensin, and the Arabians. Ned Roma was built by the Romanes, as the name testifieth, for Ned signifieth Like; and like it was, if Historiographers faile not, vnto  Rome. Here, and at Tebecrit dwelt great store of weauers. Haresgo^l was sometime famous, but being destroyed by a King and Patriarch of Cairaoan, it bequeathed, as it seemeth, the greatnesse thereof to Telensin, which after grew in renowme. This Towne giues name
 to this Kingdome. When Abu Tesfin raigned, it had in it sixteene thousand Families. Ioseph King of Fez besieged it seuen yeeres together, and almost famished them: but he being slaine by treason, they found victuals enough in their enemies campe (which they assailed and spoiled) for their reliefe. Fortie yeeres after, Abulhesen King of Fez after thirtie moneths siege tooke it, and beheaded their King. Here are many and beautifull Temples, hauing their Mahumetan Priests and Preachers. Likewise here are fiue Colledges most sumptuously buil^ by the Kings of Telensin and Fez, curiously wrought with musaike worke, for the Arabian Muses and Students, which haue their maintenance there. Their Bathes and Innes I omit. A great part of this Citie is inhabited with Iewes, distinguished by their yellow Turbants from the other Citizens, which being very rich, in the yeere of the Hegira 923. were robbed and  brought to beggerie. The TurkesGi. Bot. Ben. are now Lords thereof, betweene whom and Charles the fift, who had vndertaken their protection, the Citie is much impayred, as also by the warres betwixt the Seriffe and the Turke. Barbarussa subiected it. Batha is a great Citie, or rather was such: now ruined by warres. Not farre hence in Leo's time kept a famous Heremit, much esteemed for his holinesse: who in short time grew so rich in Horses and other Cattell, that none in that Region were comparable to him. He payd nothing, nor any of his to the King, or to the Arabians, because they supposed him a Saint. I was told by his Disciples (saith Leo) that the tenth of his Corne is eight thousand bushells a yeere.A rich Heremite. He hath fiue hundred Horses and Mares, ten thousand small Cattell, and two thousand Oxen, besides that, he hath yeerly sent him from diuers parts of the world, of almes and offering, betweene foure  and fiue thousand duckats. His fame is spred ouer Asia and Africa, his disciples are fiue hundred, which dwell with him, and liue at his charge, to whom hee enioyneth neither penance nor labour, but to reade ordinarie prayers: and giues them some names of God to obserue in their prayers, which they are to mumble so many times a day: for which cause multitudes resort to him to be his disciples, which after such instruction he sends home againe. He hath an hundred Tents, some for Strangers, some for Shepheards, and others for his Familie. This good and lustie Hermit hath foure wiues, and many slaues, and by them many sonnes and daughters gallantly attyred. His children also haue wiues and children, in so much that the whole Familie of this Heremit and his sonnes exceeded fiue hundred. Hee is honored of the Arabians, and the King of Telensin is afraid of him. I, being desirous to know him, was entertayned  of him three dayes, and supped with him euery night in secret roomes, where hee shewed me among other things, bookes of Magicke and Alchymie: and would haue proued to me that Magicke was a true Science: whereby I thought him to be a Magician, because I saw him so much honored, and yet vsed neither sayings nor doings, but those Inuocations of God by certayne names. Thus farre Leo, lib. 4.
Oran is subiectOran. to Spaine, taken by Peter Nauarre, 1509. It hath ten thousand Families. The Turkes in vaine assaulted it, An. 2563. Their Piracies procured this Spanish thraldome: vnto which Mersalcabir, a most famous Hauen, is also subiect.
TegdemtTegdemt. is as the Arabian name signifieth, Ancient. It sometime was famous, and abounded with men of learning and Poets. But hee which would further bee informed of the  Cities of this Kingdome, let him reade Leo. The people of Bresch vse to paint a blacke crosse on their cheeke, and another vpon the palme of their hand. The same is obserued of diuers others, which yet know not the reason thereof, being Mahumetans. The storie saith, that the Gothes inuading and ruling these parts, proclaymed freedom from tribute to all such as would become Christians: a badge of which Christianitie was this crosse, still kept, now their Religion is lost.
Concerning their marriages in these parts, we readeCateches. Mystagogic. P. G. that the Bride is carryed, not on her feet, but in the armes of two yong men, with her eyes closed, and being marryed, is in like sort, without stirring her eyes or feet, conueighed to the Bridegroomes house; where she enters first with the right foote, in token of prosperitie (the left foote first touching ground,  would portend sinister successe, as proceeding from a certayne Constellation and ineuitable destinie) with musicke shee is entertayned and conducted to the Bride-chamber, where shee sits downe, as taking possession of her house, all the other women standing about her: after which shee is led with great pompe by women to the Hall, the men accompanying the Bridegroome to another roome. The Bride is set on a bed couered with a white veile, the women standing by, and many gifts and presents are offered to her: two women being her instructers in the rites and ceremonies which shee is to obserue, called Magitae, to whom the Bride giueth the money which is offered. The men which offer, if they bee of neere kinne, may vpon request see her face, her eyes still closed. Neither may shee speake, but by those Magitae is shifted and gallantly adorned, and brought to banquet with the women. They  haue a dinner and a supper, furnished with exceeding varietie of dishes, of Honey and Raysins diuersly compounded: their flesh is not tasted before oyle be powred on it. There are neere as
 many pots boyling, as guests, and much superstition is obserued in killing their flesh towards the Sunne, with pronouncing certaine wordes, or else all is cast on the dung-hill. The Bride being conueyed to bed, may not signifie any griefe for smart or losse there sustayned. The next morning before day, the husband riseth, not saluting his wife, and taking a pot for water, and a vessell for meate, at his returne beates vpon the doore with a stone many times, till shee (then first) speakes to him, and ordering the said meate and water, beginnes to looke to her houshold-charge. The Magitae presently come and congratulate her last nights d^lliance, and desire issue thereof: and then cut her haire hanging downe on her backe, euen with her neck, that it should not hinder her husbands embraces.
 The gouernment of these parts is, as is said, Turkish. The Boglerbog hath chiefe title, but the Diuano hath chiefe power of Iudgements and Iurisdiction: The Corasan or Captaine of the Ianizaries, being in many matters as great as the Beglerbeg. The Beglorbegs of Algier and Tunis make their principall profits of their places (which they hold three yeers, hauing first bought them at a deare rate) by their piracies, which with ioynt consent they exercise on these Seas, all in manner being fish that comes to net, if they meete them conueniently, notwithstanding any league or peace holden with the Grand Signior. They also giue entertainment to such Pirats of other places, as resort to them, either to sell their ill-gotten goods, or to ioyne their strength with them. As of latePirats: of these two Pirats there is a speciall Treatise, ^et forth 1609. Dansker and Warde haue beene famous in this infamie; the first, after his seruice with them and for them, receiuing his reward, by  them suddenly killed at Tunis (where he was knowne, notwithstanding his disguising himselfe, with purpose to haue surprised their fleet:) the other (a shame to our Countrey, of which he was) grew so rich by his Piracies, that hee shewed at one time to (the Authour of these reports) Iohn Pountesse, a bagge of Iewels, contayning almost halfe a bushell, besides his other purchases: And at last, that the end might manifest the wickednesse of these proceedings,Many English Christians vnworthy either of these names turn from that faith (which they neuer had but in profession) to professe themselues (for hell) Turkish. he became an Apostata and Renegado from his faith; and soone after (as some haue reported, for others say he is still aliue, and Captaine of the Turkes Gallies) dyed at Tunis: leauing his goods (for his goodnesse he had left before) vnto the Turks, his body vnto a forren sepulchre, and his soule let pirats and robbers (if they think they haue any soule) say whither.
Algier was by Barbarussa subiected to the Turke, about the yeere 1534. Tunis An. 1574.  Three and twentie yeeres after that Tripoli, in Barbarie, another Cage of like birds, and seat of a Boglerbeg, was taken from the Knights of Malta by Sin^n Bassa. These Kingdomes the Turke hath in Africa, besides the great kingdome of Egypt, and what hee hath taken from Prester Iohn.
In EgyptKnolls. are said to be an hundred thousand Timariots, or Horse-mens fees, which for that tenure of their Land, without any charge to the great Turke, are to serue where it pleaseth him to employ them. In this kingdome of Algier are fortie thousand.



CHAP. X. Of the Kingdome of Fez, part of Mauritania Tingitana.

@. I. Of the Poeticall and Historicall Antiquities, and part of Temesma.
 MAuritania Tingitana (so called of Tingis, now Tanger, at the mouth of the Streits) is by PtolemeyPtol. l 4. c. 8. bounded on the West, with the Westerne and Atlantike; on the North, with the Mediterran Seas; on the East, with the RiuerPlinie calls this Riuer Maluana. Muluia or Malua, which diuideth it from Casariensis; on the South, with the inner Nations of Libya. NigerDom. Nig. Aph. Com. 1. saith, it was after called Setinensis, of the Citie Setia: more truly, Sitiphensis, of Sitiphis, which Procopius saith was the mother Citie of Tingitana. In this Prouince are now the famous kingdomes of Fez and Marocco.Gi. Bot. Ben. The ancient Inhabitants besides the Maurusij (of which wee haue spoken) werePlin. l. 5. c. 2* the Massaes^li, Autololes, Bannurri, and the Gaetulians which liued here, and in other parts of Africa, as the Tartars doe in Asia, and the Arabians in Africa, remoouing their dwellings (if Tent-wandring may bee so called) as their pastures faile them. So Silius writeth  of them:
Silius, lib. 1*Nulla domus; plaustris habitant, migrare per aruaMos, atque errantes circumuectare Penates.House they haue none; but wandring still in Waynes,They cart their houshold-gods about the Playnes.

The westerly point of Mauritania Pomponius beginneth at the Promontorie, called of their store of Vines, Ampelusia,Pompon. Mela lib. 1. cap. 5. cum Oliuarii annot. now Cabo de Cantero, as Oliuarius affirmeth. In it was a Caue sacred to Hercules, and beyond the same, Tingi, supposed to bee built by Antaeus, for proofe whereof they shew his Target made of an Elephants hide, too huge and vnweildy for any man of later times, and holden in great veneration. Next to this Tingi (which gaue name to the Countrey, after by Claudius Caesar, who sent a Colonie thither, called Traducta Iulia) was a high Mountayne called Abyla, to which on the Spanish coast was opposed Calpe, which two Hills bare the name of Hercules pillars; Hercules himselfe (if wee beleeue fabulous antiquitie) making there a passage to the Ocean and Mediterran Seas, for mutuall view and entertainment. They are now called Seuta on that side, and Gibraltar on this side. A  little hence was Iulia Constantia, a Colonie of Augustus; and Lixus, a Colonie of Claudius. In thisNatal. Comes Mythol. l. 7. c. 2. was Antaeus his Palace, and his combate with Hercules, and the Gardens of the Hesperides, which some (as is said) place neere Bernice. Antaeus, if his legend bee true, wasSome say threescore and ten, and that Sertorius found him in his sepulchre of that length. I can easily beleeue both alike. threescore and foure cubits long, a cruell and inhospitall Tyrant, who in his encountring with Hercules, was three times hurled dead to the earth, and so many times by his mother (the Earth) reuiued: which Hercules perceiuing, held him vp in the Aire till he had strangled him. Whereby they intend, that the Sunne reuiueth the earth, signified by Antaeus and Hercules, but with his excessiue heat doth kill it. The Hesperides were the daughters of Hesperus, brother of Atlas; Aegle, Arethusa, Hespertusa. In their Gardens grew those golden  apples (the dowrie of Iuno to Iupiter) kept by a Dragon, engendred of Typhon and Echidnae, which had an hundred heads, and many voyces, attended by the Priest of the Hesperides: these Hercules fetched away. This was the poeticall tale; the truth whereof is said to bee, that the daughters of Atlas were by Pirats and Theeues, sent from Busiris King of Egypt, stolne; and redeemed by Hercules, who slue those theeues. These were borne to Atlas of Hesperia, daughter of Hesperus his brother, called therefore Atlantides and Hesperides, sixe in number. Atlas had an excellent kinde of sheepe, with yellow fleeces, which for this exploit he bestowed on Hercules: and taught him also the knowledge of Astronomie: in regard of which Science, Atlas is said to haue borne vp the Heauens with his shoulders, and Hercules to haue vndertaken his burthen. Whereas NatalisLib. 7. cap. 7. Comes placeth these gardens with Plinie, neere to Lixus, and yet nigh to Meroe and the Red Sea, betwixt which places is such  a world of distance, it argueth how great errours great Schollers may fall into by want of that so-much-neglected studie of Geographie, without which, Historie that delectable studie is sicke of a halfe-dead palsie: one cause that hath mooued me to ioyne in my studies and in this worke, the Historie of Time,Chronologie and Geographie are the two eyes of Historie. Chytraeus. with her manifold changes and chances and of Place together. Besides the Altar of Hercules, and wilde Oliues, there remayned nothing in Plinies dayes of that Hesperian garden. NigerDom. Niger. Com. Aph. 1. findes there a tree Mallow, twentie foote high, and aboue a fathom about. Of Mount Atlas they tell wonderfull tales, of the selfe-fertilitie thereof, the Inhabitants neuer seene by day, the desart-like silence, the fires therein shining by night, the musicke and misse-rule of the Aegypanes and Satyres, and the labours of Hercules and Perseus there. Iohn Leo shall better acquaint vs with the truth, then those fables of credulou^  antiquitie. Out of him therefore and other later writers, wee will take view of the present face of Africa, there being little that can bee said of their ancient Rites, more then is alreadie obserued. The Romans brought hither their Language and Religion. The Vandals vnder Gensericus passing out of Spaine, made conquest of all in manner which the Romans had in Africa, of whose crueltie VictorVict. Vticensis Persecutionis Vand. Vticensis, an eye-witnesse, hath written three bookes. The manifold battels and alterations of estate betwixt them, the Romans, Maurusians, and others, ProcopiusProcop. de Bello Vand. hath diligently recorded. It would bee harsh and tedious here to relate. The soyle, saith Mela, is more noble then the people: of the miraculous fertilitie whereof, DionysiusDion. Halicar. lib. 1. Muust. Cosin. l. 6. Halicarnasseus, Munster, Boemus, and others haue written, I know not how truly, That their corne yeelds an hundred fold encrease, and in some places an hundred and fiftie; That there are seene Vines as great as two men can fathom, and grape-clusters a cubit long,  etc. It isTheatrum Arnoldi Mermannii. thought that Christian Religion was here preached in the Apostles time.
Leauing those things of more age and vncertaintie, wee will come now to the kingdomes of Fez and Marocco, which haue beene of Saracenicall erection in this Prouince of Tingitana.Io. Leo, lib. 3. Gi. Bot. Ben. Maginus. That of Fez stretcheth from Azamor to Tanger, and from the Atlantike Ocean to Muluia. This Riuer is the Easterne border, on the North it is washed with the Sea, on the South is the kingdome of Marocco, on the West, the Riuer Ommirabih. The Riuers Subu, Luccus, and others water it. Therein are numbred seuen Prouinces, Temesna, the Territorie of Fez, Azgar, Elhabet or Habat, Errif, Garet, and Chaus or Elchauz: euery of which, saith Leo, had in old time a seuerall Gouernour. Neither was the Citie of Fez the royall seat,  but was built by a schismaticall Rebell, in whose Familie the gouernment continued 150. yeeres. And then the Marin familie preuayling, gaue it first the title of a kingdome, setling their abode and strength therein.

Temesna beginneth at Ommirabih, thence stretching Eastward to Buragrag, betweene Atlas and the Ocean. It is a playne Countrey, eightie miles in length, contayning in it fortie great Townes, besides three hundred Castles. In the yeere of the Hegira 323. Chem^m^ the sonne of Menol, an Heremiticall Preacher, perswaded them to pay no tribute, nor yeeld subjection to Fez, because the Lords thereof were vniust. Hee bearing himselfe for a Prophet, in small time gate into his hand the Spirituall and Temporall Sword, holding the same by force and Armes. But after that Ioseph had built Marocco, hee sought by Catholike Doctors of the Mahumetane Religion, to reduce them from their Heresie, but they slew them, and with an Armie of fiftie thousand marched towards Marocco, to expell  thence the House of Luntuna, but by this meanes brought destruction to themselues; Ioseph getting the better, and spoyling their Country, tenne moneths together, with great crueltie.
It is thought that a million of people by Famine, Sword, Rockes aad Riuers, were consumed: and Temesna was left to bee inhabited of Wolues, Lyons, and Ciuit-Cats, a hundred and fiftie yeeres: at which time King Mansor gaue the possession of Temesna to certaine Arabians, who fiftie yeeres after were expelled by the Luntune Family, recouering the Kingdome from the House of Mansor; and after, the Marin Family preuayling, gaue it to the people of Zenete and Haora, in meede of their seruice, which they had done to the Marins against the King and Patriarch of Marocco. From which time they haue enioyed the  same almost two hundred yeeres.
Anfa was a Towne of great Trade with the English and Portugals, and by these vtterly razed: and so the Arabians serued the next Citie Mansora. Nuchaila, sometimes famous for their plentie of Corne, of which it is recorded, that they would giue a Camels burthen for a paire of Shooes, hath now but a few bones left of her carkasse, namely, a piece of the wall, and one high Steeple, where the Arabians after they haue ended their Tilth, lay vp their instruments of Husbandrie, none daring to steale his neighbours tooles, in reuerence of a Saint of theirs, there buried.
Rebat, is a Towne furnished with Colledges, and Temples, the modell of Marocco. At Sella was King Mansor buried, where hee had built a stately Hospitall, and Palace, a beautifull  Temple, and a Hall of Marble cut in Mosaike worke, with glasse-windowes of diuers colours, wherein hee and his Posteritie were buried. I saw, saith Leo, the Sepulchre, and copied out the Epitaphs of thirtie of them.
Madur Auvan, by the ruines testifieth her sometime proud buildings, Hospitals, Innes and Temples. In Thagia is visited the Sepulchre of a holy Man, which liued in the time of Habdul Mumen the Calif or Patriarch, who wrought great miracles against the Lyons, wherwith the Towne is much molested. Ettedle, a Mahumetane Doctor, wrote a Legend of his miracles, which Leo saith hee had read, and supposed that they were done either by Naturall or Diuellish Magicke. The Fessans after their Easter, yeerely resort to his Tombe, with such numbers of Men, Women and Children, and their Tents,  that they seeme an Armie. It standeth from Fez an hundred and twentie miles, so that their going and returning in this Pilgrimage lasteth fifteene dayes. My Father carried mee yeerely thither when I was a Childe, and since, I haue beene there many times, by reason of many vowes which I made, being in danger of Lyons. Where Zarfa stood, the Arabians nowSeges est, vbi Troia fuit. sow Corne.
The Territorie of Fez hath on the West the Riuer Buragard; the East, Inaven; on the North, Subu; and Atlas on the South. Sella was built by the Romans, sacked by the Gothes, subiect since to Fez. The buildings are of Mosaike worke, supported with Marble Pillars: euen the Shops are vnder faire and large Porches, and there are arches to part Occupations. All the Temples are beautifull. In this Towne the Genowaies, English, Flemings, and Venetians,  vsed to trade. The Spaniards tooke it in the 670 of the Heg^ra, but lost it againe within ten dayes. Fanzara was destroyed by Sahid, who with certaine Arabians besieged Fez seuen yeeres together, and destroyed all the Villages in the Countrey about. Mahmora was made famous by the slaughter of the Portugals, whose bloud dyed the Sea three dayes together, blushing to see the barbarous Barbarian spill so much Christian bloud. Leo was there present, and numbreth the slaine Christians at ten thousand, besides the losse of their Ships and Ordnance, whereof the Moores tooke vp foure hundred great Brasse Peeces out of the Sea, in the yeere of the Heg. 921.
 



HONDIVS his Map of the Kingdome of Fez.
map of Fez, North Africa
FESSAE REGNUM





@. II. Of the Citie of Fez, as it was in LEO's dayes, and the Customes of the Inhabitants.
THe Citie Fez, or Fesse, was built in the time of Aron the Caliph, in the 185. yeere of the Hegira, or Mahumeticall computation. It had thisFez signifieth Gold, in Arabike; and so doth Phaz in Hebrew. Vide Leo, Sanut. etc. golden Title, because on the first day of the Foundation, there was found some quantitie of Gold. Gasper Varerius and Aldrete are of opinion, That the Riuer Phut (so called of the sonne of Cham, before mentioned) is this Riuer of Fez, by the Arabians thus altered: and that this Riuer  gaue Name to the Region and the Citie; which opinion is also recited by Leo. The Founder was named Idris, Arons neere kinsman, to whom the Caliphaship was more due: For he was nephew of Hali, Mahumets cousin, who marriedElsewhere called Fatima. Falerna, daughter of Mahumet, and therefore both by Father and Mother of that kindred; whereas Aron was but in the halfe-blood, being nephew to Habbus, the vncle of Mahumet. Howbeit, both these Families were depriued of the Caliphate; and Aron by deceitOf this* read our third book: the difference seemeth to be more in names then truth. vsurped: For Arons Grandfather fained himselfe willing to transferre that dignitie to Hali, and caused the house of Vmene to lose it; and Habdulla Seffec became the first Caliph, who persecuted the House of Hals openly, chasing some into Asia, and some into India. But one of them remayned in Elmadina, of whom (because  hee was old and religious) he had no great feare. His two Sonnes grew in such fauour with the people, that they were forced to flee; and one being taken and strangled, the other,
 which was this Idris, escaped into Mauritania; where hee grew in such reputation, that in short time he got both Swords into his hand, and dwelt in the Hill Zaron, thirtie miles from Fez, and all Mauritania payed him tribute. Hee dyed without issue, onely hee left his slaue with Child; she was a Goth, become Mahumetan, and had a sonne, which after his father was called Idris. Hee succeeded in the Principalitie, and was brought vp vnder the discipline of a valiant Captaine, named Rasid; and began to shew great prowesse at fifteen yeeres. He afterwards, encreasing in power, built on the East side of the Riuer a small Citie, of three thousand Families. After his death, one of his sonnes built another Citie on the West side; both which Cities so encreased, that there was small distance betweene them. And a hundred and eighty  yeeres after, there arose ciuill Warres betwixt those two Cities, which continued a hundred yeeres. And as Aesops Kite serued the Mouse and Frog, so Ioseph, of the Luntune Family, apprehending this aduantage, tooke both their Lords, and slew them, and thirty thousand of the Citizens. He brake downe the walls which parted the two Cities, and caused many Bridges to be made, and brought them both to be one Citie, which he diuided into twelue Wards.The sweet situation of Fez.
The Citie is now, or at least in Leos time was, both great and strong. It seemes, that Nature and Art haue played the Wantons, and haue brought forth this Citie the fruit of their dalliance: Or else they seeme Corriuals; both, by all kind Offices, seeking to winne her loue: So doth the Earth seeme to dance, in little Hillocks and pretie Vallies diuersifying the Soyle: so doth the Riuer disperse it selfe into manifold Chanels; no sooner entring the Citie, but it is diuided  into two Armes, wherewith it embraceth this louely Nymph; and these subdiuided, as it were, into many Fingers, in variety of Water-courses, insinuating it selfe vnto euery Street and Member thereof: and not contented thus in publike to testifie affection, findes meanes of secret intelligence with his Loue by Conduit-pipes, closely visiting euery Temple, Colledge, Inne, Hospitall, (the speciall Chambers of his Spouse:) Yea, and almost euery priuate house; from whence, with an officious seruice, he carrieth the filth that might offend either sight or sent of his Bride; which still enjoying, he wooeth; and euer wooing, enjoyeth. Only in hot Seasons he hath a cold suit: for the Riuer is dry; but then he hath six hundred Fountaynes to speake for him in his absence. Neither is Art behind in his proffered courtesies, but still presents her with Mosaike workes, as Chaynes and Iewels to adorne her; with fine Brickes and  stones framed into most artificiall Fabricks, both louely for delight, and stately for admiration. The roofes of their houses are adorned with Gold, Azure, and other excellent colours, which are made flat, for the Inhabitants vse and pleasure; whose Houses are richly furnished, euery Chamber with a Presse, curiously paynted and varnished. And who can tell the exquisitenesse of the Portals, Pillars, Cisternes, and other parts of this Cities furniture? Which, if t^ey be not now so excellent, as when Leo liued here; yet, it is worth the sight, to looke vpon it with his eyes, as then it flourished, before the Court was remoued thence to Marocco, or the deuouring bellies of Time and Warre had impaired her Beauties. Once, let the Temples therein a while detayne your eyes; whereof there were in Fez, together with smaller Chappels, or Moschees, about seuen hundred; fifty of which great and faire, adorned with Marble Pillars, and other  ornaments; the Chapiters thereof wrought with Mosaike and carued workes. Euery one had his Fountaines of Marble, or other Stones, not knowne in Italy. The floor^s are couered with Mats, closely joyned, and so are the walls a mans height lined therewith. Euery Temple hath his Steeple after the Mahumetan manner, whereon they, whose office it is, ascend and call the people at the appointed houres to Prayer: there is but one Priest thereunto, who sayth their Seruice there, and hath charge of the reuenew of his Church, taking accounts thereof, to bestow it on the Ministers of the said Temple; namely, those which keepe the Lampes light in the night, the Porters, and them which cry in the night-time, to call them to Church. For he which cryeth in the day-time, is onely freed from Tenths, and other Payments; otherwise, hath no Salarie or Stipend. There is one Principall, and (if wee may so terme it) Cathedrall  Church, called the Temple of Caruven, so great, that it contayneth inThis compasse is to bee v^derstood of all the Buildings. circuit about a mile and halfe. It hath one and thirty Gates, great and high. The Roofe is a hundred and fifty TuscanBraccia di Toscania. yards long, and litle lesse then eighty broad. The Steeple is exceeding high. The Roofe hereof is supported with eight and thirty Arches in length, and twenty in bredth. Roundabout are certayne Porches, on the East, West, and North, euery one in length forty yards, and in bredth thirty. Vnder whith Porches, or Galleries, are Magazines, or Score-houses, wherein are kept Lampes, Oyle, Mats, and other necessaries. Euery night are lighted nine hundred Lamps; for euery Arch hath his Lamp, especially that row of Arches which extends through the mid-Quire, which alone hath a hundred and fifty Lamps; in which ranke are some great Lights made of Brasse, euery of which hath sockets for one thousand fiue hundred Lampes:  And these were BelsBells were fi^st found and founded Anno 870. by Vr^us Duke of V^nice. Plon^ and Vagetii spic^leg^a. of certayn Cities of Christians, conquered by Fessan Kings, About the wals of the sayd Temple within, are Pulpits of diuers sorts; wherein mnay learned Masters reade to the people such things as pertayne to their Faith and Spirituall Law. They begin a
 little after breake of day, and end atVn hora digierno. one houre of the day. In Summer they reade not, but after foure and twenty houres, or Sun-set, and continue till an houre and halfe within night. They teach as well Morall Philosophie, as the Law of Mahomet. Priuate men reade the Summer-Lectures; onely great Clarkes may reade the other; which haue therefore a large stipend, and Bookes, and Candles, are giuen them. The Priest of this Temple is tyed to nothing but his Mumpsimus, or Seruice. Also he taketh charge of the Money and Goods which are offered in the Temple of Orphans, and dispenseth the reuenewes that are left for the poore. Euery Holy-day he dealeth to the poore of the Citie, Money and Corne, according as their necessitie is more or lesse. The Treasurer of this Church is allowed a Duckat a day. He hath vnder him eight Notaries, each of which haue six Duckats a moneth: other six Clarkes  gather the Rents of Houses and Shops, which belong to the Church, retayning the twentieth part thereof for their wages. Moreouer, there are twenty Bayliffes of the Husbandry, that ouer-see the Labourers. Not farre from the Citie are twenty Lyme-Kils, and as many Brick-Kils, seruing for the reparations of the Temple, and the houses thereto belonging. The reuenewes of the Temple areThis may be reckoned as old Rent with vs, which now may bee exceedingly improued: for Leo wrote this, An. 1526. two hundred Duckats a day. The better halfe is layd out on the premisses. And if any Temple of the Citie or Moschee be without reuenew, they are hence furnished with many things; that which remaines, goeth to the common good of the Citie.
In the Citie are two principall and most stately Colledges of Schollers, adorned with Mosaikes and carued workes, paued with Marble and Stones of Majorica. In each of them are many Chambers; in some Colledges are a hundred; in some more; and in some lesse. They  were all built by diuers Kings of the Marin Family. One is most beautifull, founded by King Abu Henon. It is adorned with a goodly Fountayne of Marble, and a Streame continually running: there are three Cloysters, or Galleries, of incredible beautie, supported with eight square Pillars of diuers colours, the arches adorned with Mosaike of Gold and fine Azure. The Roofe is of carued worke. About the walls are inscriptions in Verse, expressing the yeere of the Foundation, and prayses of the Founder. The Gates of the Colledge are of Brasse, fairely wrought, and the doores of the Chambers carued. In the great Hall where they say their Prayers is a Pulpit, that hath nine stayres to it all of Iuorie and Ebonie. This Colledge cost the Founder 480000. Duckats. All the other Colledges in F^z hold some resemblance with this, and in euery of them are Readers or Professors in diuers Sciences prohibited by the Founders.  In old time the Students were wont to haue their dyet and rayment allowed for seuen yeeres, but now they are allowed onely their Chamber; for the warresBellona, enemie to the Muses. of Sahid consumed their Possessions: So that now there remaines but little wherewith they maintayne their Readers; and of them, some haue two hundred Duckats, some a hundred yeerely, and some lesse. And there abide in the said Colledges onely a few Strangers maintayned by the Almes of the Citizens. When they will reade, one of the Auditors readeth a Text, and the Reader then readeth his Comments, and brings some exposition of his own, and explaineth the difficulties. And somtimes in his presence the Students dispute of that Argument which he handleth.
There are many Hospitals in Fez, not inferiour in building to the Colledges aforesaid. In them, strangers were entertayned three dayes at the common charge. But in the time of Sahids  warre, the King sold their Reuenues. Now, onely Learned men and Gentlemen receiue entertainment, and poore persons reliefe. There is another Hospitall for diseased strangers, which haue their dyet, but no Phisicke allowed them. Here also Mad-men are prouided for. In this Hospitall, Leo, in his youth, had beene a Notarie.
There are in Fez a hundred Bath-stoues, well built, with foure Halls in each, and certaine Galleries without, in which they put off their cloathes. The most part of them pertaine to the Temples and Colledges, yeelding them a great rent. They haue a yeerely Festiuall, wherin all the seruants of the Bathes, with Trumpets and great Solemnitie, goe forth of the Town, and gather a wild Onion, which they put in a brazen Vessell, and bring it solemnely to the Hot-house doore, and there hang it vp, in token of good lucke. This, Leo thinkes to be some Sacrifice, obserued by the ancient Moores, yet remaining. Euery African Towne had sometimes  their peculiar Feast; which the Christians abolished.
Innes heere are almost two hundred, built three stories high, and haue a hundred and twenty Chambers a piece, with Galleries afore all the doores. But here is no prouision of Bed or Boord for Strangers. The Inne-keepers of Fez (in Leo's dayes) were all of one Family, called Elchena, attyred like women, shaue their beards, become womanish in their speech, yea degenerate euen to the Wheele and Spindle. They are soInfamous Inne-keepers. odious (except to base villaines that resort thither) that the better sort of people will not speake to them; and may not enter the Temple, Burse, or Bath, nor into those Innes next the great Temple, where Merchants are entertained. There are thousands of Mills, all almost pertaining to the Temples and Colledges reuenew.  Each Trade in Fez hath a peculiar place allotted thereto, the principall whereof are next the great Temple; as Scriueners, Booke-sellers, etc. euery Trade by themselues.

The Christian captiues rest only vpon Fridayes; and eight other dayes in the yeere Festiual to the Moores. There are six hundred Fountaines walled about, the waters whereof are conueyed by Conduits to the Temples, or other places, because the Riuer is sometimes dry. They haue in Fez a Iudge for Criminal Causes, and another for Questions of Religion; a third, that deales in Matrimoniall Cases: From these there lyeth an Appeale to the high Aduocate.
The Iudges of Mahomets Law, in matters of conscience, haue no allowance for the same. Their Marriages are thus: When the Father of the Maide hath espoused her to herThe man neuer seeth his Bride before Marriage: but sends his Mother, or some other Woman, to see her; and vpon that report agreeth with the Father. Louer, they goe with their friends to Church, and haue with them two Notaries, which draw the Couenants agreed betwixt them, into writing. The Father bestowes a Dowrie or Portion  of Money, Apparell, and such like; seldome, of Land. When the Bridegroome fetcheth her home, she is set in a Cabinet, couered with silke, and carried by Porters, accompanied with her kinsfolkes, and much Minstrelsie; and the Bridegroome^ friends goe before with Torches, and her kinsmen after, toward the great Church. Then hee hasteth home, expecting his Bride in his Chamber; whom her Father, Brother, and Vncle, bring and deliuer to his Mother; and he setting his foot on hers, shues the Chamber doore: at which a woman standeth, and receiueth of him a Napkin stayned; which she sheweth to the Assembly, as a testimony of the Brides Virginitie: But if shee bee not found a Maide, shee is returned to hee Friends with shame, and the guests goe home without their Feast. They hold great feasting also at the Circumcision of their male-children, which is the seuenth day after they are  borne. The Barber or Circumciser is presented with gifts of all the inuited guests. Then followeth mirth and iollity. They vse dancings; but the women apart by themselues without men.
There is a remaynder of Holidayes instituted by the Christians, which themselues vnderstand not. On Christmas Euen they eat a Sallet made of diuers herbes, and seethe all kinds of Pulse which they feed vpon. On New-yeeres day, the children goe with Maskes on their faces to the houses of Gentlemen, and haue Fruits giuen them, for singing certaine Songs. On the Feast of Saint Iohn Baptist, they vse to make Bone-fires. They make a Feast called Dentista (when their childrens teeth begin to grow) vnto other children. When a man dyes, the women put on Sack-cloth, and defile their faces with dirt. They call to them those wicked  men in womens attire, which haue foure-square Drummes, to the sound whereof, they sing mournfull Ditties, in prayse of the dead party. At the end of euery Verse the women vtter most hideous shrikes and out-cries, tearing their haire, and beating their brests and cheekes, till they be all embrued with bloud. And thus they continue seuen dayes, and then intermit their mourning forty dayes; after which space, they resume the same for three dayes, as before. But the better sort behaue themselues more modestly. At this time all the Widdowes friends come about her to comfort her, and send her diuers kindes of meats; for in the mourning-house they may dresse no meate at all, till the dead be carried out. The woman which loseth her Father, Brother, or Husband, neuer goes forth with the Funerall. At some Festiuals, the Youths of one Street will fight with Clubs against the Boyes of another Street, and  sometimes betake them to other Weapons, and kill one another. Sometimes they vse these bloudy Frayes without the City, the Officers forcing them to better order. There are many Poets, which pen amorous Sonets: and on Mahomets Birth-day, make Verses in his commendation, resorting early to the Palace, and there ascending the Tribunall, reade their Verses to the people; and he whose Verses are best, is pronounced that yeere Prince of Poets. The Marin King on that day vsed to entertaine the learned men, and to reward the best Poet with a hundred Ducats, a Horse, a Woman-slaue, and the Kings Robes which hee wore that day.
In Fez are two hundred Grammar Schooles, built like great Hals. Euery day they learne one lesson of the Alcoran. They reade and write not in Bookes, but in greatThese tables are boords like Horn-bookes: when one lesson is learned, that is wiped out, and another written; and so throughout the Alcoran, till all bee learned. Tables. In seuen  yeeres they learne the whole Alcoran by heart. And then the Father inuiteth his sonnes Schoole-fellowes to a Banquet: and his Sonne rides through the street in costly apparell, both which are lent by the Gouernour. The other Boyes ride and sing Songs in prayse of God and Mahumet. On Mahumets Birth-day euery Boy must carry a Torch to Schoole curiously wrought, some weighing thirty pound, which they light before day, and let them burne till Sun-rising, singing all the while the prayses of Mahumet. The Schoolemasters haue the remnant of the Waxe, which sometimes they sell for a hundred Ducats. They are free Schooles anciently built. In the Schooles, and also in the Colledges, they haue two dayes of recreation euery weeke, wherein they neither teach nor studie.




@. III. Of their Diuiners and Sects, and other parts of the Fezan Territorie.
THere be three kinds of Fortune-tellers or Diuiners. One of which vseth Geomanticall figures; others, powre a drop of Oyle into a glasse of water, which becommeth cleere as a Seeing-glasse, in which they say they see strange sights, rankes of Deuils, like Armies, some trauelling, some passing ouer a Riuer, etc. When the Diuiner seeth them  quiet, he demandeth such questions of them as he will, and the Deuils with gestures returne answere. The third sort are Women-witches, which make the people beleeue, that they are acquainted with Deuils of diuers sorts, red, white, blacke: and when they will tell any mans fortune, they perfume themselues with certaine Odours, whereby (as they say) the Deuill entreth into them, and their voyce is presently altered, as if the Deuill spake within them. And then they that come to enquire, aske their questions, and so hauing left their present for the Deuill, depart.
TheseA female filthinesse. women vse vnlawfull lusts betweene themselues in mutuall filthinesse: and if faire women come to them, they wil demand the Deuils fee, that they may haue such dealing with them. Yea, some addicting themselues to these abominable practices, will faine themselues  sicke, and send to one of these Witches, which will affirme, That shee is possessed with a Deuill, and cannot be cured, except she become one of their Societie. The foolish Husband beleeues, consents, and makes a sumptuous Feast at her Deuillish Admission. Others will coniure this Deuill with a Cudgell out of their Wiues: others fayning themselues to bee possessed with a Deuill, will deceiue the Witches, as they haue deceiued their Wiues. There are Exorcists, or Diuiners, called Muhazzimi, which cast out Deuils; or if they cannot, they excuse themselues, and say it is an ayrie Spirit. They write Characters, and frame Circles, on an ash-heape, or some other place: then they make certaine signes on the hands or foreheads of the possessed party, and perfume him after a strange manner. Then they make their Inchantment, and demand of the Spirit, which way he entred, what he is, and his name; and  then command him to come forth. Others there are that worke by a Cabalisticall rule, called Zairagia, and is very hard; for he that doth this, must be a perfect Astrologer and Cabalist. My selfe (it is Leo's report) haue seene a whole day spent, in describing one figure onely. It is too tedious here to expresse the manner. Howbeit, Mahomets Law forbids all Diuination; and therefore the Mahumetan Inquisitors imprison the Professors thereof.
There are also in Fez some Learned men, which giue themselues the sirnames of Wisemen, and Morall Philosophers, which obserue Lawes not prescribed by Mahumet: some account them Catholike; others, not; but the vulgar hold them for Saints. The Law forbiddeth Loue-songs, which they say may be vsed. They haue many Rules and Orders, all which haue their Defenders and Doctors. This Sect sprang vp fourescore yeeres after Mahumet; the first  Authour thereof was Elhesen Ibun Abilhasen, who gaue Rules to his Disciples, but left nothing in writing. About an hundred yeeres after, came Elharit Ibnu Esed, from Bagadet, who left Volumes of Writings vnto his Disciples; but by the Lawyers was condemned. Fourescore yeeres after, vnder another famous Professor, that Law reuiued, who had many Disciples, and preached openly. But by the Patriarke and Lawyers they were all condemned to lose their heads the giddie Receptacles of such phantasticall Deuotions.) But hee obtayned leaue of their Chaliph, or Patriarch, that he might try his Assertions, by Disputations with the Lawyers; whom he put to silence: and therefore the Sentence was reuoked, and many Colledges built for his Followers. An hundred yeeres after, Malics^^h the Turke destroyed all the maintayners thereof, some flying into Cairo, some into Arabia. Not long after, Elgazzuli a learned man compounded the Controuersie; so reconciling these and the  Lawyers, that the one should be called Conseruers, the other Reformers of the Law. After the Tartars had sacked Bagdat, in the yeere of the Hegeira 656. these Sectaries swarmed all ouer Asia and Africa. They would admit none into their Societie, but such as were learned, and could defend their Opinions: but now they admit all, affirmingAnabaptisticall fancies in Fez. Learning to be needlesse; for the Holy teacheth them that haue a cleane heart. Therefore they addict themselues to nothing but Pleasure, Feasting, and Singing. Sometimes they will rend their garments, saying, They are then rauished with a fit of Diuine loue. I thinke rather superfluitie of belly-cheare is the cause; for one of them will eate as much as will serue three: Or else it is through wicked lust; for sometimes one of the Principals, with all his Disciples, is inuited to some Marriage-feast; at the beginning whereof, they will rehearse their deuout Orizons and Songs: but 
 after they are risen from Table, the elder beginne a Dance, and teare their garments; and if through immoderate drinking, any catch a fall, one of the youths presently take him vp, and wantonly kisse him: Whereupon ariseth the Prouerbe, The Heremits Banquet; signifying, that the Scholler becomes his Masters Minion: for none of them may marry, and they are called Heremites.
Among these Sects in Fez are some Rules esteemed Hereticall, of both sorts of Doctors. Some hold, That a man by good Workes, Fasting, and Abstinence, may attaine to the nature of an Angell, the Vnderstanding and Heart being thereby so purified (say they) that a man cannot sinne, though he would: But to this height is ascended by fiftie steps of Discipline;  and though they fall into sinne before they come into the fiftieth Degree, ye^ will not God impute it. They vse strange and incredible Fastings in the beginning, but after, take all the pleasures of the World. They haue a seuere forme of liuing set downe in foure Bookes, by a by a certaine learned man, called Essebrauer de Schrauard in Corasan. Likewise, another of their Authors, called Ibnul Farid, wrote all his Learning in witty Verses, full of Allegories, seeming to treat of Loue. Wherefore one Elfargan^ commented on the same, and thence gathered the Rule and the Degrees aforesaid. In three hundred yeeres none hath written more elegant Verses; which therefore they vsed in all their Banquets. They hold, that the Heauens, Elements, Planets, and Starres, are one God; and that no Religion is erronious, because euery one takes that which he worships, for God. They thinke, that all knowledge of  God is contained in one Man, called Elcorb, elect by God, and wise as he. Forty among them are called Ela^ted, which signifieth Bl^cks. Of these is Elcoth or Elcorb elected, when the former is dead; threescore and ten Electors make the choice. There are seuen hundred threescore and fiue others, out of whom, those threescore and ten Electors are chosen. The Rule of their Order binds them to range vnknowne through the World, either in manner of Fooles, or of great Sinners, or of the vilest man that is. Thus some wicked persons of them goe vp and downe naked, shamefully shewing their shame, and like brute beasts will sometimes haue carnall dealings with women in the open streets; reputed neuerthelesse by the common people for Saints,Vide l. 3. c. 7. as we haue shewed elsewhere. There is another sort called Caballists, which fast strangely, eate not the flesh of any liuing creature: but haue certaine meates and habits  appointed for euery houre of the day, and of the night; and certaine set Prayers according to the dayes and monethes, strictly obseruing the numbers of them; and carry square Tables, with Characters and Numbers engrauen in them. They say, that good Spirits appeare to them, and talke with them, instructing them in the knowledge of all things. There was amongst them a famous Doctor, called Boni, which composed their Rule and Orders, whose Booke I haue seene, seeming more to sauour of Magicke then the Cabals. Their notablest works are eight. The first, called Demonstration of Light, contayneth Fastings and Prayers. The second, their square Tables. The third, fourescore and nineteene Vertues in the Name of God contayned, etc.
They haue another Rule among these Sects, called Sunab, the Rule of Heremits; the Professors  whereof inhabite Woods and solitary Places, without any other sustinance then those Desarts affoord. None can describe their life, because they are estranged from all humane Societie.
He that would see more of these things, let him reade the Booke of one Elefacni, who writeth at large of the Mahumetan Sects, whereof are threescore and twelue principall, each mayntaining his owne for Truth, and the way to Saluation. Two are most predominant in these dayes; that of Leshari in Africa, Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and Turkie and the other of Imamia in Per^^^, and Corasan, more lately broched. Although I haue spoken before of the Saracen Sects, yet could I not but follow Leo in his reports of them heere. As for thoseGold-finders and Alchymists. Coniurers, which by Art Magicke professe to find Gold, which indeed lose Gold to find it: and  the Alchymists, which seeking to turne other metals into Gold, turne their Gold into other metals, and the Bookes that both these haue of their Sciences: likewise the Snake-charmers, and other baser people, I passe ouer.
In the Suburbs of Fez are an hundred and fifty Caues, hewne out of excellent Marble, the least of which will hold a thousand measures of Corne. This is the sinke of Fez where euery one may be a Vintner and a Bawde. Another Suburbe hath two hundred Families of Lepers, which are there prouided for: and all of that quality forced to keepe there.
In new Fez the Iewes haue a street, wherein they haue their Houses, Shoppes, and Synagogues: and are maruellously encreased since they were driuen out of Spaine. They are Goldsmiths for the Mahumetans may not bee of that Trade,A note for Vsurers. because they say it is Vsury to sell  things made of Gold or Siluer for more then their weight, which yet is permitted to the Iewes. They liue in exceeding contempt, not being permitted to weare shooes, but in stead thereof vse sockes made of Rushes. They weare a blacke Turbant, and if any will weare a
 Cap, he must fasten a red cloth thereunto. They payed to the King of Fez monethly in Leo's time one thousand and foure hundred Ducats.
The Mahumetan temporall Lords are not by their Law to hold any other reuenue, then of euery subiect which possesseth an hundred Ducats, two and a halfe for Tribute, and of Corne the tenth measure yeerely. Yea, this is to be payed into the Patriarch or Califs hand, who should bestow that which remayneth ouer and aboue the Princes necessitie, on the common profit; as, for the poore, and maintenance of Warres. But now the Princes haue tyrannized further, especially in Africa, where they haue not left the people sufficient for their needments. And therefore Courtiers are odious (no lesse then the Publicans sometimes among the Iewes) no man of credit vouchsafing to inuite them to their Tables, or receiue gifts from  them; esteeming all their goods theft and bribery. Nor may any Mahumetan Prince weare a Diademe, which yet it seemes is now broken.
In Gualili a Towne of Mount Zarhon is Idris, of whom before is spoken, buried; all Barbary religiously visiteth his Sepulchre. Pharao is the name of a Towne, by the vulgar supposed the worke of Pharao, which fond conceit grew from a Booke, entituled, The Booke of the words of Mahomet, taken out of an Author, called Elealbi, which sayth with Mahomets testimony, that there were foure Kings which ruled all the World; Two faithfull, and two vnfaithfull: the two former, Salomon and Alexander Magnus: the two later, Nimr^d and Pharao. The Latine Inscriptions there seene, shew it was the worke of the Romans.
Tame Lions.In Piatra Rossa a Towne by, the Lyons are so tame, that they will gather vp bones in the  streets, the people not fearing them. The like Lions are in Guraigura, where one may driue them away with a staffe. At Agla, the Lions are so fearefull, that they will flee at the voice of a child; whence a Coward Braggart is Prouerbially called a Lion of Agla.
Shame is the name of a Castle, so called of their shamefull couetousnesse; which, when they once requested the King (then entertained amongst them) to change, he consented. But the next morning, when they had brought him vessels of Milke, halfe filled vp with water, hoping the King would not perceiue it, hee said that none could alter nature, and so left them, and their name to them.


@. IIII. Of the fiue other Prouinces of this Kingdome, and some later Obseruations.
WE haue now passed two Prouinces of the Kingdome of Fez: the third is named Azgar, which hath the Riuers Buragrag, on the West; Bunasar, on the South, the Ocean, on the North; and Eastward, the Mountaines. Here standeth Casar  Elcabir, which King Mansor gaue to a poore Fisher, who had giuen him kinde entertainment in his Cottage one night when he had lost his company in hunting. In it are many Temples, one Colledge of Students, and a stately Hospitall. Habat, the fourth Prouince or Shire of this Kingdome, is next hereunto, and contayneth almost an hundred miles in length, and fourescore in breadth. Ezaggen, a Towne of Fez, are permitted by an ancient Priuiledge of the Kings of Fez to drinke Wine, not withstanding Mahomets prohibition. Arzilla, sayth Leo, was taken by the English, then worshippers of I^^^s, about nine hundred yeeres after Christ. The Religion, I thinke, deceiues him. He addes, that the Towne remayned without habitation thirty yeeres, and then one of the Mahumetan Patriarches of Cordoua, then Lord of Mauritania, reedified it. Of the acts of the English is not vnworthy  the rehearsing,T. Walsingham hist. Hen. c. 5. That Seut or Ceuta (there written Sunt) was taken by the Portugals, through the assistance of English Merchants, Anno 1415. Iulian, the Earle of Seut, brought the Moores first into Spaine, in the yeere of the Hegesra 92. In it were many Temples, Colledges, and learned men.
Errif begins at the Straits of Gibraltar, and stretcheth Eastward to the Riuer Nocer an 140. miles. The Inhabitants are valiant, but are excessiue drinkers. Mezemme and Bedis, or Velles de Gumera, are chiefe Townes in it. On Mount Beni Ierso was built a faire Colledge, and the Mahumetan Law publikely taught therein: the Inhabitants therefore freed from all exactions. A Tyrant destroyed this Colledge, and slue the learned men. The Books therein were valued worth foure thousand Ducats. This was Anno 1509. In Mount Beni Guazeual  is a hole, that perpetually casteth vp fire; Wood cast in, is suddenly consumed to ashes: some thinke it Hel-mouth. In Mount Beni Mesgalda; were mayntained many Mahumetan Doctors,
 and Students, which would perswade the people to drinke no wine, which themselues will not abstaine from.
Garet, the sixt Shire of this Kingdome, lyeth betweene the Riuers Melulo and Muluia. The seuenth is Chauz, reputed the third part of the Kingdome, betweene the Riuer Zha and Guruigara. Herein standeth Tezza, adorned with Colledges, Temples, and Palaces. A little Riuer springing out of Atlas runnes thorow the chiefe Temple, which is greater then that at Fez. There are three Colledges, and many Bathes and Hospitals. Each Trade dwelleth by themselues, as at Fez. I was acquainted (saith Leo) with an aged Sire in this Citie, reputed a Saint, and enriched exceedingly with the peoples offerings. From Fez did the people  resort to visit him with their offerings, which is fiftie miles: he seemed to me to be a deceiuer. In Mount Beni Iesseten are many Iron mines, and the women in great brauerie weare Iron rings on their fingers and eares. Ham Lisnan was built by the Africans, and borrowed the name from the Fountayne of an Idoll, whose Temple was neere the Towne: to which at certayne times in the yeere resorted men and women in the night: where, after sacrifices, the candles were put out, and each man lay with the woman hee first touched. Those women were forbidden to lye with any other for a yeere after. The children begotten in this adulterie, were brought vp by Priests of the Temple. The Moores destroyed this holy-stewes, and the Towne, not leauing any mention thereof. In Mount Centopozzi are ancient buildings, and neere thereto a spacious hole, or drie pit, with many roomes therein: they let men  downe into the same by ropes with lights, which if they goe out, they perish in the pit. Therein are many Bats which strike out their lights. In the Mountaynes of Ziz there are Serpents so tame, that at dinner time they will come like Dogs and Cats, and gather vp the crummes, not offering to hurt any.
Thus much of the kingdome of Fez out of Leo, a learned Citizen of Fez, and great Traueller, both in the Places and Authors of Afrike: whom Ortelius, Maginus, Boterus follow, commended byBodiu Method. cap. 4. Ant. Poss. de hist. Aoparat. lib. 16. ser. 7. cap. 2. Bodinus, Posseuinus, and others, as the most exact Writer of those parts, and translated into English by Master Pori^, from whom if I swarue in diuers things, impute it to the Italian copie of Ramusius, which differeth not a little, especially in these things I haue here set downe, from the English.
 I thought good here also to adde out of others some such customs and rites as they obserue in Fez, and other parts of this Kingdome:Historie of Barbarie, Ro. C. Their Circumcision is vsed in their priuate houses. Women may not enter the Moschee for their often vncleannesse, and because Eue first sinned. The eight day after a childe is borne, the parents send for a Talby or Priest, and some old men and women, where after a few prayers said, the women wash the childe all ouer with water, and giue the name, making a banquet. But sometimes the circumcision is deferred diuers yeeres after this ceremonie, as the Fathers thinke.
Their Fasts they obserue very strictly, not so much as tasting water till the starres appeare. Yea, diuers haue beene seene, by their rigour, in this superstition to faint, and some to die. A certayne Moore in the time of their Lent (which continueth thirtie dayes) in the companie  of an English Gentleman, being thirstie with heat and trauell, went to a conduit in Marocco (where the same Religion is professed as in Fez) and there drinking, was so reuiled of the people, that in a desperate anguish hee slue himselfe with his dagger. Yet doth their Law allow an exchange some dayes of this Lent, with other dayes in the yeere following, if trauell then hinder. Their Feasts and Fasts are at the same times, and in the same manner that the Turkes obserue, of which is before spoken. Their Easter they call Rumedan: their Whitsuntide, Lidlaber: their Michaelmasse, Lashour: their Candlemasse, Lidshemaw: (if it be lawfull thus to paralell ^hos^ vaine superstitions with Christian obseruations. In this last Feast, which seemeth to bee the same which Leo calls Mahomets birth-day, euery one must haue a candle for himselfe, and for euery sonne in his house. The King hath that day candles carried to  him, some like May-poles, other like Castles, sixe or eight men carrying one of them: so artificially composed, that some are in making six moneths. That night the King doth heare all the Law read: the like is done in all other Churches. The Talby that cannot reade all their Law in a night, is held insufficient for his place. They goe (saith my Authour) sixe times in foure and twentie houres (which is once oftner then is written of the Turkes, except on their Sabbath) to their prayers, first washing themselues, as they doe also after the offices of nature, and after companie with their wiues, thinking thereby to be washed from their sinnes. Their times of prayer are, two houres before day, the first, when the Monden, or Sexten cryeth in the Steeple (as you may reade in our Turkish Relations) and then may no man touch his wife, but prepare himselfe to pray (with washing or other deuotions) either in his owne house or  at Church. After their publike prayers, the Talby sits downe, and spends halfe an houre in resoluing the doubts of such as shall mooue any questions in matters of their Law. The second time of prayer is two houres after, when it is day. The third at noone. The fourth at
 foure of the clocke in the afternoone. The fift at the twi-light. The last, two houres after. In the first of these they pray for the day; in the second they giue thankes for it; in the third time they giue thankes for that it is halfe passed; in the fourth they desire the Sunne may well set on them; at twi-light they giue thanks after their daily labours; the last time, they desire a good night. They thinke it vnseemely to eate meat with their left hands, and hold it vncleane, and doe all with their right hand. Their Sabbath or Friday is not exempted from worke: Onely they are then more deuout in going to Church.
Their Churches are not so faire generally as in Christendome, nor haue seats in them, ornaments, or bells: (onely the floores are matted) they are also poore for the most part, as are their Church men. Their Lyturgie is very short, not so long as the P^ter noster and Creede:  other set forme they haue not, but euery one prayes after his owne pleasure. Although the Moore may haue foure wiues, and as many concubines as hee can purchase, yet few marry foure, because the wiues friends will haue a sufficient bill of dowrie for her maintenance, which none but rich men can performe: and againe, the wiues challenge his nights companie, and that in course: if any be neglected, shee complaines to the Magistrate, and he forceth the husband to his dutie, or else to send her home with her Dower, and a Bill of diuorce. The Concubines are embraced with more stolne pleasures. That bill of Dower holdeth the husband in awe, which else would make a slaue of his wife, or still change for yonger flesh. The Bride is besided before her husband see her: and if hee finde her not a Virgin, hee may turne her home and keepe her portion by Law. For their funerall Rites; when one is dead, they  presently wash him, and speedily put him into ground (the heat so requiring) and after that, the women at conuenient times haue a custome to meete, and make memoriall of their deceased friends, with remembrance of their vertues, which they thinke caused men to haue more respect to their good name. Their other obsequies are before declared. The King vseth to sit in Iudgement on Fridayes in the afternoone: and the Mufti sitteth with him at other times in Iudgement: but on the Friday he sits alone by himselfe. Of these Mufties are three; one at Marocco; another at Fez; the third, at Taradant in Su^, another part of this Seriffian Kingdome. Other Iudges sit all the yeere long two houres before noone, and as many after. Before these euery one pleades his owne cause: and if the witnesses can bee proued to bee infamous of life, or not to say their prayers sixe times a day, their testimonie is disabled. The  Scriuanos are Talbies, which assist the Iudge, and in his absence supply his place. The Fokers or Saints (Leo before calls them Heremites) dwell in the best places of the Countrey, keepe great hospitalitie for all trauellers, whither any man may come for a night, and be gone in the morning. They giue great example of morall liuing, and almes to the needie, comprimising matters of difference betwixt parties, and repressing disorders. They are much loued and respected, and their houses are holden Sanctuaries, whose priuiledges the King will not breake, but vpon waightie reasons.



CHAP. XI. Of the Kingdome of Marocco, with a Discourse of the Kings thereof, and of the Seriffe, Xarif, or Iarif, and his posteritie, now reigning in Barbarie.

@. I. Of the Kingdome, Kings, and Citie of Marocco.  
THe Kingdome is situateBoter. part. 1. Maginus. Sanutus, lib. 3. betweene Atlas and the Atlantike Ocean, bearing name of the chiefe Citie thereof: fruitfull of Corne, Oile, Grapes, Sugar, Honey, and Cattell. They make fine cloth of Goats haire, and of their hides that leatherCordouan leather of Moracco. which hence is called Marocchine. This Kingdome is diuided into seuen Prouinces, through which we intend our next perambulation, taking LeoLeo, part. 2. for our guide: beginning at Hea, which on the North and West hath the Ocean, Atlas on the South, and the Riuer Esifnual on the East. The people feede on Cakes of barley and on a pappe or hastie-pudding of barley-meale, which being set in a platter, all the familie compasse about, and rudely with Natures spoones claw forth those dainties.  Naper^ they vse none a Mat laid on the ground* serueth for table and cloth, and stooles too. Caps are the priuiledges of age and learning. Linnen shirts are almost banished their
 Countrey: and so are Arts liberall and mechanicall, except some simple Lawyer, which can make some shift to reade, and a Surgeon to circumcise their children: Their physicke is cauterizing as men deale with beasts. They are alway in mutuall warres one with another, yet will not they iniurie a stranger, who if he would trauell amongst them, must take some harlot or wife, or religious man, of the aduerse part with him. At Tednest, one of their Cities, such respect is had to strangers, that if a Merchant come hither, and hath no acquaintance, the Gentlemen of the Citie cast lots, who shall be his Host, and they vse him kindly, looking only for some Present at his departure, in token of thankfulnesse. And if he be a meaner person, he may choose his Host, without any recompence at all. In the midst of the Citie was a great  and ancient Temple, with many Priests attending their deuotions; besides other meaner Oratories. This Citie hath since been ruined and desolate. In Teculeth were a thousand households, foure Hospitals, one beautifull Temple, and a house of religious persons: destroyed it was by the Portugals, An. 1514. as Hadecchis had beene the yeere before. Ileusugaghen is another Towne of Hea, or of Hell rather, so full is it of confusion, bloud, and murthers, besides the want of Learning, Ciuilitie, Iudges, Priests, or whatsoeuer else may detayne those men from a beastly or deuillish metamorphosis. The Seriff, being made a Prince of Hea, brought me thither to be a Iudge, but for feare of treason amongst them, we were glad to leaue them. How farre off in manners is their neere neighbour Tesegdelt? where a guard is set at the gates not so much to keepe out enemies, as to entertayne strangers, whom at his first  comming they aske if he haue any friends in the Citie: if not, they must prouide him entertainment at free-cost. They haue a most beautifull Temple, furnished with Priests. Taglesse, the next Towne, is a den of theeues and murtherers. When I was there, such a swarme of Locusts ouer-spred the Countrey (that scarce might a man see the earth) eating vp their fruits.
Cule^hat was built of a certaine Sectarie in our time, first a Preacher, attended with troupes of disciples, after, a cruell and mercilesse Tyrant, murthered at last by one of his wiues, for lying with her daughter: and then his villanies being manifested, the people put all his followers to the sword. Onely a nephew of his fortified himselfe in a Castle, which he held maugre all their might, and burying his grand-father, caused him to be adored as a Saint.  H^mar Seijf was the name of that Rebell. The other parts of Hea are like the former,H^mar, a Preacher, Tyrant and Saint. some exceedihg hospitall and courteous, some brutish, without diuine or humane learning or liuing. Great store of Iewes liue here, and in Mount Demensera are of those Iewes which are calledKarraim Scripture-Iewes. Carraum, of the rest accounted Sectaries. These reiect the Traditions, and hold them onely to the written Scriptures (as in our Iewish relation yee haue read.) In Mount Gebelel had in are many Heremites, which liue on fruits of trees, and water, so reputed of the simple people, that all their doings are accounted miracles.
SusSus. is the second Region of this Kingdome, lying Southward from hence on the other side of Atlas, so called of that Riuer which is the Easterne border thereof, otherwhere bounded with the Sea and the Desarts. At Messa neere the Sea side is a Temple holden in  great veneration. Many Historians affirme, that from this Temple shall come that iust Califa, of whom Mahumet prophecied. There also they say the Whale vomited vp Ionas. The rafters and beames of the Temple are of Whales bones, which vsually are left there dead on the shore. This the common people esteeme to proceede from some diuinitie of that Temple: but the true cause is certaine sharpe Rocks a little off in the Sea. I my selfe was inuited by a Gentleman, who shewed me a Whales ribbe, so huge, that lying on the ground in manner of an arch, vnder it, as it were thorow a gate, we rode on our Camels, our heads not reaching to touch it. It had beene there kept an hundred yeers for a wonder. Amber is there found in abundance, which some thinke proceedes from the Whales, as either the ordure,Huge Whalebones. or the sperme, and seede thereof. Teijent is a Citie of Sus, wherein is a great Temple, and an arme  of a Riuer passeth thorow the same. There are many Iudges and Priests, whom in their Ecclesiasticall affaires they obey. Tarodant hath three thousand Families: sometimes the place where the Kings Lieutenant or Deputie resideth. Tedsi is much greater, adorned also with a Temple, and furnished with Priests and Ministers: Iudges and Lecturers payed at the common charge. In Mount Hanchisa it snowes in all seasons of the yeere, and yet the Inhabitants goe thinly clothed in the sharpest winter.
The Region of M^roccoMarocco. is three-square: confined with the mountaynes Nefisa, on the West; and Hadimeus, on the East; betweene the Riuers Tensift, and Esifinuall. The Countrey in fertilitie of soile resembleth Lombardie. Marocco (which some thinke to be Bocanus Hemerus of Ptolemey) was built (saith Leo) by Ioseph sonne of Tesfin, King of the people of  Lontuna, by the aduice of excellent Architects, and cunning workmen. In the time of Hali sonne of Ioseph, there were in it ten thousand Fires or Families, and more. It had foure and twentie gates: was strongly walled: furnished with Temples, Bathes, Colledges, Innes, after
 the African manner. One most stately Temple was built by Hali, and called by his name. But a successor of that kingdom, called Abdul Mumen, caused it to be razed, and built, againe, and called after his owne name, howbeit the name of Hali is still continued in the Title, all that his cost notwithstanding. This Abdul Mumen, who was the second that by rebellion succeeded in the kingdome, built another Temple, which Mansor enlarged fiftie yards or elles on euery side, adorning it with many pillars fetcht out of Spaine. He made a Cisterne or Vault built vnder it, as large as the Temple it selfe; and couered the Temple with lead, with leaden pipes from the roofe, to conuey the raine-water that fell thereon, into the Cisterne. He built thereon a steeple like the Coliseo or Amphitheatre at Rome, of gre^t hewen stone. The compasse of this steeple or tower is an hundred Tuscan yards or elles, higher then the  steeple of Asenelli at Bononia. There are seuen lofts one aboue another, very faire and lightsome. Vpon the top of this tower is built a little turret, the top whereof is as a needle or spire: and it contayneth fiue and twentie yards in compasse, and is as high as two great lances, with three lofts therein, one higher then the other. On the top of this spire is a broach with three globes of siluer one vnder another, the greatest below, and the least highest. From the top hereof the Mountaynes of Azafi may bee easily seene, an hundred and thirtie miles off: and a tall man on the ground seemes as little as a childe of a yeere old. The plaine Countrey fiftie miles about is hence discerned. It is one of the greatest Temples in the world; and yet not frequented; the people assembling thither to their deuotions, but on Fridayes: the Citie it selfe neere this Temple is ruinate, so that the passage is difficult by the  ruines of houses. Vnder the porch or gallerie of this Temple were sometimes an hundred shops of Booke-sellers, and as many ouer-against them, but nowAn. Dom. 1526. there is not one in all Marocco: Scarcely is the third part of the Citie inhabited (vnderstand it of the time when Leo writ this; for since that time Marocco by residence of the Kings there, hath flourished, as Fez hath contrariwise decayed) the rest being planted with Vines and Trees, the Arabians not suffering them to exercise any husbandrie without the walls. It was built An. 424. of the Hegira. After Ioseph the Founder, and Hali his sonne, Abraham succeeded, in whose time, a rebellious Preacher called Elmaheli, borne and brought vp in the Mountaynes, rebelled: and with an armie encountred King Abraham, and ouerthrew him. The King fled, and was so hardly pursued by Abdul Mumen, whom Elmaheli had sent after him, whiles himselfe besieged  Marocco, that the poore King, in danger to bee surprized at Oram, mounting on his horse, and taking his wife behinde him, set spurres to his horse, and so came all three downe together on the mercilesse Rocks. Abdul Mumen returning victorious, found this addition to his happinesse, that Elmaheli was dead, and him selfe was chosen King and Prelate (or Chalipha) by the fortie Disciples, and ten Secretaries of Elmaheli; a new custome in the Mahumetan Law. He maintayned the siege, and at the yeeres end, entred by force, and tooke Isaac, the little and onely sonne of Abraham, and stabbed him with his owne hands, killing most of the Souldiers hee there found, and many of the Citizens. His posteritie reigned after him, from An. 516. of the Hegeira, to the 668. at which time the Familie of Marin depriued them, in which the Kingdome continued till the 785. yeere. Then the same decreasing in  power, Marocco became subiect to certaine Lords of the old Hill, neere to the Citie. But of none receiued they so much damage, as of the Marin Familie, which held their Court in Fez, and had a Lieutenant onely in Marocco; Fez being made chiefe Citie of Mauritania.
Let me borrow of Caeli. Sec.Cael. Sec. Curio de regno Mar. p. 356. Curio in his Historie of the Kingdome of Marocco, which (for the most part) is taken out of Leo. He saith, that Abdul Mumen subiected to his Empire all Barbarie, from Messa to Tripolis; his Empire in Africa comprehending fourscore and ten dayes iourney in length, and fifteene in breath. He also possessed the kingdome of Granada in Spaine, sometime called Betica, and from Tariffa to Tarracon, and a great part of Castilia and Portugall. Neither had he alone this large Empire, but hisLeo reckons them in this Order. Abdul, Ioseph Mansor, Iacob Mansor* and this Mahomet Enasir: whereas Curio-seemes to insinuate a longer line of posteritie: these being all, directly and immediatly succeeding. sonne Iosippus after him, Iacobus Mansor his nephew, and their posteritie, till Mahumet Enasir, who, Anno 1212. in the  kingdome of Valencia was ouerthrowne of Alphonsus (as I take it) the ninth King of Castile, in that place which is called Las nauas di Tolosa; losing in the battell threescore thousand men. In memorie or which battell and victorie, that Alphonsus adorned his Scutchion with a Castle Or, in a field purple: which custome his successors doe still obserue, because that day that golden kingdome, as a strong Castle, confirmed to him by the bloud of his enemies, was deliuered from those Miscreants. And thereupon, that kingdome of the Bastitanes (so it was before that time stiled) was intituled Castile. Moreouer, hee instituted that knightly Order of Saint Iames, who haue in their habit purtrayed a purple sword, in token of bloud. This Mahumet our Historians call Miramulinus. For Abdul Mumen intituled himselfe Miralmumim, the name signifying, The Prince of beleeuers, which others corrupting, call Miramulus,  as they did him Abed Ramon. Howsoeuer, it standeth for the Name and Armes of Castile; certainly Curio was not curious, nor carefull enough in adding, that this Abdul Mumen was
 in the time of Rodericus the Gotish King, about seuen hundred yeere; after Christ, as also in his Saracenicall Historie he relateth, and wee before haue obserued, seeing that Marocco was long after built, and diuers hundreths of yeeres were interposed betwixt Rodericus, and this Abdul Mumen; Curio hereinCurios fault arising from confounding the Histories of Abed Ramon and Abdul Mume^, which ^^ued ome Centuries or yeres after the former. differing not onely from Leo, his best guide in the rest of his Historie, but from himselfe, as will easily appeare to any that list to compare his Saracenicall History with the Marochian. And for that notable victory against the Moores, Rodericus Archbishop of Toledo was there presentRod Tol de rob Hispan l^b. 8. cap. 10 and s. in the field and saith that the King ware a blacke Cap, which had belonged to Abdul Mumen, the first of the Almohades, and had by him the Alcoran. This Abdelmon or Abdel Mumen was (he writeth) the sonne of a Potter, to whom  Auentumerth, a great Astronomer, foretold his Royaltie. To this AuentumerthLib 7. cap 6. did one Almehadi ioyne himselfe, who interpreted the Alcoran contrary to the B^gda^ Catholocisme, and the interpretations of the Almoranides wh^ch then rul^d in Africa; whose helpe Abdel vsed to obtaine the Kingdome both of Africa and Spaine. Hee buried Almohadi bei^g dead, very Royally, not farre from Marocco, where he is had in great veneration, and prayers made to him: and the followers of his sect called of him Almohadis. To Abdel Mumen succeeded his Sonne Auen Iacob, who being slaine in Portugall, his Brother Aveniuseph succeeded; and then his Sonne, this Auen Mahomath; with whom,Lib. 8. cap. 10 he saith were slaine two hundred thousand Moores, the carkasses lying so thicke, that they could scarce ride ouer them; and yet in all the field no signe of bloud to be seene. For two dayes space the Spanish Armie burne no wood  for any vse, but the Arrowes, Launces and Pikes of the Moores, burning of purpose, and not onely for necessitie; and yet scarcely consumed halfe. With him perished the Almohades. Thus farre Rodericus an eye-witnesse, not much differing from Leo.
I cannot omit that which Mathew ParisMat Par. in Ichan. p 2, 3. hath written of Iohn King of England about these times, and in his owne dayes. He sent, saith he, Thomas Herdin^on and Radulph Fitz Nicolas Knights, and Robert of London Clarke, to Admirall Murmelius, King of Marocco, Africa, and Spaine, whom they commonly call Miramumelius, to make offer vnto him of his Vassalage, and that he would not onely hold the Land of him with payment of Tribute, but would also change his Religion, and accept the Mahumetan. The Embassadours hauing declared their message, the King (or Emire Elmumenin to call him rightly) shut vp the Booke  whereon they found him reading, and after a little deliberation thus answered, I was now reading a Greeke Booke of a certaine wise man, and a Christian, called Paul, whose wordes and deeds well please me; this onely, I like not, that hee forsooke the Religion wherein he was borne, and vnconstantly embraced another: and the same I say of your Master. God Almightie knowes, that if I were without the Law, and now to chuse, This aboue all other should be my choise. And then, by diuers questions enforming himselfe better of the state of the Kingdome and of the King, he grew into great passion and indignation against the King, protesting that he thought him vnworthy to bee his Confederate, and commanded the Embassadours neuer more to see his face. The Author heard Robert of London, one of those which were sent, relate these things.
 But to returne to our Marocchian buildings. In it is a great Castle, in the midst whereof is a faire Temple, and thereon a goodly Tower, and on the toppe of the same an iron broach, with three golden Globes weighing a hundred and thirtie thousand Barbarie Duckats, in forme like those before mentioned. Diuers Kings haue gone about to take downe the same, but alway some strange misfortune hath befalne them, whereby they haue beene forced to leaue their attempt. Insomuch that it is holden a signe of ill lucke to take them from thence. The vulgar conceit is, that some influence of the Planets is cause hereof. And also that Shee that set them there, by Art Magicke inchanted certaine spirits to a perpetuall Station there for to guard them. The people indeed are the spirits which in our time kept the Kings fingers from them, who else would haue aduentured all those phantasied dangers to haue possessed  himselfe of the Gold for his Warres against the Portugals. The Wife of King Mansor is reported to haue set them there as a Monument of her memory, hauing solde her Iewels to purchase them. AdrianusIn Theatr. vrbium. Romanus saith, that the Talosi Numidians, and all Barbary, come to Marocco, to study and learne Grammar, Poetry, Astrologie, and the Lawes. There is also in the said Castle a Colledge for the receit of Students, which hath thirtie Chambers, and beneath, a spacious Hall, where in old times Lectures were read: and all the S^udents had their expences allowed them, and rayment once a yeere: and the Readers for their stipend had, some a hundred Duckats, some two hundred, atcording to the qualitie of their profession. No man might be admitted into that Colledge which was not well instructed in the principles of Arts. The excellency of the matter and workmanship might well detaine vs longer  in the view thereof, but that it is now rather become a Sepulcher of Sciences, then a Theater, there being not aboue fiue Students vnder a sencelesse Professor, left in Leos time, as the ghosts of those sometimes renowned numbers of Schollers. There were built also by Marsor twelue
 stately Palaces in the said Castle, for his Guard, Officers, Armories, and other purposes fitting both Mars and Venus. There were also goodly and spacious Gardens, and a Parke with many kindes of wilde Beasts, as Giraffas, Lyons, Elephants, etc. There was a Leopard made of Marble, the spottes not borrowed, but Natures handy-worke. But alaste, Deuouring Time, that swalloweth his owne off-spring, was not content to haue inglutted his insatiable paunch with the flesh of those beasts, and men, branded with Natures stampe of mortalitie; but euen those curious and costly stones are now become graue-stones to themselues, prouoking the beholders at once to haue compassion and amazement; the Reliques of laborious Art still contending with Time, to testifie what greater excellence hath beene. The Garden is now become the Citie dung-hill, the Librarie in stead of Bookes is furnished with nests of  Doues, and other fowles. That ouerthrow which Mahomet the King of Marocco receiued in Spaine, was the occasion of the ruine of that Family, which was furthered by his death, leauing behind him tenne sonnes which contended amongst themselues for the Kingdome, and slew one another. Hereupon the people of Marin entred into Fez, and possessed themselues of that Kingdome: the Habduluad Nation seized on the Kingdome of Telensin, and remouing the Gouernour of Tunis, made whom they pleased King. After the ruine of the Mansors Progeny, the Kingdome was translated to Iacob, sonne to Habdulach, first King of the Marin Family. Lastly, this Kingdome declining, the Arabians by continuall outrages haue further distressed it, forcing the people to what pleased them. Thus farre Leo: who saw not the influence  of a Scarre, euen in his dayes, in his eyes, and of his acquaintance, arising, which after in his exaltation brought a new alteration to Marocco, (restoring it to the former splendour and all those parts of Barbary: I meane the Seriffo, a name vsually giuen vnto such as professe
HONDIVS his Map of the Kingdome of Marocco.map of Morocco, Northwest AfricaMAROCCHI REGNUM
 themselues descended of Mahomets kindred, from whence also this wee speake of his deriued Pedegree. The historie I thinke here worthy to be inserted: the rather because this Western Starre is now declining, and by his fierie gleames, seemes to be neere his setting. And thus in effect doth BoterusG B.B. part 2, lib. 2. ^ut of whom M. Pory and the Description of the world hath translated the same. relate the same.


@. II. Of the Kings of the Seriffian Familie.
 ABout the yeere 1508 began to grow in name, through Numidia, a certaine Alfa^que, borne in Tigumedet in the Prouince of Dara, beeing a subtill man, and no lesse ambitious in minde, then learned in those Sciences, whereunto the Mahumetanes are most addicted. Hee, by confid^nce of his blood (descended of their Prophet) and of the diuisions of the States of Africa, and the exploits the^e dayly atchieued by the Portugals, attempted to make himselfe Lord of Mauritania Tingitana. For this cause hee sent his three Sonnes Abdel, Abnet, and Mahomet, to visit the Sepulchre of Mahomet. Much was the reuerence and reputation of holinesse, which they hereby acquired amongst that superstitious people, which now beheld them as Saints, and kissed their garments as most holy  Reliques. These failed not in their parts of the play, to act as much deuotion, as high contemplatiue lookes, deepe fetched sighes, and other passionate interiections of holinesse could expresse. Ala, Ala, was their yernfull note, their food was the peoples almes. The old Father ioyning to see his proiects thus farre proceed, and minding to strike whiles the Iron was hote, sent two of them to Fez, Amet, and Mahumet; where one of them was made Reader in the Amodonaccia, the most famous Colledge of Fez, and the younger was made Tutor to the Kings young sonnes. Aduanced thus in ^auour of the King and People, by their Fathers aduice, they apprehended the present occasion of the harmes sustained by the Arabians and ^^ores vnder the Portugals Ensignes: they demanded Licence of the King to display a Banner against the Christians, putting him in hope easily to draw those Moores to him, and  so to secure the Prouinces of Marocco. In vaine were Mulley N^^er the Kings brother his allegations, not to arme this Name of Sanctitie, which being once victorious, might grow insolent, and forget dutie in minding a Kingdome. They obtaine their desires, and with a Drum and Banner, with Letters of commendations to the Arabians and people of Barbary, they are so attended with forces and fortunes, that Ducala, and all as farre as Cape de Guer stoopes to their command: the people willingly yeelding their Tenths to this Holy warre against the Portugals, enemies of their Faith. Hereunto was added the ouerthrow which they gaue to Lop^s Barriga, a famous Portugall Captaine, the brightnesse of that sun-shine being somewhat eclipsed with the losse of their elder brother, if rather a Monarchie were not hereby furthered. By faire words they entered into Marocco. The Arabians of Ducala and  Xa^quia, about this time trying their quarrels by dint of Sword in mutuall conflicts, presented a fit occasion to the Seriffs, to prey vpon them both; their strength hauing made them weake, and their weaknesse making the other strong. And now did they begin to vsurpe soueraigntie, presenting their Fessan King, with sixe Horses, and sixe Camels, and those but simple, whom before they had acknowledged their Soueraigne, with payment of the fifths of their spoile. The King of F^z before applauding his owne victories in theirs, began now to distaste, and to distrust: hee sends to them to demand his fifths, and the tribute also formerly paide him by the Kings of Marocco. Death, the common enemie of Mankinde, here interposed her selfe on the Seriffian part, and tooke the King of Fez out of the world; the Scepter descending to his Sonne Amet, the Scholler of the young Seriff: who not onely pro^^^ded not in his Fathers demands, but confirmed Amet in the Signiorie of Marocco, so that  i^ some small matters hee would acknowledge the soueraigntie of Fez. But now the Seriffs, whose hearts continually encreased with their fortunes, sent him word; that being lawfull successours to Mahomet, they owed no man tribute, and had more right in Africa then he: if ^ee would respect them as his friends and Allies, so it were, if otherwise, they which had power to offend the Christian, should not bee destitute in defending themselues. The sword, the vnequalle starbiter of equitie, is now made vmpire; the Fessan proclaimeth warres, besiegeth Marocco, is dislodged, and in his returne vanquished. Thus haue the Seriffs acquited themselues of that yoake, and now intend new conquests on the other side of Atlas, and in ^^midia, and in the mountaines, which happily they atchieued. Yea, the Portugals wearied  with the warres, which they were forced to maintayne in defence of those places they held in Africa (the expences so much surmounting the reuenue) abandoned them to the Seriffs. And now the want of enemies procured enmitie betwixt the Brethren, who trying that
 valour against each other, which before they had exercised ioyntly against their enemies, the issue was, that the younger, in two battels hauing ouercome the elder, and at the second, which was Anno 1544. hauing taken him prisoner, confined him to Ta^lete. Hee now sole Monarch of Marocco, conuerts his forces against the King of Fez, to try if he could bee his Master in the field, as hee sometimes had beene in the Schoole, and failed not of his attempt, but hauing once taken and freed him, the second time because he had broken promise, he depriued him and his sonnes of estate andThe end of the Raigne of Marins. life. He also by meanes of his sonnes took Tremizen, which soone after was recouered from them by Sal Araes Vice-roy of Algier, and Fez also added, by an ouerthrow of the Seriff, to the Turkes conquest, who gaue the gouernment of Fez to Buasson, Prince of Veles. But he in an vnfortunate battell with the Seriff, lost his life  and state. Mahomet going after to Taradant, was by the way slaine in his Pauilion, by the Treason of some Turkes suborned thereunto by the King of Algier, of whom all (but fiue) in their returne were slaine by the people: Anno 1559. Mulley Abdala, the Seriffs sonne, (...) proclaymed King.
SomeR^. C. his Historie of Barbary, c^p. 1. write, that by occasion of a Rebellion in Sus, hee sent to the bordering Turkes for aide, who first helped, after murthered him, and hauing sacked Taradant, and ouer-runne the Countrey two moneths together, were in their returne, by the Mountainers cut off. Mully Abdala hauing raigned fifteene yeeres, dyed, leauing behind him thirteene sonnes; the eldest, Abdala, commanded the rest to be killed: but Abdelmelech the second brother escaped intoThe Turkes fingers haue itched to bee dealing with these parts euer since Solymans time, and haue therfore willingly entertayned all occ^sions to effect their ambitious designes. Nic. Honiger. Turkie, and Muley Hamet, the third brother, esteemed of a simple and quiet spirit,  not any way dangerous to the state, was spared. The other tenne were put to death in one day at Taradant, where they had beene brought vp. This Abdela dying, left behind him three sonnes; Muley Mahomet, Muley Sheck, Muley Nassar: the two younger escaped into Spaine, where Sheck is yet liuing and turned Christian. Nassar returned in the foureteenth yeere of Muley Hamets Raigne, and had almost driuen Muley Sheck, then Gouernour of Fez vnder his Father, to his heeles, had not superstition more preuayled with Nassars followers, then Allegeance. For when Lent came, his Souldiers would needs home to keepe their Easter at their owne houses: for feare whereof Nassar hastily giuing battest, was there slaine. Abdelmelech before fled into Turkie, now came backe with Turkish forces, and got the Kingdome from Mahomet, who fleeing, or as others write, sending for succour to Sebastian  King of Portugall, obtained it. In the yeereMichal ab Isselt. continuatio Surii. in. An. 1575 and 1578. 1578. Fiue thousand Germans were entertayned in the Portugall pay for the expedition, and great forces were leuyed, the Pope sending Stukely, that English Traytor (falsely termed Marquesse of Ireland) with fixe hundred Italians, to Sebastian,^o. Thom. Freigius hist. de caede Sebast. who the foure and twentieth of Iune tooke Sea, and the next day with a Fleet of one thousand and three hundred sayle; or as DoglioniNic Doglioni, Compendio Hist. part. 6. hath it, setting in order his Armada of fiue hundred sayle, and blessing his Royall Standard, with thirtie sixe thousand Footmen, and foure thousand Horse, set forth towards Africa: Where Abdelmelech being sickly, had assembled an Armie of fifteene thousand Footmen, and foure and fortie thousand Horse men. On the fourth day of August, they joyned battell, and the Duke of Auero, with his Portugals, made a great impression into the Moores host; which Abdelmelich  labouring beyond his naturall force to withstand, saued his people, but lost his life, not by the Sword of the enemy, but by the weakenesse of his body, deliuered vp to death. His brother HametG. Wilkins cals him Mully Mahomet. ruled the Armie (as yet ignorant of what had befalne) and made such slaughter of the Portugals, that the Duke of Auero, the King of Portugall, and other great Personages there fell, and Mahomet himselfe was drowned, in fleeing ouer a Riuer. Thus remayned Hamet victorious, and at one time had the dead corpes of three Kings in his Tent, Such is the furie of Waire, the force of death trampling vnder foot the meanest, and triumphing ouer the greatest. Stukely among the rest receiued due wages for his treacherie, and disloyaltie to his Countrey, slaine out of his Countrey by the barbarous Barbarian. To AbadelmelechEdmund Hogan in Makluyt tom. 2. part. 2. was Master Edmund Hogan employed in Embassage, by the Maiestie of our late Soueraigne,  Anno, one thousand fiue hundred seuentie seuen, and with all good Offices entertayned. To Hament his Successour, was from the same Sacred Maiestie, sent Ambassadour,Henry Roberts Hak. ih. p. 119. Master Henry Roberts, Anno one thousand fiue hundred eightie fiue, who was there Lieger three yeeres. This Muley Hamet in a Letter to the Earle of Leicester, thus begins. In the name of the mercifull and pitifull God. The blessing of God light vpon our Lord and Prophet Mahomet, and those that are obedient vnto him. The seruant of God both mightie in warre, and mightily exalted by the grace of God, Myra Momanyn, the sonne of Myra Momanyn, the Iarif, the Hozeni, whose Kingdomes God maintayne. Vnto the right famous, etc. In an Edict published in behalfe of the English, hee stileth himselfe, The seruant of the Supreame God, the Conquerour in his cause, the successor aduanced by God, etc. He flayed off the skin from the carkasse of Mahomet,  drowned in the battell, as is said, and filled it full of Straw, and sent it through all Prouinces of his Kingdome for a spectacle. He raigned seuen and twentie yeeres. He sent an Embassage
 into England,Ro. C. his Historie of Barb. Anno a thousand sixe hundred and one, performed by Abdala Waecad Anowne.
His people did so feare him, that AbdalaG. W. Creme his Customer, hauing one onely Sonne, (who in an idle businesse and busie idlenesse, would needs feed his curious eyes with the light of the Palace where the Kings Concubines were) caused him to bee strangled before his face.
He gouerned the Alarbes (which are supposed to bee of Arabian Race, and said to vse the Arabike Language, Inhabitants of the plaine and Champaine Countries of Marocco, Fez, and Sus) in peace and subiection receiuing their tents duly paid. The Brebers or Mountainers  are the Natiues and ancient Inhabitants, chased by the former into strong Cities, and the Naturall Forts of Hils (as our Progenitors serued the Britaines, forcing them to the Mountaines of Wales and Cornwall) a people of another Language (called Tamaset) and disposition, whom hee could not so easily tame, and therefore in policie hee drew them into forreine Expeditions, especially against the Negros, thereby extending his Empire so farre that way, as by Camell it was sixe moneths iourney from Marocco, to the extremest bounds. Likewise he vsed them to goe with theCarauan is a company of Merchants going together with their goods and beasts. Carauans to Gago to fetch home his yeerely Tribute. He conquered Tombuto and Gago, about the yeere 1594. as appeareth by the Letters ofMadoc. Hack. Lawrence Madoc, who saw thirty Mules laden with Gold come from thence to Marocco, and sayth that Tombuto rented threescore Quintals of Gold. He was much delighted in Astronomie; as  M. Thomas Bernhere hath written in a LetterBern. let Marocco. 1600. to Master Edward Wright, to whom hee sent for Mathematicall Instruments to be vsed in that yeerely Voyage to Gago ouer the sandie Sea, where they vsed Needle and Compasse.
His prouisions for his Ingenewes or Sugar-gardens, for his buildings, maintenance of his women (rather for the pompe then the sinne) I let passe. For passed they are now, and gone, together with himselfe, his three Sonnes, by Ciuill-Warres, leauing scarce hope of good, or place for worse state then is now in Barbary, and hath beene these many yeeres. Hee dyed of the Plague, which was so violent in these parts, that by WilkinsG. Wilk. miseries of Barbarie. report there dyed aboue foure thousand and seuen hundred in one day and night thereof in Marocco, and in one yeere seuen hundred thousand Moores, and seuen thousand seuen hundred Iewes. In the Citie of Far  (I thinke he meaneth Fez) dyed the same yeere fiue hundred thousand, besides those which perished in the Countrey and other places: so many (sayth hee) as if Barbary had beene the common buriall place of the World; and the liuing were not able to burie the dead, neither did the earth couer and bury them, but they buried and couered the earth, the high-wayes being strowed with dead, infected, and infectious carkasses. A plentifull Haruest found not Labourers to inne it, but shed it selfe on the ground; and the cattell mourned for want of Milkers. Here was no want of store, and soone after (the plague cea^ing) no store but of want. Pamine succeeding in place, and exceeding the others cruelties. And lest a third furie should be wanting, the warres betweene the late Hamets Sonnes, followed the former at the heeles, that as with a threefold cord, Barbary is welhigh strangled and dead.



@. III. Of the Ciuill Warres in Barbary And of some other parts of that Kingdome.
THe Sonnes of Hame? were Mahomet, commonly called Sheck, a title proper to the Kings eldest Sonne? Boferes his Brotherly the whole bloud: Sidan, by another  woman; as Nassar and Abadela. Muley is a title of honour, giuen to the Kings Children, and all of the bloud Royall. Muley Sheck was made Gouernour of Fez in his Fathers life t^^e, Boferes of Sui; and Sidan, of Tedula, in the mid-way betweene Fez and Marocco. Muley Sheck so displeased his Father by his vnbridled courses, that hee went with an Army to Fez to displace him, and to see things there in order, leauing Boferes (lately returned from Sus, because of the plague) in the gouernment of Marocco. Sheck tooke Sanctuary with fiue hundred of his best Souldiers, from whence his Father caused him to bee brought by Force, and sent him prisoner to Mickanes: But before he could finish his purposes, the fourteenth of August 1603. he died. Sidan had followed his Father in this Expedition, and taking aduantage of his presence, I dized on the treasures, and proclaimed himselfe King  of Barbary, and heire to his Father. What Sidan had done at Fez, the like did Boferes at Marocco, and at Taradant. Nassar made some stirres, but soone after died of the Plague. Boferes sendeth Bashar I^^da^ to encounter with Sidan, who was now come with his forces against
 him, and because himselfe had not the heart, to hazard his person in battell, knowing that it would be no small discouragement, if there were none his equall in bloud, hee on certaine conditions, freed his elder brother Muley Sheck, who the sixt of Ianuary 1604. chased Sidan out of the field. Hence all old quarrels, and feuds, and robberies, and a world of other mischiefes nowOf these warres and the Genealogie of this Seriffian Family, see Laur. Bayerlincki opus Chron. to. 2. in An. 1603. began to fill all the parts of Barbay. Muley Sheck in Fez proclaimes himselfe King. Thus is all inuerted, many Kings and few Subiects: none now in his vncertainty paying their accustomed tenths, intending rather mutuall feuds and battles betwixt their seuerall Tribes and Kindreds, then common fidelitie and allegiance. Sidan by aide of the Great Foquere, or Heremite, obtayneth Sus, the people yeelding obedience to none but whom that Religious person shall appoint them: by meanes of him also, a peace was concluded  betwixt Boferes and Sidan in August, 1604. Thus was the warre continued betweene Sheck and Boferes. Abdela, Shecks sonne, driueth Boferes out of Marocco, in the latter end of the yeere 1606. vsing his victory with bloudy cruelty, besides the rifling and pillage of the goods in the City. Bloud is a slippery foundation, and pillage a pill'd wall: so fell it out to Abdela, who soone lost the City to Sidan; which he had taken from Boferes, after a bloudy field fought betwixt them in April after. Here Sidan puts to the Sword three thousand Fessans, which had taken Sanctuary, and came forth disarmed, vpon promise of Pardon, which Boferes after with like perfidiousnesse, and breach of promise, required on three thousand Morochians. The Shracies (which are Mountayners neere to Algier, but no more respecting  the Turkes there, then the Brebers doe the Serif) fell at variance, and began to mutinie in the Army of Sidan, whom they serued; and cut off the Bashas head, who was their Generall, which caused Sidan to execute vniust cruelties against all of that Tribe in Marocco, giuing the Shracies goods to the Murtherer whomsoeuer. On the twentieth six of Nouember 1607. Abdela ioyneth in battle with Sidan, prouoked by those Shracies who thirsted for reuenge of Sidans tyrannies, where many English, vnder Captaine Giffard, and other Captaines were slaine, Sidan chased, and Marocco recouered.
But whiles these brethren contend, Muley Hamet Bosonne their Cousin, rich in treasure, richer in hopes, thought it fit time to take vp that Kingdome, which these with warring for it lost. He gathered together whatsoeuer forces he could make, and came towards Marocco. Abdela heard and feared, and hauing spied a man vpon a Hill with a Speare in his hand, with  white linnen like a flagge vpon it: his feare (an vntrusty Messenger, told him, that all Bosonnes Armie was behind the Hill, although it were then a full dayes march from thence and) sent him wings to flye to Fez. The man was but a silly Moore, which had washed his Linnen, and dryed it on his Speares point. Bosonne entreth Marocco, and proclaymes himselfe King, but loseth both City and Kingdome in Aprill following, 1608. and after a second ouerthrow receiued by Sidan now Master of Marocco, hee was by Alkeid Azus his meanes poysoned, Muley Sheck, loth to leaue Marocco to Sidan, sendeth Etina an Italian Merchant into Spaine, with promise to the Catholike King, of Allaroche, Saly, Alcasar, and other Townes to turne Spanish, if he would helpe him to his right in Afrike. This Negotiation was well entertayned, and the Spaniard now hathHe hath also diuers other Cities; Tanger Seuia, etc. in those parts. Allaroche. Since this time rare accidents  haue hapned by certaine Religious persons, after the Moores account, which History is thus reported.
A certaine Foquere, Talbie, Heremite or Saint (names giuen by diuers to the same) called Side Hamet Ben Abdela, liued in Wed Sowre, forty dayes iourney beyond Marocco Eastward, where sometime hee entertayned Sidan to his great content, fleeing then to hisThe Moores call their protection or defence, a Horne, as is vsuall in the Scriptures. Horne or defence in time of distresse. This man the Moores report to be a great Magician, that he could feed three hundred Horse at one pit of Barley, and the same no whit diminished, that he had foretold of plenty the last yeere, which came accordingly to passe, that hee could by his Art secure men from the danger of Gunshot. Hee being of great reputation for Wealth Learning,The Letter of R. S. since printed, May 10. and Holinesse, gathered a band of men, and conducted them to Marocco. Sidan with an Armie of sixteene thousand, giues him battle at Marocco, the^e tenth of May  1612 and was ouethrowne. For he went himselfe, and led his Company on the mouth of the Ordnance without that mee he causing (as the Moores report) that the bullets should still remayne in the Peeces when they were discharged,R. S. saith that he foretold three should goe off without harme the rest should take si^^, but not goe off: and so it fell ou^. as he had often for the confirmation of his people made triall before, setting fortie Gunners to shoot at as many others without harme by the like A^t. Thus hee lost none of his owne, and many of the other were slaine, Sidan fled to Safia, and emba^ques his two hundred women in a Flemming: his riches, in a Marsilian: This was taken by Don Liuys the Spanish Admirall wherein were thirteen chests of Gold (or as Masten Ioseph Keble then at Saphia reported to mee, fifty fardels of Arabike Bookes, valued at a Million of treasure; he saw ten of those fardels.) The other ship at Santa  C^uz met Sidan and deliuered him his women. Men were more necessary, which he wanted, and yet (worse then their want) some offered their seruice for pay, and receiuing it, forsook
 him, whereby he was forced to flee into the Mountayns, where he is said yet to remaine. Side Hamet, now called Mully Hamet Ben Abdela, placed a Gouernour in Marocco, another at Taradant, the cheife City of Sus.
Since I published theseIn the first Edition of this Booke. See of this King, A. Iansen. Gaellobelg. 1612. Relations, certaine Letters haue beene printed, and entituled Newes from Barbary, which more largely discourse of this Saint: That hee is about thirtie sixe yeeres, very ciuill and plaine in habit, his Turbant of course Calico, his Alheik or loose Gowne of Lile Grogram, a plaine Sword by his side, hanged with a plaine leather thong, a man of great Wisdome and Learning, an Astrologer and Politician. He hath drawne to him Alcaid Azus aforesaid, the principall Counseller of the Land, and many other Saints  and principall men, and since his comming hath married the Widdow of Muley Boferis. He alledgeth certaine Prophecies which foretell these his proceedings in reuiuing their Law, rooting out the Xeriffes, and establishing peace in his Reigne, which shall continue fortie yeeres, after which Christ (as hee saith) shall come to iudgement. The Talbies and learned men doe confesse, that they find these Prophecies of him in their Bookes: to wit, both his name, his beginning at Missa, his course, and certaine bodily characters, as a Wart aboue his right eye, a blacke or gray tooth before (which Master Keble saith he saw) a Ring in the palme of his right hand, and a Spurre in his right foot, a bunch of haire betweene his shoulders, and others to the number of seuen; all which agree to him. At his beginning he put forth onely one Tent and a Kitchin, and then resorted to him the Shrokies, a Saintish people in their  Law, but otherwise in behauiour very Sauages, of which a hundred and fiftie, or two hundred serued him without pay, with whom he brake Alhadge Lemiere his forces (seruants to Sidan) being fiue hundred strong. His Shrokis encreased to fiue hundred, with whom and others that added themselues by the way, he ouerthrew Sidans forces three times before the battle. Then did he subdue certaine Mountayners, which Sidan (nor his Father) could neuer bring vnder. By the way to Marocco hee was to passe a Riuer, and warned his people that none should take vp water in their hand to drinke, which some doing, anon after dyed. Comming to Dets, where hee found a great Power to withstand him, hee comforted his fearefull followers, with promise, that to morrow they should see more with him, then against him: and remoouing his Tents that night, there seemed another Armie greater then  theirs, till they came at Dets, and then vanished, the enemies first with sight thereof hauing fled, and left all to the spoyle. This, saith our Authour,R. S. lit. Sasi, who was with him foure dayes. our Countriman M.W. with diuers others, sweare they haue seene (if any credit, or the name of our Countriman bee to be giuen to a Renegado) He himselfe with some other of our Nation went to see him, and receiued kinde entertainment, with promise of fauour to the English, willing them to take knowledge that hee was sent by Gods appointment to releeue all of all sorts, and to aduertise what they had seene, saying they should see more strange matters come to passe: meaning, as they ghessed, the conquest of Spaine, F^ance, and Italy, with which opinion he possesseth the foolish Moores. For when hee hath set peace in those parts, hee tels them of a Bridge (recorded in their Writings to haue beene in former times) which shall appeare in  the mouth of the Straits, to carry them ouer. But what will bee the issue is vncertaine, the people soone after beginning to disobey, the Shabenites and Brebers robbing to the gates of Marocco. AnotherG. B. letter. reporteth that euery day they flee from him more and more, and Muley Sidan is expected againe. Him yee last left at Sancta Cruz, from whence (as by later intelligenceIanson. Gallob. M. Fanister, and principally M. Ioseph Keble then in Barbary. I haue receiued) he went to Side Hia, another famous Foquere in the Mountaines of Atlas, at whose Zowia (or Religious House) being arriued, hee sate downe on a stone, nor would enter till he had obtayned conference; where they agreed on conditions, that Sidan should leaue his tyrannies, and proclayme pardon to the aduerse party, Hia promising accordingly his best assistance.
This the next yeere 1613. was performed. SidaSide is as much as Dominus, Lord or Master, a title giuen to their Religious. Hia gathering an Armie of 50000. men,  most of which were Brebers of the Countrey of Hea or Haha, with which hee marched towards Marocco. Mully Sydan in the meane while had giuen diuers battles or slighter skirmishes to Mully Hamet, with losse to himselfe, notwithstanding his promise of seuen dayes sacke of Marocco to his Souldiers, if they could recouer it. Mully Hamet was neere AzamorFiftie miles from Marocco. at this approch of Hia, from whence he made more haste then speed (being then about fifteene thousand strong) with a thousand Horse riding before, and leauing the rest of his Armie to follow. With it his handfull of men, and heart full of manly courage, he set vpon the great Armie of Side Hia, three times peruayling, but at last with multitudes was ouerthrowne; his Horse first, and himselfe after, being slaine with a shot, his wonted Deuill, or Imposture, now failing, Hia falling, and many of his followers vpon him; till a certaine Alcayde knowing  him, cryed that Bomobali, that is, the King of clouts or rags was slaine; whereupon all forsooke him and fled, his other troupes now also comming to the flight, which before his indiscretion and impatience would not suffer him to vse in the fight.

Thus died this glorious vainglorious Saint, a man of great valour, which hee had tryed in thirty seuerallThei fi^hts are sleigh^ in Barbary: they discharge not their Peeces ab^ue twice, and then the greatest cry Hyrla, Hyrla, etc. makes the other side runne away. Battailes and skirmishes: in which he obtained the better, both against Sidan and the Mountayners, whose Corne-fields he burnt, destroyed their Vineyards, and in two or three daies had cut down sixty thousand Oliue-trees. The place of this battle betwixt Hamet and Hia, was in or neere the Gardens (which are said to extend foure miles from Marocco) the time in October, 1613. Alcuid Azus was then in Marocco, with the Sonne of Hamet: both which vpon this disaster fled with abundance of Treasure, but by the Larbies were taken, and Azus his head presently smitten off, as the supposed contriuer of many policies to their detriment: Hamets Sonne was carried to Marocco, and presented to Sidan, where after diuers contumelies, opprobriously carried on an Asse diuers dayes, he was at last  slaine. When Side Hia had slaine Hamet, hee grew suspected to Sidan, because hee did not then presently proclaime him, nor durst he aduenture to the City, till Hia had remooued his forces further. The City meane while sustayned diuers abuses by the Souldiers; as before by the Vsurper, in so much that Sidan wept when hee entred and saw the beauty of his Palace defaced (which some say is comparable in greatnesse and statelinesse to the best in Christendome) and kept within doores three moneths or more. After this comming forth, hee brake his Couenant with Hia; and those which before he had pardoned, were now put to death, and some also grieuouslyHanged vp by the hands, and weights hanged at their priuie members: also Limon peeles dipped in Oile and fired, then dropped on their naked backes, etc. 1616. tortured. Whereupon Hia tooke armes againe, and came neere to Marocco with a great Power, which suddenly he was forced to disperse, and to returne home for feare of Treason by Side Lassan a great man in his Armie, which was reported to  hold intelligence with Sidan, and to haue written to him.
Thus barbarous and miserable is the present State of Barbary, Sidan (the only Suruiuer of the Brethren) possessing Marocco; Fez acknowledging no Souereigne, but the City gouerned by the Magistrates thereof, and in the Countrey each Cast or Tribe by it selfe; Mully Abdela, the Sonne of Mully Shek, liues sometimes at Micanes, sometimes at Alcasar, little respected, maintayning himselfe by spoyle and robbery; and Side Hia enioying the Royall profits of the Kingdome of Sus. He liues commonly at Taradant, holds the Countrey subiect, but arrogates not the title of King: His word is Lanserel hoc layenore Side Hia, that is, Let the Truth liue, and Side Hia flourish. A late Letter from thence signifies the feare that Sidan had of Hia's third approch to Marocco, in which respect he sent two thousand Souldiers into  the Countrey of Draa, thence to enter into Sus, if such inuasion happened. But we haue beene too tedious Actors of this Barbarian Tragedie. Wee must forward on our Pilgrimage: and now hauing glutted our eyes with bloud, let vs take more quiet view of the other parts of this Kingdome.
Agmet was sometimes called a second Marocco,Leo l. 2. from whence it standeth foure and twenty miles. The Hils and Valley about it, adorned with Gardens and Vineyards, a faire Riuer, and fertile fields, yeelding fiftie fold encrease, haue assembled Natures Forces to ioyne with Arte (if Magicke may be so termed, and the Histories write true) for the common good of Agmet, and Marocco. The Riuer runneth (as is thought) to Marocco vnder the ground: which secret passage is attributed to the Wizards of Ioseph, Founder of Marocco, lest the water  course should be cut off from the City. This fruitfull Agmet in Leo's time was peopled onely with Foxes and wild beasts, sauing that a certaine Heremite held the Castle with a hundred of his Disciples.
TheThe Mountaines of Marocco. Mountaynes are very rude, according to their rough and cold places of habitation, many of them couered continually with Snow. In Nififa they gaze and wonder at strangers: in Semede they forced Leo to play the Iudge and Notarie (accepting no excuse) eight dayes; and then set him in a Church-porch, and after a certaine Prayer, presented themselues with their presents before him, Cockes, Hens, Nuts, Garlike; and some of the bet^er sort a Goat, which all he gaue his Host; money they had none for him.
In Secsina there is at all times of the yeere, Snow. There are many great Caues, wherein they winter their beasts in Nouember, Ianuary, and February. They weare no shooes, but certaine  Sandals, and are lustie men at ninety or a hundred yeeres old. Temnella is an Hereticall Hill and Towne, which hath a faire Temple. They are of Elmaheli his Sect, and challenge any stranger which comes amongst them to dispute. In Hantera are many Iewes of theCarraim Iewes. Carraim Sect.
The fourth Region of this Kingdom is Guzzula, confining with the Hill Ilda on the West, Atlas on the North, Hea on the East. They haue no walled Townes, but great Villages: neither haue they King or Gouernour; the cause of Ciuill Warres amongst them: yet doe they obserue three dayes in a Weeke truce, when euery man may trauell or batter safely. A certaine Heremite, who was reputed a Saint, was Authour of this three dayes truce in each  weeke. Hee had but one eye. I my selfe, sayth Leo, saw him, and found him to bee trustie, courteous, and liberall.

Duccala the fifth Region lyeth betweene Tensift and the Ocean, Habib and Omirabih. At Az^phi the Prince was (in Leo's time) murthered at Church, while he was in his deuotions, by a subiect, who was chosen Gouernour; but the Portugals obtayned the place. Azamur, a Citie exceedingly addicted to Sodomie, was also punished with Portugall slauerie, and most of the Countrey thereabouts. In the Hill, called Greene-hill, liue many Heremites, of the fruits onely there growing. Here are many Altars and Saints after the Mahumetan fashion.
Mahumet King of Fez, in the yeere of our Lord 1512. passed this way with his Armie, and at euery Altar made a stand, and there kneeling, would thus say; My God, thou knowest that my intent of comming to this wilde place, is onely to helpe and free the people of  Duccala from the wicked and rebellious Arabians, and from our cruell enemies the Christians: and if thou doest not approue it, let thy scourge light onely on my person; for these people that follow me deserue not to be punished. Hence he sent me Ambassadour to Marocco.Leo an Ambassadour.
Hascora the sixt Region of Marocco, is situate betweene the Riuer Tensift and Quadelhabid* Alemdio in Hascora was conquered to the King of Fez by a Merchant, whose Paramour the Prince had taken away; for which adulterie he was by the Iudges condemned to be stoned. The Prince of Temcenes was so addicted to Arabian poetrie, that hee gaue Leo, then a youth of sixteene yeeres old, fiftie ducats for certaine verses hee had made in his praise, and twice as much he sent to his vncle for the same, with a horse and three slaues.
Tedles is the seuenth Prouince of this Kingdome, lying betweene Guadelhabid and Ommitabih.  Tefza the chiefe Towne is beautified with many Temples, and hath store of Priests. The Towne walls are built of a kinde of marble called Tefza, which gaue name to the Town. Mount Dedes is in this Prouince, where the people (for the most part) dwell in Caues vnder the ground: they haue neither Iudges nor Priests, nor honest men among them. For other places, if any thinke vs not more than tedious alreadie, let them resort to Leo, whom all follow in their Relations of these parts. When any ChristianG. Wilk. Miseries of Barbarie. will turne Moore, it is their custome to signifie it to the Christians in those parts: and in place and time appointed, an equall number of both sorts being assembled, and fitting the one ouer against the other, the partie in the middle and presence of both, is demanded of which he will be, and the Christians may vse what arguments they can to disswade him: which is done three seuerall times.  Thus did one of our Nation, who hauing thus killed his owne soule, after murthered anothers body, and was therefore adiudged to wander like Cain, none releeuing him, in which state he pined and dyed.



CHAP. XII. Of the Arabians populations, and depopulations in Afrike, and of the naturall Africans; and of the beginnings and proceedings of the Mahumetan  superstition in Africa: of the Portugals forces and exploits therein.
HAuing often mentioned the Arabians in our former Chapters, it seemes fit to speake somewhat of the comming of that Nation, and their Religion, into Africa from the East, as also of the Armes of the Portugals (before often spoken of) which from the West haue made some impressions in these parts. The Arabian Mahumetisme, euen almost in the infancie thereof, pierced into Africa. In the yeer^Chronol. Aug. P. Diacon. and Zonar. Constant. P. Diac. Leont. G B. B. 3. part. lib. 2. of our Lord 637. Omar inuaded Egypt, and Odman in the yeere 650. passed further with fourescore thousand fighting men, and defeated Gregorius  Patricius, and imposing a tribute on the Africans, departed. In Leontius time, in the yeere 698. They inuade and possesse Africa, and appoint Gouernours of their owne: in the yeere 710. They pierced into Numidia and Libya, and ouerthrew the Azanaghi, and the people of Galata, Oden, and Tombuto. In 973. hauing passed Gamben, they infected the Negros; and the first that dranke of their poyson, were those of Melli. In the yeere 1067. Iasaia sonne of Ababequer, entred into the lower Ethiopia, and by little and little infected those people which confine vpon the Desarts of Libya and the rest, and pierced into Nubia and Guinea.
Constantinus the EmperourConst Parphyrogenitus de administr. imperio. ex Theophanis historia, cap. 25. among the Prouinces or great Amera-ships, subiect to the Saracens, numbreth Africa for one: the number and order whereof hee hath transcribed from  Theophanes, and I here from him. The first of these was Persia or Chorassan; the second, Egypt; the third, Africa; the fourth, Philistiem or Rhamble; the fift, Damascus; the sixt, Chemps or Emessa; the seuenth, Chalep; the eight, Antiochia; the ninth, Charan; the
 tenth, Emet; the eleuenth, Esipe; the twelfth, Musel; the thirteenth, Ticrit. But when as Africa shooke off the yoke of the Ameras of Bagdad, and had an Amera of her owne, afterwards by occasion of the weaknesse of the Amera of Bagdad, the Amera of Persia or Chora^an freed himselfe also, and called himselfe Amerumnes, wearing the Alcoran hanging down his necke in Tables like a chaine, and saith, hee is of the kindred of Alem: and the Amera of Egyp^ (to whom the Amera of Arabia foelix, had alway beene subiect) became also his owne man, calling himselfe Amerumnes, and deriuing his pedigree from Alem. This as it giues light to the Saracen Historie in generall, so it sheweth the greatnesse of the Arabian or Saraceni^all power in Africa, where first they made head against their Masters, in the time as i^ said before of Elagleb then Deputie or Amera in Cairaoan, whose example became a president  to the Amera's of Persia and Egypte and (which is more to our present purpose) was occasion of further spreading their superstition through Africa; the fountayne or sinke thereof being now not farre off in Damasco or Bagdad, but in the heart of Africa, Satan there choosing his Throne for these his Vicars or Calipha's (for so the word, saithIos. ^cal Can. Is^gog l 3 Chal^^^a ^st Vicariu^, qu^ nomine ^^ cati s^nt, qui ^o^^ ^uhammedem ^^rum potiti ^^^t* qui and d u nis and hum^nis praeessent. Scaliger, signifieth) which as you haue heard, were too faithfull in that their infidelitie. And because I haue mentioned Scaligers interpretation of the word Chalipha, it should not be amisse to adde out of the same place, that the first Gouernours or Generalls after Mahumet (or as hee calls him, Muhammed) were called Emir elmumenin, that is, Captaines of the Orthodox or right beleeuers. Afterwards, because vnder colour of Religion, they sought, not onely a Priestly primacie, but a tyrannicall Monarchie, they chose rather to bee called Chalipha. The first Emir elmumenin  was Abubecher. When his successors sent their Lieutenants into Africa and Spaine, they gouerned a while vnder them, doing all in the name of the Emir elmumenin, although nothing in a manner but a Title was wanting of the fulnesse of power to themselues. But after, they en^itled themselues Emire Elmumenin, and of Deputies became Kings: which was done by the petit Kings of Spaine, and the Gouernours of Africa. And now the King of Marocco and F^z vseth it. For it is not a proper name, but as the French King is called Christianissimus, and the Spanish Catholicius. Thus farre Scaliger: which serueth as a Glosse for those former names of Amera, Amerund^e, Chalipha, Miramuldinus, and many other hence corrupted.
The meanes of these and other Saracens enlarging their Sect, haue beene principally by Armes: and where they were not of force, by traffique and preaching,About two hundred yeers after the death of Mahomet, all Barbarie was infected with that pesti^ence, Leo, lib. 1. as on the other side  of Ethiopia, euen to Cabo de lor Gorientes in the Kingdomes of Megadazo, Melinde, Mombazza, Quiloa, and Mosambique, besides the Ilands of Saint Laurence, and others. But the greatest mischiefe that hapned to Africa, by the Arabians, was about the foure hundreth yeere of the Hegeira. For before that time, the Mahumetan Chalipha's, or Amera's, had forbidden the Arabians to passe ouer Nilus with their Tents and Families, that so the Countrey was still peopled by the ancient Inhabitants, howsoeuer it was gouerned by them. For such multitudes of vnbridle^ and barbarous Nations were not likely to proue dutifull subiects to the Empire. About that time, one Elcain, the schismaticall Califa of Cairaoan, as is before in part shewed, hauing by his Generall Geboar conquered all the westerne parts, as farre as Sus, employed the same mans valour for the conquest of the East. And Egypt being now together  with Syria subdued; Elcain himselfe seeing the Calipha of Bagdet, made no preparation to withstand him, by the aduice of Gehoar (which at that time founded Cairo) passed into Egypt, thinking to inuest himselfe with the Saracenicall soueraigntie, committing the gouernment of Barbarie to a Prince of the Tribe Zanhagia, who in this absence of his Lord compacted with the Chalipha of Bagdet, and acknowledged his Title in Barbarie, receiuing in reward of his treason from that Bagdet Prelate, the Kingdome of Africa. Elc^^^ hauing lost this morsell, to snatch at a shodow, was in great perplexitie what course to ^^ke, till a Counsellor of his perswaded him that he might gather great summes of gold, if hee would let the Arabians haue free libertie to passe through Egypt into Africa: which, though hee knew, that they would so waste i^ by their spoiles, as it should remayne vnprofitable, both to himselfe  and his enemies, yet incited by two vehement Orators, Couetousnesse and Reuenge, at last he granted; And permitted all Arabians which would pay him ducats a piece, freely to passe, receiuing their promise, that they would become deadly enemies to the rebell of Cairaoan. Whereupon ten Tribes or Kindreds of the Arabians (halfe the people of Arabia deserta) and a multitude also out of Arabia foelix (as writeth Ibuu Rarbu, a famous Historian, out of whom Leo hath drawne a great part of his African historie) accepted the condition, and passing the Desarts, they tooke Tripolis, sacked Capes, and after eight moneths siege, entred into Cairaoan, filling with bloud, and emptying with spoile, all the places where they preuayled. Thus did those kindreds of Arabians settle themselues in these parts, forcing the Prouinces adjacent to tribute: and remayned Lords of Africa, till Ioseph founded Marocco, who  aided the posteritie of the rebell against them, and brake their yoke, from the tributarie cities.
But Mansor the fourth King and Calipha of the sect of Muoachedin, begun, as is said, by
 Elmabesi and Abdul Mumen, preferred the Arabians, and induced them to make warre vpon those their enemies, whom easily they conquered. He also brought all the chiefe and principall of the Arabians into the westerne Kingdomes, and assigned them more noble places for habitation, to wit, the Prouinces of Duccala and Azgar: to those of meane condition hee appointed Numidia, which at first were, as it were, slaues to the Numidians, but after recouered their libertie, and obtayned the dominion of that part of Numidia assigned them, euery day encreasing in power: those which inhabited Azgara and other places in Mauritania, were all brought into seruitude. For the Arabians out of the Desarts, are as fishes out of the water. Atlas on the one side, and the other Arabians on the other side, suffered them not to passe into  the Desarts, and therefore they laid downe their pride, and applyed themselues to husbandrie, dwelling in their Tents, and paying yeerely tributes to the Kings of Mauritania, from which those of Duccala, by reason of their multitudes, were free. Many Arabians remayned still in Tunis, which after Mansors death, they tooke and made themselues Lords of the Regions adioyning; where some of them bare great sway till Leo's time: the other depriued of their wonted pay at Tunis, committed great robberies and slaughters of Merchants and Trauellers.
The Arabians, which inhabited Africa, are diuided into three peoples, Hilel, and Chachin, which are said to descend of Ismael, therefore by the Mahumetans esteemed more noble: the third is termed Machil, deriued from Saba, and came thither out of Arabia foelix. The diuisions  and subdiuisions of these into their seuerall Tribes and Families, which Leo hath done, would perhaps to our nice Readers seeme but an harsh heape of strange names, and for their sakes I will referre the studious hereof to that our Author.
The Tribe Etheg, which Mansor placed in Duccala, and in the Playnes of Tedles, in later times suffered much damage by the Portugals on the one side, and the Kings of Fez on the other: they are about one hundred thousand men of warre, halfe horse-men. The Sumaites in the Desarts neere Tripolis can arme fourescore thousand men: Sahid in the Desarts of Libya, can bring into the field almost an hundred and fiftie thousand of their Tribe. The Ruche are not rich, but in agilitie of body miraculous, and account it a shame if one of their foot-men be vanquished of two horse-men: nor is any amongst them so slow, that he will not out-goe  any the swiftest horse, be the iourney neuer so long. The Vode dwell betweene Gualata and Guading; and are esteemed about threescore thousand warriours. The other kindreds of them are exceeding many, dispersed through Africa, some-where commanding, other-where subiect. And as they liue in diuers places, so doe they obserue differing customes. Those which dwell betweene Numidia and Libya liue miserably: they make merchandize of their Camels with the Negros, and many Horses which are sold into Europe, termed horses of Barbarie. They are much addicted to Poetrie, and make long Poems of their warres, huntings, and loues, with great elegance, and that in rithme, like the vulgar Italian Sonets. They are (the destinie of Poets) courteous, but poore. The Arabian Inhabitants betweene Atlas and the Sea, are more rich in corne and cattell, but more base and barbarous in conditions. Amongst  the Arabians neere Tunis, a good Poet is highly esteemed, and amply rewarded of their great men, neither can the neatnesse and grace of their verse easily be expressed. When they goe to warre, they carry their wiues with them on Camels, and that (to make vp the wonder) to incourage them. The Arabians betweene Barbarie and Egypt leade a wretched life in those barren Desarts, forced, not onely to exchange their cattell for corne, but to pawne their sonnes in great numbers to the Sicilians, who if they breake day, make slaues of them: and therefore they exercise all robberies, and sell any stranger (they can lay hold on) to the Sicilians for corne.
Now for the naturall and natiue Inhabitants of Africa, the white men (so they are in comparison of the Negros) are diuided into fiue peoples, Sanhagia, Musmuda, Zeneta, Haoara,  and Gumera. The Musmuda inhabit the Regions of Hea, Sus, Guzula, and Marocco. Gumera inhabiteth the Mountaynes alongst the Mediterranean, from the Streits to Tremizen. These two dwell seuered from the others, and maintayne continuall warres one with another. As Authors say, they were wont to haue Tents, and the wide fields for their habitation, and those that were conquered, were sent to inhabit Cities; the Conquerors were Lords of the fields. The Tribes or Peoples Zeneta, Haoara, and Sanhagia, inhabit Temesne. The Zeneti chased the Familie of Idris from the dominion of Africa and Fez: and were againe themselues, after that, depriued by the Zanhagian families of Luntuna, and of Abdul Mumen. The Benemarini a Zenetan familie recouered the Empire long after.
They are in these timesRo. C. Historie of Barbarie. diuided into Brebers and Alarbies. The Brebers inhabit the  Mountaynes: the Alarbies, the Playnes. Both of them maintayne deadly feuds, and will fight sorer battels in such quarrels, then in seruice of their King. Insomuch, that vpon losse of any great man, cruell battels haue beene fought, and ten thousand men slaine at a time.

The Alarbies haue their fairest Virgin riding on a Camell, with a flagge in her hand, decked in all pompe to sollicite her kindred to reuenge, and goeth formost in the field incouraging them to follow. The kindred spareth no bloud to saue their Virgin, which the other side striueth to winne, holding that a continuall glory to the seuenth generation. When a man is killed, his Tribe seeketh not reuenge on the murtherer onely, but on the first man of the Tribe he meets with. The Brebers doe likewise. Their women follow them in their battels, with a certaine colour in their hand called Hanna, which will staine, and therefore they throw it vpon such as offer to run out of the field, the basest ignominie that can befall them.
The Larbie and Breber doe differ as much in language, as Welsh and English; the one is giuen to Husbandry, the other very much to Robbery. Mully Sidan in these late warres,  seeing the Larbees also become robbers, caused the next Dwarre (a Towne of Tents) belonging to that Tribe which herein had faulted, to bee destroyed Man, Woman, Child, Kine, Sheepe, and whatsoeuer belongeth to them, by his Souldiers. But after, hee had lost the field in the battell with Muly Sh^ck, they foraged vp to Marocco gates, trusting to the strength which that Tribe could make, beeing fifteene thousand Horse. This Tribe or kindred was called Weled Entid.
In Africa they are much subiect to the Cough: insomuchLeo, lib. 1. that on the Fridayes when they are in their Mahumetan Sermons, if one fall a coughing, another followes, and so from hand to hand all take it vp, and hold on in that sort, till the end of their Sermon, no man hearing what hath beene said.  
For their morallThe generall vices of the Africans, cha 8. conditions, Leo thus describeth them, as wee haue somewhat mentioned before; the inhabitants of the Cities in Barbary are poore and proud, irefull, and writing all iniuries Ma^ble: vntractable and vnfriendly to Strangers: simple, and credulous of impossibilities. The vulgar is ignorant of nature, and esteeme all workes thereof diuine and miraculous. They are irregular in their life and actions, exceedingly subiect to choler, speake aloft and proudly, and are often at buffets in the streets. Thus base is their disposition, and no lesse is their estimation with their Lords, who make better account of their beasts. They haue no chiefe men or Officers to rule or Counsaile them. They are ignorant of merchandize, being destitute of Bankers and money-changers, and euery Merchant is constrained to attend his wares himselfe. No people vnder Heauen more couetous; few amongst them, which for  loue of God or man will entertaine a stranger, or requite a good turne: alwayes encombred with melancholy, they addict themselues to no pleasures; the reason whereof, is their great pouertie and small gaines.
The Shepheards, both in the mountaynes and fields, liue a laboursome and miserable life, a beastly, theeuish, ignorant kinde of people, neuer repaying any thing committed to them. The young Women before they marry, may haue their Louers in all filthinesse, none of them bestowing her virginitie on her Husband: if they bee once married, their louers doe no more follow after them, but betake them to some others. The brutish Father makes this odious loue to his Daughter, and the beastly Brother to his whoorish Sister. The most of them are neither Mahumetans, Iewes, nor Christians, but without faith, and without so much as a  shadow of Religion, neither making any prayers, nor hauing any Churches, but liue like beastes. And if any hath any smacke of deuotion, yet hauing no Law, Priest nor any Rule to follow, hee is forced to liue like the other. Many of them, both in Cities and fields, are found sauoring of better things, both for Arts, Merchandize, and Deuotion, as the same Leo sheweth: but thus are the most inclined.
Now, to adde somewhat further of the Mahumetan Religion in Africa, Anno 714. (as someAnt Gueuara E^istol. Io. de Barras Asiae dec. 1. lib. 1. doe reckon) the Saracens, by the incitement of Iulius Earle of Suta, as in our third booke is related, inuaded and conquered Spaine. Leo in his fifth booke attributeth this to Muse Gouernour of Africa, vnderSome will haue this Qualid. or Vl^t. to be the Miralmuminin of Africa a Marauni^n, whom L^o maketh the East^rne Calipha. Qualid the Calipha of Damasco, whose next successour  depriued Muse, and sent Iezul to Cairaoan to succeed in his roome, whose posteritie there gouerned till that House was depriued of the Caliphship, and the seate thereof remooued from Damasco to Bagdet. Then was Elagleb made Lieutenant of Africa, and held it with his posteritie after him 170. yeeres. After which time El Mahdi an heritic^ll Calipha dispossessed them. Of this El Mahdi and Elcain, and their supposed heresies, I haue no certaine Historie. Certaine it is, that the Mahumetanes from the beginning were diuided, as appeareth of Idris in our Historie of Fez: and more fully in the Catalogue of Mahomets next successours, which were the next not in blood, but in power. So did Bubac or Abubacer challenge it, and after him Homar and Ottaman: contrary to the Testament of Mahomet, who appointed Hali his heyre. Muauias also murthered Hali and his sonne, to obtaine the Soueraigntie. Th^s were they diuided about the true successour of their false Prophet; which fire is not  yet extinct. Another diuision was about the interpretation of their Law.G.B.B hist. Sar. lib. 1. Abubacer gaue foundation to the Sect Melchia or Melici, embraced by the Africans: Homar was author of
 the sect Anesia, which the Turkes and Zaharans in Africke receiue. Odman or Ottoman left behind him the Banesiae, which hath also his followers. Hali was head of the Imemia, which is followed by the Persians, Indians, many Arabians, and Gelbines of Africa.
Curio calleth these sects, embraced of the Africans, Melici, and as hee affirmeth, Asuphij of the Syrians and Arabians, Alambeli of the Persians, and Buanifi of the Alexandrians and Assyrians. Forreine names can scarcely bee translated, but withall are traduced, and of diuers diuersly called. Of these foure grew threescore and eight Sects of name, besides other more obscure. Amongst the rest were the Morabites, who ledde their liues (for the most part) in Hermitages, and make profession of morall Philosophie, with certaine principles differing  from the Alcoran. One of these was that M^abite, which certaine yeeres past shewing Mahomets name imprinted in his brest, being done with aqua fortis, or some such thing, raysed vp a great number of Arabians in Africa, and layd siege to Tripolis, where being betrayed by his Captaine, hee remained the Turkes prisoner, who sent his skinne to the Grand Seigenior. These Morabites affirme, that when Alle or Hali fought, he killed ten thousand Christians with one blow of his Sword, which they say was an hundred Cubites long. One writesSee 3. part. Th. Pol. pag. 16^. that these Moabites deuoted themselues to a solitary life, and strict penance for certaine yeeres, which being expired, by the merits thereof, they may after loosen the reynes of their lusts to all impuritie without any impuritie, as beeing beyond possibilitie of sinning: (The like wee haue obserued before of the Indian Gymnosophists) and then to enable Nature  to vnnaturall degrees of beastly lusts, they eate certaine Herbes, which may melt the heart in and into those flames, for which purpose they vse also in Barbarie a Composition called Lafis. The Cobtini is as foolish a Sect, one of which shewed himselfe, not many yeeres since, at Algier, mounted on a Reede, with a Bridle and reynes of leather, affirming that hee had ridden an hundred miles on that Horse in one night, and was therefore highly reuerenced. Somewhat also is said before of these African Sects in our Chapter of Fez.
Another occasion diuided Africa from other of the Mahumetane superstition. For when Muauia and Iezid, his Sonne were dead, one Maruan seized on the Pontificalitie, but Abdalan the sonne of Iezid, expelled him. Hee also had slaine Holem the sonne of Halea a little  before, whom the Arabians had proclaimed Caliph, and therefore made the Maraunian stocke, of which hee descended, odious to the Arabians. They therefore at Cufa chose Abdimely for the Saracenicall Soueraigne, who was of Hali's posteritie, which they call the Abazian stocke or family. Hee sent Ciafa against Abdalan who fledde and was slaine; Ciafa exercised all cruelties against all that Maraunian kindred, drew Iezid out of his Sepulchre, and burnt his carkasse, and slaying all of that house, cast their bodies to the Beasts and Fowles to be deuoured. Whereupon one Abed Ramon of that familie, (some suppose him the Sonne of Muauias) fled into Africa, with great troupes of followers and partakers, where the Saracens receiued him very honourably, BarriusDec. 1. l. 1. Asia. tels that Ciafa himselfe was Caliph, and that he descended of Abaz, of whom that stocke was called Abazian; and that he tooke an oath  at his Election, to destroy the Maraunians; which hee executed in manner as aforesaid by Abidela his kinsman and Generall. To Abed Ramon resorted the Mahumetans in Africke, who equalling his heart to his fortunes, called himselfe Miralmuminin, which is mis-pronounced Miramulim, and signifieth the Prince of the beleeuers; which he did in disgrace of the Abazians. Some attribute the building of Marocco to him, which others ascribe to Ioseph, as before is said, and some to some other Prince, built (as they say) in emulation ofBagdet was built long after this time. Badget, which the Easterne Calipha builded for the Metropolitan Citie of their Law and Empire. Barrius addeth that he became a Nabach^donosor, to whip and scourge Spaine, which Vlit his Sonne, by Musa his Captaine wholly conquered in the time of Rhodericus. But Pelagius soone after wich his Spanish forces began to make head against the Moores, and recouered  from them some Townes: whichIn two yeres space it is said, that there perished in those Spanish war^, 700000. people. Warre was continued with diuersitie of chance and change three hundred yeeres and more, tillAn. Do. 1110. Alphonsus the sixt tooke Toledo from them: and for diuers good seruices which Don HenryDon. Henry Earle of Loraine. L. Ma. Siculus l. 7. de rebus Hisp L. And. Ressend. de Ant. Lusic. l. 4 he in a proem^ to K. Seba^^. entitleth him Africus, Atlaticus Aethiopicus, Arabicus, Perficus, Indicus, Taeprobanicus, etc. had done him in these warres, gaue him his D^ughter in marriage, and for her portion, those parts which hee had taken from the Moores in Lusitania, since called the Kingdome of Portugall, with all that hee or his could Conquer from them. Thus was the Kingdome of Portugall planted in the bloud of the Moores, whereby it hath beene so fatned, and hath so batned euer since, that all their greatnesse hath risen from the others losse. For they not onely cleered those parts of that Kingdome of them by an hereditary Warre, but pursued them also into Africa, where Iohn the first tooke Scuta from them, so making way to his Posteritie to pierce further, which happily  they performed.
Alphonsus the fift Portugall,Osor. de. reb. gestis Emanuel. tooke from them Tanger, Arzila, and Alcasare, and others; especially Emanuel wanne from them manyTutuan, Asaphi Castellum regale, Azamor, Titium, Mazagam etc. Deam, a Gates. Cities, and a great part of Mauritania; the Arabians
 not refusing the Portugals seruice, till the Seriff arose in Africa, as euen now was shewed, and chased the Portugals thence.
Thus Spaine hath reuenged her selfe of the Mahumetan iniuries by her two Armes: of Castle (which at last draue them out of Granada, and tooke diuers Townes in the Maine of Africa from them, and King Philip now in our dayes hath expelled the remainders of that Race quite out of Spaine:) and Portugall, which thus freed it selfe, and burthened them, by another course did yet more harme to the Mahumetan profession. For Henry sonne of Iohn the first, set forth Fleets to discouer the Coasts of Africa, and the Ilands adiacent, diuers of which were by the Portugals possessed, and made way to the further discoueries and conquests of that Nation in Africa, and India, to these our dayes, where they haue taken diuers Kingdomes  and Cities from the Moores. Of which other places of this Historie in part, and the larger Relations ofBarrius, Osorius, Maffaeus, L. Marmol l. 9. Arthus, Dantiscanus. P. Gatric, lib. 3. Barrius in his Decades, of Osorius, Maffaeus, Marmol, Arthus, Iarrie and others, are ample witnesses.


CHAP. XIII. Of Biledulgerid and Sarra, otherwise called Numidia and Libya.
WEe haue now, I suppose, wearied you with so long discourse of that part of  Africa on this side Atlas, but such is the difference of the Mindes wearinesse, from that of the Body, that this being wearied with one long iourney, if the same be continued with a second, it is more then tired: the other after a tedious and irkesome way, when another of another nature presents it selfe, is thereby refreshed, and the former wearinesse is with this varietie abated, yea although it bee, as this is, from a better to a worse. Euen the mounting vp this cold hill, and thence to view the Atlantike Ocean on the West, Southward and Eastward the Desarts, will neither make the Soule breathlesse with the steepe ascent, nor faint with so wide prospects of manifold Wildernesses; this of barren Earth, and that of bare Waters; a third seeming to  bee mixt of both, a Sea without waters, an Earth without soliditie, a sand not to hazard Ships with her priuie ambushments, but with open violence swallowing men, and disdaining to hold a foot-print as a testimony of subiection; a winde not breathing ayre, but sometimes the higher Element in fiery heates, and sometimes the lower in sandie showres: once a Nature mocking Nature, an order without order, a constant inconstancie; where it is Natures pastime to doe and vndoe; to make Mountaines and Valleyes, and Mountaines of Valleyes at pleasure. Strange is the composition of these places, but stranger is that of the Minde, which feedes it selfe with the cruell hunger, and satiates thirst with insatiable thirstinesse of these Desarts. And whereas the body feareth to be drowned, euen there, where it as much feareth to want water, in this sandie iourney: the Soule (modell of Diuinitie, life of  Humanitie) feares no such accidents to it selfe, but in a sweetnesse of varietie delights to suruey all that her first and Ancient inheritance (howsoeuer since by sinne mortgaged and confiscated) and being sequestred from all societies of Men, can here discourse with GOD and Nature in the Desarts. Hither now, after so long a Preamble, we bring you, and at first present vnto your view Numidia, where you shall bee feasted with Dates which haue giuen the name Biledulgerid (that is, Date-Region) thereunto, and before is made one entire part of seuen, in ourLib. 6. cap. 1. diuision of Africa. LudonicusL. Marmolius. Sanutus one of the exactest diuiders of Africa l. 1. parteth Libya into 7. desarts, and Numidia into the 4. Lands of Tesset, Segelmes, Zel, and Biledulgerid. Marmolius writes it Biledel Gerid. Obserue by the way with Aldrete, that this Numidia is that of the Ancients, which is part of Barbary, but more Southerly; nor hath this Libya of Leo the same bounds with that of the ancient Geographers.  
The Easterne border is Ehoacat, a Citie distant one hundred miles from Aegypt; the Westerne is the Atlantike Ocean; the Northerne, Atlas; the Southerne, Libya. This is the basest part of Africa;Leo lib. 1. the Cosmographers not deigning it the name of a Kingdome, the inhabitants thereof are in many places so farre distant from any other. As for example, Tesset a Citie of foure hundred Housholds is seperated from all other habitations three hundred miles. Some places thereof are better peopled. The Numidia described byPtol. l. 4. Plin. l. 5. c. 3. P. Mela l. 1. c. 6. Oliuarius in Melam. Cael. Rhod. l. 18. c. 38. Ptolomey, Mela, and Plinie, is of a farre lesse bounds, and is rather a part of Barbary, then of this which wee heere describe: called (saith Plinie) Metagonitis, and famous for nothing but Marble, and wilde beasts: The Numidae called Nomades of their Pastorall life, and change of Pastures, carrying their houses on their Carts. The Cities whereof were Cyrtha, called now Constantina,  and Iol, now, as some write, Bugia. The Numidians are notorious for excessiue Venerie. For the Religion of these, whom Leo tearmeth Numidians, hee saith, That in olde time they
 worshipped certayne Planets, and sacrificed to them; and were like to the Persians, in worship of the Sunne, and the Fire, to both which they built Temples, and like the Vestals in Rome, kept the fire continually burning. Christian Religion began to quench this Fire (as isMermann^^ Theatrum. thought) in the Apostles dayes, which after was peruerted by Arrianisme, subuerted by Mahometisme. Iewish Religion had heere some footing also, before that Christianitie was Preached to them.
The Numidians liue long, but lose their Teeth betimes (sowre sauce for their sweet Dates) and their eyes also pay vntimely tributes to the Sands, which the windes very busily and often send as their Searchers and Customers, till at last they can see to pay them no more. In  all Numidia the French disease (as wee terme it) is vnknowne, and in Libya. I haue knowne saith Leo, an hundred persons that haue beene cured of that maladie, onely by passing ouer Atlas and breathing this ayre. This disease was not heard of in Africa, till King Ferdinand expelled the Iewes out of Spaine, and the Moores by lying with the Iewes wiues got the same; and generally infected Barbary, calling it therefore the Spanish disease. The Plague also infecteth Barbary once in ten, fifteene, or fiue and twentie yeeres, and destroyeth great multitudes, because they haue little regard or remedie for it. In Numidia it is scarce knowne once to happen in an hundred yeeres, and in the Land of Negroes neuer. Worse diseases then Pox or Plague possesse the Numidians, namely, ignorance of Diuine, Morall and Naturall knowledge, Treason, Murther, Robberie, without all respect of any thing. If any of them  are hired in Barbary, they are employed in base Offices, Scullians, Dung-farmers, and what not? Neither are the Libyans or Negroes much better.
Of the Numidians and Libyans, are fiue peoples, Zenaga, Guenzaga, Terga, Lemta, and Berdeua and liue all after the same manner, and order, that is, without manners or order at all. There garments of base cloath, scarce couer halfe their bodie. The Gentlemen (Gentlemen must pardon me the abasing of the Name) to bee distinguished from the rest, weare a jacket of blew. Cotton with wide sleeues. Their Steeds are Camels, on which they ride without Stirrops or Saddles, and vse a goad in stead of Spurres, and a leather fastened in a hole bored thorow the gristles of the Camels nose, serues them for a Bridle; Mattes made of Rushes are their Beds, and Wooll growing on their Date-trees, yeelds matter for their Tents.  Their food is often-times patience with an emptie belly: which when they fill, bread or meate after any sort is absent: Onely they haue their Camels milke, whereof they drinke a dish-full next their heart: and certaine dry flesh sodde in Butter and Milke, euery one with his hands raking out his share of these dainties, after drinking the broath; and then drinke vp a cup of Milke, and Supper is done. Whiles Milke lasteth, they care not for water, especially in the Spring-time, all which season, some neuer wash hands or face, because they neuer goe to the places where they may haue Water. And the Camels haue ioyned with their masters in this neerenesse, not regarding water, whiles they may feed on grasse.
All their life (or that space rather, before they dye, not worthy the name of life) is spent in Hunting, and robbing their enemies; not staying aboue three or foure dayes in a place, as  long as the Grasse will serue their Camels. They haue ouer euery Tribe One, in manner of a King, whom they honour and obey. Very rarely is a Iudge found amongst them, and to him such as are litigious, ride sometimes fiue or sixe dayes iourney. Him will they amply reward with a thousand Duckats more or lesse by the yeere. As for Letters, Arts, Vertue, they dwel not in these Desarts. They are very jealous, which is the death of many. Yet are they liberall after their manner to Strangers, as I my selfe (it is Leos report) can testifie. For going ouer the Desarts with a Carauan of Merchants, the Prince of Zanaga encountred vs with fiue hundred men on Camels, and caused vs to pay our Customes: and then inuited vs to his Tents. There did hee kill many Camels to feast vs, both young and old, and as many gelded, and Ostriches, which they had taken in the way. And when the Merchants shewed themselues  loth, that hee should make such slaughters of them, he said. That it were shame to entertaine them with small Cattell onely, being strangers. So wee had Roast, and Boyled; and Bread of Panike, very fine; and Dates great plentie. Hee honoured our companie with his presence; but he ate together with his Nobles, seperate from vs: and had with him certaine Religious and Learned men, to sit with him, which all the Meale-time touched no Bread, but onely Flesh and Milke: the reason, the Prince gaue vs, because they were borne in the Desarts, where no Corne grew. Onely they ate Bread on certaine solemne Feasts; as, at Easter, and day of Sacrifices. Thus did this liberall Prince spend on vs ten times the value of his Customes. After this manner also liue the Africans, called Soana.
The Tracts ofLeo lib. 6. See of the Palme more fully, Sup. c. 5. Numidia, most in name, are these: Data, which extendeth it selfe two  hundred and fiftie miles in length; where are great store of Date-trees, whereof some are male, and some female; the first brings forth onely Flowers; the other, Fruit. And they take a flowred bough of the male, and engraft it in the female; otherwise, the Dates proue nought
 and almost all stone. They feed their Goates with the stones of the Dates beaten, and therewith they grow fatte, and yeeld store of Milke. Segelmesse was built (if any list to beleeueBicri, ^n African Cosmographer, his errour. Bicri, an African Cosmogropher) by Alexander the Great. Heere were certaine Colledges and Temples. The people of the Countrey liued on Dates. They haue no Fleas: a small priuiledge; for they haue infinite store of Scorpions.
Fighig hath industrious and wittie people; whereof, some become Merchants; others, Students, and goe to Fez; where hauing obtayned the degree of Doctors, they returne into Numidia, and are made Priests and Preachers, and so become rich. Tegorarin hath Traffique with the Negros. They water their Corne-fields with Well-water, and therefore are forced to lay on much soyle. In which respect, they will let Strangers haue their houses Rent-free,  onely the Dung of Themselues and their Beasts excepted. They will expostulate with that stranger, which shall in some nicer humour goe out or doores to that businesse, and aske him, if hee know not the place appointed thereunto. Heere were many rich Iewes, which by meanes of a Preacher of Telensin were spoyled, and most of them slaine, at the same time that Ferdinand chased them out of Spaine.
Techort is a Numidian Towne, exceeding courteous to Strangers, whom they entertaine at free-cost, and marrie their Daughters to them, rather then to the Natiues. Pescara is exceedingly infested with Scorpions, whose sting is present death: wherefore the Inhabitants in Summer time forsake their Citie, and stay in their Countrey-possessions till Nouember.  
Libya extendeth it selfe from the Confines of Eloachat vnto the Atlantike, betwixt the Numidians and Negros. It is one other of the Seuen parts, into which wee haue diuided Africa: the Arabians call it Sarra; that is, a Desart. PliniePlin. lib. 5. in the beginning of his fift Booke, sayth, That all Africa by the Graecians was called Libya. Taken in a more proper sence, it is diuerslyStrab. l. 17. Ortel. Thesaurus bounded by the Ancients, and therefore wee will heere hold vs to Leo's description. The name Libya is deriued from Libs, a Mauritanian King, as someL. Coruini. Geograph. affirme. HerodotusHerodot. l. 3. saith, of a woman named Libya. Among the Libyans are reckonedNiger. Aph. Com. 3 the Libyarcha, Libiophaenices, Libyaegyptij, and diuers other Nations, euen of theIsid. Orig. l. 6. Ancients accused, for want of inward and outward good things, cunning onely in Spoyle and Robberie. The Libyans worshipped one PsaphonAlexand. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 4. for their God, induced thereunto by his subtiltie. For he had taught  Birds to sing, PSAPHON is a great God: which being set at libertie, chaunted this note in the Woods, and easily perswaded the wilde people to this deuotion; which Aelian saith, Annon had endeuoured in vaine. It was the custome of Women to howle in their Temples,Coel. Rhodig. l. 12. c. 2. whence some of the Bacchanall Rites were borrowed by the Graecians. Vnto the Libyans are reckoned those Nations, whose barbarous Rites are before related in the seuenth Chapter of this Booke. Wee will now come to later Obseruations.G. Bot. Ben. p. 1 lib. 3. Maginus. Men may trauell eight dayes, or more, in the Libyan Desarts ordinarily, without finding any water. The Desarts are of diuers shapes, some couered with grauell, others with sand, both without water: heere and there is a lake, sometime a shrub, or a little grasse. Their water is drawne out of deepe pits, and is brackish, and sometimes the sands couer those pits, and then the Trauellers perish for  thirst. The Merchants that trauell to Tombuto, or other places this way, carrie water with them on Camels; and if water faile them,Leo, lib. 1. they kill their Camels, and drinke water which they wring out of their guts. Their Camels are of great abilitie to sustaine thirst, sometimes trauelling without drinke twelue dayes or more. Otherwise they were neuer able to trauell thorow those Desarts.
In the Desart of Azaoad there are two Sepulchres of Stone, wherein certaine letters engrauen testifie, that Two Men were there buried; one a very rich Merchant, who tormented with thirst, bought of the other, which was a Carrier or transporter of wares, a cup of Water, for ten thousand Duckats, and dyed neuerthelesse; both buyer and seller with thirst.  
Their liues for lewdnesse resemble the Numidians before mentioned, but for length come much short of them, few attayning to threescore yeeres.A. Cadamosto. They are (as little need as they haue thereof) often plagued with those clouds of Grashoppers, which couer the ayre, and destroy the earth.
The Libyan Desart of Zanhaga beginning at the Westerne Ocean, extendeth it selfe farre and wide betweene the Negros and the Numidians, to the Salt-pits of Tegaza. From the Well of Azaoad, to the Well of Araoan, an hundred and fiftie miles space, is no water; for lacke whereof, many both men and beasts there perish. Likewise in the Desart Gogdem, for nine dayes iourney no drop of water is found. In the Desart of Targa is Manna found, which the Inhabitants gather in little vessels, and carrie to Agadez to sell. They mingle it with their drinke, and with their pottage: It is very wholsome. Tegaza is an inhabited  place, where are many veynes of Salt, which resemble Marble, they digge it out of pits, and sell it to Merchants of Tombuto, who bring them victuals. For they are twenty dayes
 iourney from any habitation, the cause that sometimes they all die of famine. They are much molested with the South-east winde, which maketh many of them to lose their sight. Bardeo^ was found out lately by one Hamar, a guide vnto a Carauan of Merchants, who lost his way by reason of a maladie that fell into his eyes; yet blind as hee was, hee rode on a Camell; none else being able to guide them: and at euery miles end caused some sand to bee giuen vnto him, whereon hee smelled, and thereby at last told them of an inhabited place, forty miles before he came at it: where, when they came, they were denied water, and were forced by force to obtaine it.
The Riuers that arise out of Atlas, and by the vnkindnesse of their Kinde, fall this way,  finding these thirsty Wildernesses to yeeld them the readiest channels, are trained alongst by the allu^ements of the sands, stouping and crouching to them, till being further from witnesses, they are either swallowed vp on great Lakes, or else whiles they hold on their pursuit for the Ocean, lose themselues in the search, and whiles they are liberall to the thirstie sands in the way, at last dye themselues (I cannot say, diue themselues, as else where in the World) for thirst in the Desarts. And yet through these waylesse wayes, doth couetousnesse carry, both the Arabians in their rouings, and Merchants with their Carauans to the Negros for wealth: whither: I thinke, at last you expect the comming of this our  Carauan also.


CHAP. XIIII. Of the Land of Negros.

@. I. Of the Riuer NIGER, Gualata, Senaga,  and Guinea.
NIgratarum terra, or the Land of Negros,Maginu^. Gi. Bot. Ben. either is so called of the Riuer Niger, or of the blacke colour of the Inhabitants: some thinke the Riuer is named Niger of the people: it hath on the North those Desarts which we last left; on the South, the Aethiopike Ocean, and the Kingdome of Congo; on the East, Nilus; on the West, the Atlantike. Leo makes Gaogo in the East, and Gualata in the West, the limits thereof. On the side of the Riuer Canaga it is sandie and desart; beyond, it is plentifull, being watered with Niger, which runnes thorow the middest of it. There are no Hils neere the bankes of Niger, but wooddie places  diuers, receptacles of Elephants. Raines doe neither good nor harme: onely Niger ministers them plenty, as Nilus in Egypt: Their encrease is likewise alike; fortie dayes together after the middest of Iune doth Niger encrease, at which time the Negro Townes are Ilands, and the way to them by Boats; and as many it deceaseth. The Merchants in Iuly, August and September, trade in Boats made of a hollowed tree (like the Indian Canoas.)Io. ^eo lib. 7. This Riuer some thinke, ariseth out of a Desart called Sen, from a great Lake: some with lesse likelihood, thinke it an arme of Nilus:Cadamosto. and some with no truth, thinke it to be deriued from Paradise. It is by GeographersOrtel. Ramusius etc. brought from a Lake, which they call Niger, within two degrees of the Equinoctiall, and running thence Northwards, hides himselfe from the violence of the Sunnes furie, vnder a Mantle of Earth, sixty miles together, and then the Earth discouering  him, hee runnes not farre, but in reuenge he couereth a great ^art of the Earth, and drowneth the same in a Lake called Borneo, till the Earth againe with her strong Armes claspes him in straiter bankes, and forceth him to turne his streame Westward, in which way hauing gotten Fresh helpe of some other streames, that send in their succours; he againe preuayleth, and ouerthrowes the Earth in the Lake Guber: but shee getting vp againe, makes him flee to the Ocean for ayde, with whose tide-forces assisted, he rends the Earth into many Ilands, which hee holds as Captiues betweene his waterieOrtelius and others in their Maps, make Senaga and G^mbra to be armes or mouthes of Niger. Sanutus thinkes it to be Rio Grande. Leo alleag th the opinion of some which thinke it to come from Nilus by some vnder-earth pass^ge. ^he truth is vncertaine, the angry D^sarts not admitting due search. armes of Senaga, Gambra, and diuers others, which euer let slip their hold, and yet euer hold them in euerlasting captiuitie. In this combate whiles both parts sweate in contention a fatter excrement is left behind, which all this way heartens the Earth with admirable fertilitie: especially then when the Cloudes in the  Summer time take Nigers part, and daily marshall their mighty showres to the Riuers ayde, shooting off continually in their march their Airie Ordnance, with dreadfull lightnings, whereat the amazed Earth shrinkes in her selfe, and the insulting waters for three monethes
 space trample ouer all, and send Colonies of fishes to inhabit the soyle, engirting meane-while all the Townes with a strait siege. But when the Sunne, in his Autumne Progresse, sends forth the Winds to summon the Clouds to attend on his fiery Chariot; The Earth by degrees lookes vp with her dirty face (bemited with washing) and make vse of the s^me, which cannot runne away with the fleeting waters, to serue her all the yeere after, as Treasurer of her plenty and abundance.
Richri and Meshudi, ancient African Writers, knew little of these parts:Leo lib. 7. but a Mahumetan Preacher in the 380. yeere of the Hegeira, made the people of Luntona, and Libya, of his faithlesse faith: and after that, they were discouered. They liued, saith Leo, like beasts, without King, Lord, Common-wealth, or any gouernment, scarc^ ^howing to sow their  grounds: clad in skins of beasts: not hauing any peculiar wife; but lye tenne or twlue men together, each man chusing which he best liked. Wa^^e they wage with no other Nation, nor are desirous to trauell out of their Countrey. Some worship the Sunne at the rising: Others, as the people of Gualata, the Fire: and those of Gaoga are Christians like the Egyptians: Ioseph King of Marocco subdued them: and after that the fiue peoples of Libya, of whom they learned the Mahumetane Law, and other Artes, and the Merchants of Barbary frequented those parts. The Libyans diuided them into fifteene parts, each third part of those fiue peoples possessing one.
But theAnno 1526. present King of Tombuto, Abuaci Izchia, being made Generall of the Forces of Soni Heli the former King, which was a Libyan, after his death slue his Sonnes, and  brought the Kingdome to the Negros, conquering many Prouinces. After which he went to Mecca on Pilgrimage, and thereby let himselfe in debt an hundred and fifty thousand Ducats. A great part of those Parts by their difference of Language and Religion, is yet vnknowne to vs.
Gualata was subdued by the King of Tombuto, a beggerly Countrey. This Region adioyneth to Cape Blanco. The Portugals, when they discouered these Coasts for Henry the Infanta, traded heere for slaues as farre as Canaga, or Senaga (to which our NationRic. Rainolds. Hack. hath since traded) and is an arme, as is said, of Niger. Heere begins the Countrey of Guinea or Ginny, in which we will first giue description of the Kingdomes and Nations alongst the Coast: next, we will set downe some obseruations of former times: in the third place, those of the  Dutch, and lastly, of the Iesuits.
Iarric. Thes. Rer. Indic. tom. 3. l. 1. c. 44.The Portugals reckon all to Guinea, from Sanaga, in sixteene degrees to the North, and the Angolan limits in thirteene degrees of Southerly Latitude: so called of Gen^^ situ^te on the said Riuer: All the Kingdomes of Congo and Angola they terme the Lowe^, ^he Northerly part, the Higher Guinea: Senaga, Sanaga, or Zanaga, the Ancients called Stachiris or Darat. From hence Southward is Cape Verd or the Greene Cape, anciently called Arsin^rium, against which are twelue Ilands, which beare name of this Cape, which being desart were first inhabited by the Portugals.
Anno 1446. On the Coast (for wee must leaue these Ilands to their due place) the first Kingdome is that of the IalophsIalophi. or Ialoeses bounded with Zanaga on the North, the Sea on  the West, on the East the black Ialoeses, called Fulli Gasalli, on the South the Berbecines; a Region contayning a hundred and fiue and twenty leagues in length. The Countrey is rich in Fruites and Gold, whereof inTombuto. Tubucato is great store. In these parts are many Portugals turned wilde and barbarous after the fashion of the Natiues, hauing in manner put off all Christianity: in nakednesse, in figuring their skinnes with indelible Characters and formes of diuers creatures, and in like behauiour conforming themselues to the Negros. They are called Tangos maos,Tangos maos. and through all Guinea procure such Commodities as they may sell to European Merchants. Southwards from hence are the Kingdomes of Ala and Brocall,Ala and Brocall. inhabited by the Berbecines: these worship the New Moone, and sacrifice to certaine Trees, which they embrue with the bloud of the slaine Sacrifices, and with meale of Rice. When  the King of Ala goes to Warre,Men mutire nefas? nec clam? nec cum Scrobe? Pers. Sat. 1. hee assembleth his chiefe me^ into a Groue neere the Palace; where they digge a Ditch in a round Circle, and there euery man declareth his opinion: after this consultation the Ditch is closed, and vnder paine of Treason, all which hath beene spoken must bee concealed, and as it were thus buried. The Maydens beautifie themselues with such skinne-figures as yee haue heard, on their bodies and faces, cut and pounced, with the iuyce of Hearbes made to endure: they also bore their lips, especially the lower, inserting in the holes bones and peeces of Wood; and weightie things to make it hang from the vpper lip: Opinion can giue lothsomenesse the prize of Beautie. The Kingdome of Brocall extends to Gambea, which Riuer is so great, deepe, and strong, that the Sea in thirtie leagues from the mouth (which opens it selfe fiue leagues  in disgorging his full stomacke) can scarcely subdue it vnto his salt qualitie: Some thinke it proceedes from the same Fountayne with Niger, whence these peoples are called Negros,
 some, that this and Zanaga proceed from the same head. Midway betwixt both is the G^^ene Cape.
Alongst both sides of this Riuer dwell the Mandingae,Madingae. a perfidious and Idolatrous Nation, which haue certaine Inchanters called Bexerini to performe their Priestly Holies. The Riuer is sayled vp a hundred and threescore Leagues, horrible Precipices and Cataracts, forbidding further passage by water: they call this fall a Bow, for the obliquitie of the fall, suffering men to passe vnder without wetting. Many fertile and pleasant Ilands are contayned in the diuided armes of this streame. The Inhabitants haue Shippes of good ^ignesse and strength. Not farre hence to the South is Cape Saint Marie, from which to the  Riuer of Dominico is thirtie leagues, peopled by the Arriari and Falopi. Here is also the Riuer Casamanqua, inhabited on the North by the Iabundi, on the South the Benhuni, to whom on the East adioyne the Casangae;Casangae. the King is subiect to the King of Iarem, and hee to another more within Land, and so in degrees vnto the Monarch of Mandinga, whose chiefe Citie is Songus,Songus Imperiall Citie of Negros. aboue a hundred leagues Eastward from the Cape of Palmes: to this King the most of the former are subiect. The Casangae worship an Idoll called China, which is nothing else but a bundle of staues or poles pitched into the ground, and fastened together with paste made of the meale of Rice and Millet, which they sprinkle with the bloud of sacrificed Kine and Goates. Some hang on the top thereof two or three skuls of Dogges. The Temple to this goodly Deitie is some shadie Tree, and there they offer also  Millet, and the Wine of Palmes. To secure their Seede they sticke one of these poles in the ground. The Portugals buy slaues in these parts, sold by reason of the Kings vnreasonable tyrannie.
The BuramiBurami. adioyne to the Casangae on both sides the Riuer Iarim or Dominico; as farre as Rio Grand. Here also they buy slaues. The men and women file their teeth: the women to keepe their tongues in order, euery morning take a draught of water into their mouthes, and there hold it till Dinner or Breakfast time, meane-while doing their houshold businesse, not spitting, eating, or talking. The chiefe Towne of the Burami is eight leagues from the Hauen, where the chiefe King to whom the rest are subiect, resides. Their Houses are of Earth: couered with leaues. The BijagsBijagi. inhabit neere the great Riuer, a fierce  warlike robbing people, possessing also seuenteene Iles: the Portugals haue there the Towne of the Crosse. The BeafaresBeafares. also in these parts are dispersed, of whom the King of GuinalaGuinala. carrieth the greatest state and pompe, at whose death all his Wiues and Seruants, and dearest Clients, and the Kings Horse, are slaine and intombed with him to serue him in the other life. The like vsage is in very many of these Guinean Kingdomes, to which they adde further cruelty in the manner: for they cut off their toes and fingers, and beate their bones as it were in a Morter three houres (longer then which they could not out-liue this torture) and then in the sight of those which were to vndergo the like fate, thrust them into the neck with a sharpe stake, so finishing their blinde Martyrdome. On the other side the Riuer is BigubaBiguba. a Portugall Towne, the best they haue in these parts: the Natiues are Beafares,  whose King being dead, the strongest is his Heire, the cause of much Warre. Betweene this and Cape Sierra Liona (so called of the Lyon-like roring made there by the waues, if not of the Thunders and dreadfull storme) are the Mallusians, Bagasians, and Cozolines. In these parts Grapes and Sugar-canes grow wilde: store also of Cotton, Brasill Wood of seuen colours, Graines called Malegetta of the name of the Region, long Pepper, Millet, besides Waxe and Iuory. Out of their Palmes they draw Wine and Oyle, and a certaine excellent Sope, forbidden (as is also the long Pepper) for the excellence to bee carried into Portugall.
They haue Apes called Baris exceeding great, and so industrious, that being brought vp in the house, they supply the roome of a seruant; going on their hinder feete, beating things  in the Morter, fetching water home in Vessels, which yet if none bee ready to take from them, they will cast downe and breake, and then howle. Heere is store of Iron better then ours, but their best Commoditie is Gold, but no Forreiners know the Mines whence they haue it. The Portugals called their Castle hereMina. 1485. built, Saint George of the Mine, in the fift degree of Northerly latitude. In Sierra Liona are thirteene Riuers which fall into the Sea. On the Riuer Das Piedrus the Portugals haue a Towne. Capor and Tambassire two other Riuers, fall from the Hils Machamala, in which is a great Rocke of most pure Chrystall. Two of these Riuers, Tagaris on the North, and Bangua on the South of this Lion-hill make it a Peninsula in some places so neere, that they carry their Boates by Land from one to the other. The Inhabitants are the Cumbae, and the Natiues called Capi;Capi. these more ingenious then other  Guineans. They haue their Kings which administer Law, hauing to that purpose round Galleries not farre from their Palaces called Funkes, where is a high Throne for the King, and lower Seates on both sides for his Counsellors called Solatequis.
 Their Lawyers or Aduocates they call Troens, which weare parti-coloured garments, wouen with feathers, hold staues in their hands whereon they leane whiles they pleade, and haue Vizors to hide their^^me need^ ^^zors to hide (...) not blushing. blushing if any such cause happen in the Kings presence, who hauing heard the pleading of these, and the aduice of the Counsellors pronounceth sentence. In the Creation of a Solatequis the rite obserued is this: they place the person to be created in a faire seate of wood, and then the King strikes his face with the inwards of a Goat, that the bloud and filth runnes downe his brest, then sprinkles him with meale, and after puts a Cap on his head. When the King dies, his Sonne, Brother or next Kinsman succeeds: but before his full Regalitie, they bind him at his house, and lead him bound to the Palace, there whip him; after this they loosen him, attire and leade him to the Iudgement Seat, where the eldest Counsellor  makes an Oration concerning his right and dutie, which ended, he puts a Hatchet into his hand which they vse in Executions, and after this all acknowledge subiection. No lesse strange is their custome for their Maydens.
In euery City or Village they haue a house, seuered like a Monasticall Cloyster from the rest, in which all the Marriageable Virgins are kept and instructed a yeeres space by some old man of best estimation. This done, they are brought forth well apparelled with Musicke and Dances: there the young men make their choice and bargaine, with the Father, paying also the Old man for his yeeres schooling. Sorcerers are beheaded, and their bodies cast to the Beasts and Fowles: for other offences they are sold and made slaues. They weare gold Rings hanging at their Noses, weighing twenty or thirtie Crownes: these with their Eare-rings  and Bracelets are buried with them. The CumbaeCumbae. are not of the ancient Natiues, but were barbarous and deuourers of mans flesh, continually warring on the former. These about the yeere one thousand fiue hundred and fifty wasted all the Countrey, and at last seated themselues here, driuing the Capi from their habitations. If they tooke any chiefe men, they deuoured them, the meaner they sold for slaues to the Portugals, reseruing the younger for Souldiory. They would sell them more then Dogge-cheape, yea some of the Natiues would sell themselues slaues to auoide this barbarous enemy. But now being here setled, they are growne more milde and gentle. Of these are descended, as some thinke, the Giachi or Iagges, of which we shall speakeLib. 7. c. 10. else-where, called by this name in Congo, in Angola Gindae, in Abassia Gallae in Mombaza Zimbae or Imb^ae, and here Cumbae, and Manes, by themselues  Imbangolae: a Nationlesse Nation, breeding without generation, and vncertaine of what monstrous humane-inhumane Deuillish Originall.


@. II. Obseruations of those parts out of CADAMOSTA, and other Ancient Nauigators.
NOw for further particulars of the Guinean Nation, we will begin with the Nauigations  of former times. The people inhabiting on the Riuer Sanaga, AloiseCadomosto. di Codimosti, a Venetian^, calls Azanaghi, and saith, that when first the Portugals sayled thither, their simplicity, was such, hauing neuer before seene a ship that they tooke the ships for great Birds with white wings, out of some strange place comming thither: but when they saw them strike sayle, they changed their opinion, and thought them to be fishes, seeing them afarre off: but when they saw them the next day so farre off from that place, they tooke them for night-goblings or spirits.
This did he learne of diuers of the Azanaghi, slaues in Portugall. They hid their faces no lesse then the priuities, esteeming the mouth vnmeete to be seene, whence they belched such  sowre breath. They had a kind of Muffler to hide it, and part of the nose onely discouering the same at meate. Other Gouernours they then had not, only more reuerence was done to the most rich. A beggerly, theeuish, lying, trecherous Nation, as any in the World. They aniont their haire euery day with fat of fish for great gallantry, whereof they stinke exceedingly. And lest you should thinke better of their Eyes then of their Nose, their women esteeme it the greatest part of goodly feature, to haue large Brests, which by Arte and industrious stretchin^ of them, they enlarge, and some of them haue them hanging to their Nauell.
Neere vnto those are certaine Negros, which suffer not themselues to be seene of any, nor to be heard speake: but haue excellent Gold which they exchange with other Negros,  which bring vnto them Salt, such as the Minerall Salt of Tagazza, and leauing the same, they goe away from thence halfe a dayes iourney: the Negros come downe in certain Barkes,
 and lay at euery heape of Salt a quantity of Gold, and goe their wayes. When the Salt-Merchants returne, if they like the summe, they take it; if not, they leaue the Gold still with the Salt, and goe their wayes: and then the other returne, and what heapes of Salt they find without Gold, they take for their own: the other, either they leaue more Gold for, or els leaue altogether. This seemeth hard to beleeue, but many of the Arabians and Azanhagi testified it to our Author for truth. The Merchants of Melli affirmed to mee, that their Prince had once by a plot taken one of them, thinking to haue learned the condition of that people, but either of ^dlennesse, or because hee could not, hee neither ate nor spake, and within three dayes dyed. Their stature, they which had taken him, affirmed to bee a hand higher then  themselues: and that their nether lip was thicke and red, and so great that it hung downe to the^^ brest, and it together with their Gummes bloudie: their teeth great, and on each side (...) very large: their eyes standing out: terrible they were to looke vpon. And because they had apprehended this man by their ambushment, they returned not in three yeeres: but after forced by the need of Salt to cure their diseases (whence haply that deformitie proceeded) they renued that Traffique.
To leaue these farre within Land, and come to theBarrius dec^^. l. 3. c. 8. and Maffaeus hist. Ind. l. 1. saith, that Senaga and Gambea were by the Ancients called Stachiri^ and Dara^us. This name Senaga was giuen by reason that the Prince was so called. Riuer Senaga Cadamosto iustly maruelled at the partition which that Riuer caused: for on the one side the Inhabitants were well proportioned, very blacke, and the soyle very fertile: on the other side, the Inhabitants, ^eag^e, small, swart, and the ground barren. The people, that dwell on the bankes of Niger,  are called Gilofi. The Kings name in my time (which was1455. almost an hundred and threescore yeeres since) was Zuchali. He had thirty Wiues. When Richard^^ll. tom. 2. Rainolds was there 1591. the Kings name was Amar Melik. All that Region betwixt Sanaga and Gambea i^ called by one generall name, Gia Lef: of which MaffaeusM^ff lib. 1. Bar. Dec. 1. l. 1. ^. 6, 7, 8. and Barrius write, That in an accident of ciuill warres Bemoin came to the King of Portugall for aide, and was there royally entertayned and baptized with his followers; of which, some were of such admirable dexteritie and nimblenesse of bodie, that they would leape vpon a Horse as hee galloped, and would stand vpright in the Saddle, when he ranne fastest, and turne themselues about, and suddenly sit down; and in the same rac^ would take vp stones laid in order on the ground, and leape downe and vp at pleasure. This Bemoin was shamefully murthered by Peter Vaz,  the Portugall Generall, and the hope of Christianity in those parts disappointed. This was Anno 1489.
From thenceAl. Cadam. Cadamosto went to Budomel; the Prince whereof was had in great respect by his people: which when they come into his presence, kneele on both their knees, and bowing their heads to the ground, cast sand ouer their shoulders, and on their heads, with both hands, and then to goe towards him on their knees; and when they speake to him, cast sand ouer their shoulders still, with their head bowed downe, the Prince scarcely deigning them a looke, or word. For euery light offence hee would sell their Wiues and Children. He suffered our Authour to goe into his Moschee, where his Arabian Chaplaines, after their manner, mumbled their Mattens ten or twelue times in halfe an houre; all the company rising  and falling againe to the Earth, and kissing it. He also heard him willingly confute the Mahumetan, and approoue the Christian Faith: but said, hee thought it was harder for a Christian to bee saued then a Negro, because God was a iust God and Lord, who had giuen to vs many good things in this World; to them nothing in comparison, who should therefore in the other World haue their Paradise, which heere they wanted. Easily might he haue beene turned to Christianity, but for feare of losing his State. His Wiues prouide him his dyet, as it is vsuall among the Negros, and none but his Priests and some principall men eate with him; which is after a beastly sort lying on the ground, the dish set in the middest, and all taking out the meate with their hands. They eate little at once, but eate often, foure or fiue times a day.
 From October to Iune it raines not there. They haue great Serpents, and many, which they vse to charme: and the Prince when hee would poyson his Weapons, did (as was reported) make a great Circle, and enchanted by his Charmes all the Serpents thereabouts thereinto, and then killed that which seemed to him most venemous, letting the rest goe: with the bloud thereof, and the Seed of a certaine Tree, he tempered a poyson for that purpose, with which a Weapon infected, drawing neuer so little bloud, did kill in a quarter of an houre. They haue great store of Parrats, which are instructed by a maruellous naturall cunning to preuent the Serpents, which would else destroy their nests. They build therefore on high trees, and on the end of some tender bough thereof they fasten a Bul-rush, which hangs downe two spannes, thereunto weauing and working their nest in such sort, that the  Serpents for feare of falling, dare not aduenture to deale therewith. The Negros came about Cadamosto, with wonder to see his apparell, and the whitenesse of his colour (neuer before had they seene any Christian) and some of them with spittle rubbed his skinne, to see whether
 his whitenesse were naturall, or no: which perceiuing it to bee no tincture, they were out of measure astonished. They would then giue nine, or sometimes fourteene slaues, for a Horse furnished. And when they buy a Horse, they wil bring some of their Enchanters, which make a fire of herbes, and set the Horse ouer the smoke, vttering certaine words; and after that anoint him with a thin oyntment, and shut him vp twenty dayes, that none may see him, hanging certaine trumpery about his necke, thinking that hereby they are more secure in battle. Gunnes seemed to them, for their hideous noyse, to be of the Deuill. Lag-pipes they thought to be a liuing creature, that thus sang in variable accents. But when they were suffered to handle them, they thought them to bee some heauenly thing, that God had made with hi^ owne hands, to sound so sweetly. They beheld the Shippe with great curiositie;  and eyes that were carued in the Prow of the Shippe, they tooke to bee eyes indeed, by which it saw how to direct the course at Sea. They said, the Christians that could thus make Voyages by Sea, were great Enchanters, and comparable to the Deuill, themselues had enough to doe to trauell by Land. Seeing a Candle burne in the night, they which knew not to make any light but their fires, esteemed it wonderfull. Honey they haue, which they sucke out of the Combes, but the Waxe they hurled away, till they were instructed how to make Candles thereof.
Senega (Boterus saith) comes from the Lakes Chelonidi. Sanutus affirmeth that Senega is the same which Ptolemey cals Darandus, Gambea or Gambra, that which hee cals Stachie, and Rio Grande is Niger.  
Cadamosto doubled the Promontorie, called Cape Verde, or the greene Cape, because of the greene trees which the Portugals (which had first discouered it in the yeere before) found there growing in abundance; asLikewise Cape Sierra Liona is so called of the Lion-like terrour thereof, alwayes couered on the top with cloudes, which yeeld dreadfull ^hunders and lightnings. It seemes to be the ^ame that Ptolemie and Hanno, call the Chariot of the Gods. G. Bot. Ben. Cape Blanco, or the White Cape, was so called of the White Sands there. The Inhabitants they found were of two sorts, Barbacini, and Serer^. They haue no Prince. They are great Idolaters, and haue no Law: but are very cruell. They poyson their Arrowes; with which, and the situation of their Countrey, they haue preserued themselues from the Kings of Senega.
In Gambra they were, some Idolaters of diuers sorts, some Mahumetans. They were also great Enchanters. Their liuing as at Senega, saue that they eate Dogges flesh. Heere the Prince hunted an Elephant, and gaue them to eate: the flesh is strong and vnsauoury. The Elephants delight in mire like Swine. They hunt them in the Woodes: for in the Plaines  an Elephant would, without running, soone take and kill the swiftest man (whom yet they hurt not, except they be first prouoked) if with comming and often turning, hee bee not disappointed.
Here was a kind of fish CadomostoCademosto apud Ramus. Nouus Orbis, etc. pag. 47. calleth it Cauallo, and his Latine Interpreter, Piscis Caballinus; I take it for the Hippopotamus, or Riuer-horse) which is (sayth he) as bigge as a Cow; his legges short, with tuskes like to a Bores, but so great, that I haue seene one of two spannes, and longer, clouen-footed, and headed like a Horse: hee liueth on both Elements, sometimes in the Water, other-whiles on the Land. The women vpon their brests, neckes, and armes, had certaine workes, done with a Needles point, heated in the fire, in manner as with vs they worke hand-kerchiefes. This being done in their youth, would neuer out. The  like flesh-branded workes they vse at Cape Sagres, as PietroPietro de Sintra. de Sintra, a Portugall, obserued vpon their bodies and faces. The Inhabitants there are Idolaters, and worship Images of Wood, to whom they offer some of their Meate and Drinke, when they goe to their meales. The goe naked, couering their priuie parts with the barkes of trees. This isThe Hollanders were entertained of a King in Guinea, but very miserably: an old woman naked, three times went about the Captaine, with certaine murmuring words, and cast ashes on his clothes. The Nobles about the King were naked. Hol. Nauig. 1^99. in Guinea.
A little from thence they found men who vsed as great brauery in their eares, which they bored full of holes, and weare therein Rings of Golde in rowes or rankes. They weare one great Ring in another hole bored thorow their Nose, like to Buffles in Italy: which when they eate their meate, they tooke away. The men and women of sort weare such Rings also  in their lips, in like sort as in their eares, an Ensigne of their Nobility and greatnesse, which they put in and out at pleasure. Beyond the Riuer of Palmes they found others thus beringed, and for greater gallantry weare about their neckes certaine Chaines of teeth, seeming to bee the teeth of men. They tooke a Negro, whom they carried into Portugall, who affirmed, if a woman which onely could vnderstand him, did interpret him rightly, that in his Countrey were Vnicornes.  



HONDIVS his Map of Guinea.
map of Guinea, West Africa, with inset map of Sa^o Tome
GVINEA




 @. III. Other Obseruations of later times by Englishmen and others.
ANd these Countreyes haue since beene sought toThe Guineans esteeme well of the French, ill of the Flemish and not well of the Portugals. Arthus Hist. Ind. Or. c. 9. by French, Flemish, and many of our English Merchants. In the yeere 1553.Th. Windham. Anto. Pinteado. See Hak. Voyages, Tom. 2. part. 2. Thomas Windham, and Anthony Pindeado, a Portugall, in two English ships traded alongst those Coasts, as farre as Benin, where they presented themselues to the King, who sate in a great Hall, the wals whereof were made of Earth without windowes, the roofe of thinne boards, open in  diuers places. His Nobles about him neuer looke him in the face, but sit cowring vpon their buttockes, with their elbowes vpon their knees, and their hands before their faces, not looking vp till the King command them. And when they depart out of his presence, they turne not their backes vpon him. Such reuerend regard doth that Negro King receiue of them.
The next yeereTh. Windham. Anto. Pinteado. See Hak. Voyages, Tom. 2. part. 2. Master Iohn Lock went for Captaine into those parts, to trade for Gold, Graines, and Elephants teeth. And after that, diuers Voyages were thither made by WilliamIohn Lock. Towerson,W. Towerson. who obserued at the Riuer of Saint Vincent, strange trees, with great leaues like great Dockes, longer then that a man could reach the top of them: and a kind of Pease by the Sea-side growing on the Sands like trees, with stalkes seuen and twentie paces long. Diuers  of the women had brests exeeding long. At the Cape Tres puntas they made him sweare, by the water of the Sea, that hee would not hurt them, before they would trade with him. King Abaan a Negro entertained our men kindly; hee caused to bee brought a pot of Wine of
 Palme, or Coco, which they draw forth of trees, as we haue elsewhere obserued; but their Ceremonies in drinking are thus: First, they bring forth their pot of drinke, and then make a hole in the ground, and put some of the drinke into it, and after that cast in the Earth againe, and thereon set their pot, and with a little thing made of a Gourd, take out of the same drinke, and put it vpon the ground in three places: and in diuers places they haue certaine bunches of the pils of Palme-trees set in the ground before them, and there they put in some drinke, doing great reuerence in all places to the same Palme-trees. All these Ceremonies done, the King tooke a cup of Gold, in which they put Wine; and whiles hee dranke, all the people cryed Abaan, Abaan, with certaine other words; and then they gaue drinke to euery one. The like Ceremonies they vse in all the Countrey.  
In BeninIames Welsh. the people goe naked till they be married, and then are clothed from the waste to the knees. Their bread is a kind of Rootes, called Inamia, which when it is well sodden, may be preferred before ours. They haue here great spouts of water falling out of the Aire, which if they light on a ship, doe endanger the same. They fall like the pillars of Churches. As for those Voyages to those parts, made byWill. Rutter, George Fenner, Anthony Ingram Rutter, Fenner, Ingram, or others, I referre them to Master Hackluyts Collections. One writeth,Description of Benin, by D.R. That the King of Benin hath sixe hundred Wiues: with all which twice a yeere he goeth in pompe, the Gentlemen haue, some of them, fourescore; some fourescore and ten: the meanest, ten or twelue. At Cape de Lope Gonsalues, some pray to the Sunne, others to the Moone, or to certaine trees, or to the Earth;  esteeming it a great sinne to spit vpon it, from whence they receiue their food. Men and women ^inke their bodies, putting thereon grease mixed with colour. They will not drinke before they put out some, and drinke not when they eate. They offer their wiues to strangers. The King keepeth his Daughters, when they are growne, for Wiues; and the Queenes, with like incestuous abomination, vse their Sonnes. They paint their bodies red: vse Bananas dried in stead of bread, and lay all their meates in a dish together.
About the Castle of Mina they are subiect to such Wormes, as Master IenkinsonAnt. Ienkinson. Hak. To. 1. Th^se wormes come out of their l^^s, or some fl^shie part. hath obserued to grow vpon men at Bognar in Bactria, by drinking the water of the Riuer there; which are an Ell long, and must be pulled out by degrees, euery day a little, if they breake by the way it is very dangerous. The torture they cause is vnspeakeable: they breed in the armes and legges, yea, sometimes in the yard and cod: one man hath had ten of them  at one time.
The Inhabitants of BeninGotard Arth. Dant. Hist. ^nd. cap. 9 ^ud Orient. part. 6. de Bry. obserue Circumcision, and some other Superstitions, which may seeme Mahumetan but are more likely to bee ancient Ethnike Rites. For many Countreyes of Africa admit Circumcision, and yet know not, or acknowlege not Mahumetisme, but are either Christians (as the Cophti Abassines) or Gentiles: they cut or rase the skinne, with three lines drawne to their Nauell, esteeming it necessary to saluation. They will not easily doe iniury to any, especially a stranger. They haue Birds in such respect, that it is deadly to any that shall hu^t them. And some are appointed to haue a peculiar care of them, and to prouide them food; which they doe in high Mountaynes, where they lay meate for them: which they come and eate.  
Arthus writes, That the Inhabitants of GuineaGot. Art. c. 10. 11, 12, 13. giue Religious respect vnto certaine trees. And in the yeere, one thousand fiue hundred ninetie eight, certaine Hollanders cutting them, and not ceasing at the perswasion of Negro's, whose Superstitions in that case they derided: it passed from words to blowes betwixt them, and the Dutchmen were forced to get them to their ships: one of their company being slaine in the chase. But the Murtherer was offered to the Hollanders to be punished; which they refusing, his Countrimen cut off his head, and quartered his bodie; bestowing the one as a monument of reuenge, ouer the slaine parties graue, the other on the Fowles, vnburied. TheirDescription of Guinea. trees are alway greene: some haue leaues twice a yeere. They seldome see the Sunne, either rising or going downe, by the space of  halfe of an houre. Their Winter beginneth in Aprill, which yet is their time of Haruest. Mays was brought thither out of America. In Aprill, May, and Iune, they haue much raine, and the same very dangerous to the bodie, and rotting the clothes, if it bee not presently dryed.The creatures in Guinea. It is often as warme as if it were sodden. They haue some Snakes thirty foot long, as much as sixe men can carrie: they haue also a beast like a Crocodile, called Lanhadi (we haue spoken of the like about Pegu and Bengala) which neuer goeth into the water: Spiders as bigge as the Palme of ones hand, which doe not spinne; store of Cameleons; Dogges woolly, with sharpe snouts, of diuers colours, which cannot barke, driuen to the Market as sheepe, tied one to another; blue Parrets; many sorts of Apes; blacke Flyes which seeme to burne: In Senega some Snakes haue mouthes so wide, that they swallo a whole sheepe without tearing; they haue winged Dragons, with tayles, and long mouthes with many  teeth, being blue and greene, which some Negros worship. They boare a hole in the Palme-wine tree whence issueth a white iuyce, first sweete, and after by standing it becomes sowre.
 and after by standing it becomes sowre. It is somewhat like the Coco-tree. The Palmita is without branches, the fruit growes on the top, which within is like Pomegranates, full of graines, without of a golden colour. They buy Gentilitie with gifts, a Dog, a Sheepe, a Cow in their creation is obserued much solemnitie. They know not how to number their yeeres but seeme to liue long. In their Winter they haue much sicknesse and mortalitie. The goods of the deceased descend not to his Children, but to the Brethren, if he haue any: otherwise, to his Father. If it bee a Woman, her Husband deliuereth her marriage goods to her brethren. When the King dies, the Sepulchre is made like a house, and as well furnished as if they were  aliue, being guarded night and day by armed men, to bring him any thing which he shall need.
Their Noses are flat, not naturally, but by pressing them downe in their Infancie, esteeming it a great part of beautie. Their hot stomackes can digest raw flesh; and thereforeAlex. problem. lib. 1. and 2^ Coel. l. 16. c. 15. Alexander Aphrodisicus, and Coelius Rhodiginus, that thinke their naturall heate, extracted to the outward parts, to be the cause of their blacknesse, are deceiued. They eate the enemies which are slaine in the warres (which are very rife amongst those Nations) and those which are taken, are euerlasting prisoners. And in some more important warres which they vndertake, they will burne their dwellings before they goe, lest either the enemy might possesse them by conquest, or themselues become too mindfull of a returne. In these warres they prouide themselues of some good light Armour, wearing at such times no other apparell. Their Women  are vnfaithfull Secretaries in Natures most hidden secrets, vsing in the sight of men, women, boyes, and girles, to be deliuered of their Children, whom after they circumcise, whether they be of the male or female sexe.


@. IIII. Of the Marriages, Manners, Religion, Funerals, Gouernment, and other Rites of the Guineans, collected out of a late Dutch Author.
 ANd if we may leaue to follow a Dutch guide, well acquainted in these parts, whereof he hath written a very largeA description of Guinea, 1600. in a Ducth Booke. Treatise, you may feast with them at their spousals, and againe, after a view of their liues, at their Funerals. At the marriages of their Daughters they giue halfe an ounce of Gold, to buy Wine for the Bridale; the King himselfe giueth no other portion. The Bride in the presence of her friends sweareth to be true to her Husband, which the man doth not. For Adulterie he may diuorce her, and the Adulterer payeth to the King foure and twenty Pesos of gold, and the husband also may driue him out of Towne: but the Dutchmen payd no fine therefore, the Women onely were blamed, and payd foure Pesos. If the husband suspects his wife, hee makes tryall of her honesty, by causing her to eate salt with diuers FetissoFetisso is the name of their Idols, etc. ceremonies hereafter mentioned,  the feare whereof makes her confesse. They haue many Wiues, if they can buy and keepe them: each dwelleth in a house by her selfe, though there be ten of them: they eat and lodge asunder: sometimes they will bring their cheere together. The Husband closely takes which he will haue lye with him to his roome, where their bed is a Mat. The Women after trauell wash themselues, and acccompany not with their husbands for three moneths after. The Child newly borne hath a cleane cloath wrapped about the middle, and is layd downe on a mat. The Mothers vse to beare their Children at their backes, and so trauell with them, none prouing lame, notwithstanding that shaking of their bodies: they giue them the brest ouer their shoulders. When it is a moneth old, they hang a net about the body, like a shirt,Education of their Children made of the barke of a Tree, hanged full of Fetissos, to secure it from the Diuell, who otherwise would  (they thinke) carry it away. They hang the haire full of shels; and Corals about the necke, armes, and legges, applying diuersi Fetissos or wreathes, with superstitious fancies, that one is good against Vomiting, a second for Falling, a third for Bleeding, a fourth to make it Sleepe, a fifth against wilde Beasts, and so on in the rest, giuing to each Fetisso a seuerall name. They quickly learne them to eate, and then leaue them about the house like dogs: they soone learne to goe, to speake, to swim. When they are first borne, they are not blacke, but reddish as the Brasilians. Each woman brings vp her owne: they teach them no ciuilitie, and beat them sometimes cruelly with staues. When they are eight, or ten, or twelue yeeres old, they learne them to spinne Bark-threed and make nets: after that, they goe with their Fathers to fish. At eighteene yeeres old they begin to set vp for themselues, two or three of them togeth^r  hiring a house and Canoa: and then they couer their priuities, grow amorous, and their Fathers looke out wiues for them. They haue little haire on their face at thirty: they weare nayles as long as the joynt of a mans finger, as a token of Gentilitie: which is also obserued
 by Merchants: they keepe them very cleane, and as white as Iuorie. They are great in flesh beyond Men of these parts. At threescoore and ten, or fourescore, their blacknesse decaies, and they grow yellow. They haue small bellies, long legges, broad feet, long toes, sharpe sight, quicke wit, Estridge mawes; are spitefull, curiously neat, Drunkards, Theeues, Lecherous, and subject to the Pockes, whereof they are not ashamed, as neither of shewing their nakednesse. Yet it is holden shame with them to let a fart, which they wondered at in the Hollanders, esteeming it a contempt.
Their women i^ Guinea.The Women goe long naked, are libidinous, and would boast of their filt^inesse, if they could haue their pleasure with the Dutch, decking themselues of purpose. They weare beades about their neckes, and straw Fetissos about their feet. (The Mulato women in Mina cut  their haire short for brauerie.Their ornaments.) They cut three gashes on their fore-head an inch long, and likewise on their cheekes neere their eares, which they suffer to swell and colour it with painting. They make also white strakes vnder their eyes. They curle and fold the haire of their head, making a hill in the middest like a hat, with frizzles round about. They vse long combes with two teeth onely, each a finger length: these they vse also for salutation, plucking them out and in, as heere, men put off or on their hats: they make also white spots on their faces, which afarre off shew like pearles. They rase their armes and brests with diuers cuts, on which euery morning they lay colours, which cause them to shew like blacke silke doublets cut and pinked. They haue earings and bracelets of Copper: the vnmarried Maides weare thirty or forty on each arme of Iron: the common Queanes weare copper rings with  bels on their legs.
These women are strong, nimble, well proportioned, good house-wiues, home-keepers and cookes: not very fruitfull. The riches of the Guineans are store of Wiues and Children. They take great pride of white teeth, which therefore they rub with a certaine wood: they shew like Iuorie. Their garment is a fadome or more of Linnen cloth, which they weare about their bodies, from beneath the brests to the knees: vpon which they girt a piece of blue or yellow cloth, whereon hang their kniues and keyes, and diuers wispes of straw, or Fetissos. When they goe to Market, they wash them from top to toe, and put on other clothes. They buy no more but for that day, or meale.
They stampe their Milia as wee doe spice, fanne it in a wodden dish, steepe it ouer-night  with a little Mais, and in the morning lay it on a stone, and (as Painters their colours) grinde it with another stone, till it be dowe, which they temper with fresh water and salt, and make rolls thereof twice as bigge as a mans fist, and bake it a little on the hearth. This is their bread.Their bread. Their dyetTheir dyet. is strange: as raw flesh, handfuls of graine, large draughts of Aqua-vitae, Dogs, Cats, Buffles, Elephants, though stinking like carrion, and a thousand magots creeping in them. There are little birds like Bulfinches, which make their nests on small ends of twigs for feare of Snakes: these they eat aliue with their feathers. The Moores say that within land they eat dried snakes: and these will eat dogs guts raw, which our Author hath seene: and a Boy left in pawne on shipbord for debt, which had meat enough, yet would secretly kill the Hens, that he might eat their raw guts. They will eat old stinking fish dried in the Sun: yet  can they be daintie if they may haue it. Some make a kind of Ale of Mays and water sodden together, called Poitou. Sometime foure or fiue together will buy a pot of Palme-wine, which they powre into a great Cabas, which groweth on trees, and some of them are halfe as big as a kilderkin,Drinking. round about which they sit to drinke, each sending a little pot-full to his best wife. When they first drinke, they take it out with a small Cabas, and laying their hands on the head of him which first drinketh, crie aloud Tautosi, Tautosi: he drinkes not all off, but leaues a litle to throw on the ground to the Fetisso, saying I. ou. spouting out some on their Fetissos on their armes, and legs, otherwise thinking they could not drinke in quiet. They are great Drinkers, and feed as vnmanerly as Swine, sitting on the ground and cramming, not staying till the morsell  in the mouth be swallowed, but tearing their meat in pieces, with the three mid-fingers casting it into their mouthes ready gaping to receiue it. They are alway hungry and would eat all day long: yea the Dutchmen had great stomacks whiles they were there. He that gets most, must be most liberall, industrious to get, and as prodigall in spending vpon their liquor.
Before the Portugals trade they had no Merchandise, but went naked: and the people within Land were afraid of them, because they were white and apparelled. They come to trade in the ships in the morning:See windes. for about noone the wind (before blowing from land) comes from Sea, and they are not able to endure the roughnesse thereof. They beleeue, that Men, when they die, goe into another World, where they shall haue like need of many things, as heere they haue, and therefore vse to put with the dead Corpes some parts of houshold. And if they lose any thing, they thinke that some of their friends, which in the other world had  need thereof, came thence and stole it. OfThe Religion of the Guineans. God being asked, they said he was blacke and euill, and did then much harme; their good, they had by their owne labour, and not by his
 goodnesse. Circumcision they vse, and some other Turkish Rites. They hold it vnmeet and irreligious to spit on the ground. They haue no leter, nor Bookes. They obserue a Sabbath,Tuesday Sabbath: they call it Dio Fetissos. herein agreeing, and yet disagreeing, with Turke, Iew, and Christian, for they obserue Tuesdayes Rest, from their Fishing and Husbandrie. The Wine (of the Palme-tree) which is that day gathered, may not be sold, but is offered to the King, who bestoweth it on his Courtiers to drinke at night. In the midst of the Market-place they had a Table standing on foure Pillars, two elues high, whose flat couer was made Straw And Reedes wouen together. Hereon were set many strawne Rings, called Fetissos or Gods, and therein Wheat, with Water and  Oyle, for their God, which they thinke eates the same. Their Priest they call Fetissero, who euery Festiuall day placeth a Seat on that Table, and sitting thereon, Preacheth to the people, the contents whereof I could neuer learne: which done, the Women offer him their Infants, and hee sprinkleth them with water, in which a Newt or Snake doth swim, and then besprinkleth the Table aforesaid with the same water, and so vttering certaine wordes very loude, and stroking the Children with certaine colour, as giuing them his blessing: hee drinketh of that water, the people clapping their hands and crying I.ou, I.ou, and so he dismisseth his deuout assembly.
Many weare such Rings of Straw next their bodies, as preseruatiues from those dangers, which else their angry God might inflict on them. In honour of the same Deitie (or Deuill,  as it seemes they conceiue him to be) they bechalke themselues with a kind of chalkey Earth, and this is vnto them in stead of their Morning Mattens. The first bitte at meales, and first draught, is consecrate to their Idoll, and therefore they besprinkle therewith those Rings, which I said they weare on their bodies. If Fishers cannot speed at Sea, they giue a piece of Gold to the Fetissero, to reconcile their frowning Saint. He therfore, with his Wiues, walkes a kind of Procession thorow the Citie, smiting his brest, and clapping his hands with a mightie noise, till hee come at the shore: and there they cut downe certaine boughes from the Trees, and hang them on their neckes, and play on a Tymbrell.
Then doth the Fetissero turne to his Wiues, and expostulates with them, and withall hurleth into the Sea Wheat and other things as an offering to Fetisso, to appease his displeasure towards the Fishermen. When the King will sacrifice to Fetisso, hee commands the Fetissero  to enquire of a Tree, whereto he ascribeth Diuinitie, what he will demand. Hee with his Wiues, come to the Tree, and in a heape of ashes, there prouided, prickes in a branch, plucked off the Tree, and drinking water out of a Bason, spouts it out on the branch, and then daubeth his face With the ashes: which done, he declareth the Kings question, and the Diuell out of the Tree makes answer. The Nobles also adore certaine Trees, and esteeme them Oracles: and the Diuell sometimes appeareth vnto them in the same in forme of a blacke Dog, and other whiles answereth without any visible apparition. There are which worship a certaine Bird,The Bir^ Pittoie. which is spotted and painted (as it were) with Stars, and resembleth the lowing of a Bull in her voyce. To heare this Bird lowing in their journey, is to them a luckie boding, saying, Fetisso makes them good promises, and therefore let him, in that place where they heare  it, a Vessell of Water and Wheat. And as the Earth and Ayre yeeld them Deities, so the Sea is not behinde in his liberalitie, but yeelds certaine Fishes to their Canonization. In this respect they take not the Tunie at all, the Sword-fish they take, but eate not till his sword bee cut off, which is dryed, and holden in great veneration. The Mountaines would bend their sullen browes, if they should not haue some redde letters in their Kalender, to which their toppes aspire, threatning to scale Heauen, or ouer-whelme the Earth, if the Fetissan portion did not pacifie their angry moode, by daily presents of meate and drinke set thereon. Neither can Nature alone vsurpe this Prauilege, but Art, in other things her emulous corriuall, and farre vnequall competitor, in this matter of God-making, commonly gets the vpper hand. And therefore they with their ceremonious Art can make them Fetissos', or  Gods, at pleasure. Principally in their Funerals they obserue it: for when one is dead,Funerall rites. they make a new Fetisso, or Ring of Straw, and pray it to beare the dead partie companie, and protect him in his journey into the other World. They lay the dead body on a Matte on the ground, wind it in a Wollen cloath, set a stoole vnder the head, which is couered with a Goates skinne, the body is strawed ouer with ashes, his armes layd by his sides, his eyes open: and so continueth halfe a day, his best-beloued wife sitting by (as the Husband doth also at the death of his wife) crying Aury, and wiping her face with a wispe of straw. Women goe round about the house singing and beating on Basons, and about the corpse likewise, and then againe about the house. The eldest Morimi or Gentlemen, goe about from house to house with a Bason, wherein each puts the value of twelue-pence in Gold, with which they  buy a Cow, with whose bloud the Fetissero appeaseth the Fetisso. The friends and kinsfolkes assembling, prepare a Henne, and then setting themselues in a corner of the dead mans house, they place all his Fetisso's on a row, the greatest in the middest, adorning the same with
 Garlands of Pease and Beanes, like to the Popish praying-Beads. Then they sprinkle the same with the bloud of the Henne, and hang a chaine or Garland of herbes about their neckes. After this, the women set the Hen, now sodden, in the middest of the Fetisso's, and the Fetissera takes water in his mouth, which amidst his Exorcismes and Charmes he spoutes on those Fetisso's, and taking two or three herbes from his necke, he rols the same in forme of a ball, which after certaine ceremonies he layeth downe, and so doth, till all his Herb-garland bee spent; and then makes them all into one great ball, and therewith besmeareth his face, and thus is it made a Fetisso; and the partie deceased is now at rest. In the meane time the dearest of his Wiues filleth all the house with mourning, the neighbours and friends with Songs and Musicke (such as they haue) and Dances. And at last they take vp the Corps, and carrie it to the  Graue, which is foure foot deepe, and couer it with stakes, that nothing may fall therein. The Women creeping about the Sepulchre, expostulate with him, Why hee would leaue them? Then doe they hurle on earth, so that none can get in to the Corpes; for hee hath with him his Houshold, Armour, and whatsoeuer he vsed in his life time; Wine also (if before he loued it) to drinke in the other World. Lastly, they couer the Sepulchre with a Roofe, to defend all from Raine. If the King dies, not onely greater solemnitie is vsed: but the Nobles (thinking it necessarie for so great a Personage to haue attendents) offer vnto him, one, a Seruant; another a Wife; a third, his Sonne or Daughter, till there be many of both Sexes in that other life to attend him. All which are suddenly slaine at vnawares, and their bloudie carkasses, buried together with the King. Yea, the Kings wiues which loued him best, refuse not this last and euerlasting  seruice, as they suppose; but yeeld themselues to die, that they may liue with him. The heads of all these, thus slaine, are set vpon poles round about the Sepulchre: Meate, Drinke, Rayment, Armes, and other Vtensils are added for their vse, and buried with them. After the buriall they goe to the Sea, or Riuer, and there obserue other Rites: some washing, while others play on Basons and Instruments. The Widow or Widower is layd backward on the water with diuers wordes of complaint. At last they cloath them, returne to the deadmans house, make great cheere, and drinke themselues drunke.
They, in vncertaintie of criminall accusations, as of Adulterie, Murther, and such like, haue a certaine waterThis drinke they call Enchienbenou. offered them to drinke by the Fetissero, made of those Herbes whereof their Bal-Fetisso is made, and in effect like the cursed water, Numb. 5. none daring to  drinke, for feare of sudden death thereby, if hee be guilty. They dare not come out of their houses in Thunder: for then, they say, many of them are carried away by the Deuill and throwne dead on the ground. When they pray for Raine, they wash themselues, and cast Water ouer their heads with diuers words, and spitting in the water.
Their KingsTheir King. are Electiue, and must be liberall, or else are expelled. Once a yeere he makes a great feast for the common people, buying to that end all the Palme-wine, and many Kine, the heads of which are painted and hanged in the Kings chamber, in testimonie of his bounty. Hee inuiteth also his neighbour-Kings, Captaines and Gentlemen, and then prayeth and sacrificeth to his Fetisso, which is the highest Tree in the Towne. The men with Fencing, Drumming, Singing, Leaping; the Women with Dances, honour this feast. Euery  King holdeth his feast apart, one soone after another, in the Summer-time. The King comes little abroad. In the Morning and Euening, his Slaues blow or sound certaine Trumpets made of Elephants teeth: his Wiues doe then wash and anoynt his body. He hath also his Guard. Hee sitsHis Throne and Scepter. (in state) on a stoole, holding in his hands the tayle of a Horse or Elephant to driue away Flies: gallantly adorned with Rings of Gold on his Armes and legges and necke, with corall Beads also, wherwith likewise he maketh diuers knots on his beard. His ChildrenHis children (if they will haue any thing) when they are of age must get it: the common people would not like that he should maintaine them idle. Onely he bestowes on them their marriage gift, and a Slaue. They chuse by most voycesSuccessour. a successour in another kindred, who inheriteth the  treasure of the dead King, and not his owne Children.
Controuersies are triedTheir trials in Law. by the Fetisseros Pot, as is said: if it be for Murther, hee may redeeme his life with money, one moity to the King, the other to the Courtiers: if he cannot, the ExecutionerExecution. bindes his hands behind him, couers his face, leades him to a place alone, and causing him to kneele downe, thrusts him through, and then (for before they thinke him not dead) cuts off his head: and quartering the body, leaues it to the Fowles ond Beasts. His head is boyled by his friends, and the broath eaten, and then they hang it by the Fetisso. They make solemne oathes and promisesPromises or Oathes. on this manner: they wipe their faces, shoulder, brests, and all their bodies, on the soles of your feet, thrice saying, Iau, Iau, Iau, stamping, kissing the Fetissos, on their armes, and legs. The land is all the Kings, and therefore they first till his land, and then by composition for themselues. They begin on a Tuesday, and when  the Kings worke is done, haue a feast in honour of their Fetisso to prosper their Husbandrie.



@. V. Obseruations of the Coast and In-land Countries, out of BARRERIV'S and LEO, and of the cause of the Negros Blacknesse.
ANno 1604. certaine Iesuites were sent into these parts, the chiefe of which was Balthasar Barrerius,Barrer. Epist. who conuerted some of those Negro's to the Romish Christian  profession. One of which was the King at Sierra Liona, Christened with the name Philip, his Father a man of an hundred and thirtie yeeres, about the faine time finishing his life. A Letter of this Philip vnto King Philip of Spaine,Phillippi Leonia Lit. Feb. 5. 1606 is published by Iarrie, in which hee desireth more Priests to bee sent into those parts, offers him to build a Castle at the Cape, and concludeth with wishing him as many yeeres as the Heauen hath Starres, and the Sea Sands. The King of Bena gaue great hopes of his Conuersion, which were suddenly dashed, by meanes of a certaine Mahumetan (for so farre hath that PestilenceAt the first comming of the Portugals, all these parts were Ethnikes with some little Saracenicall aspersion amongst the Ialophs, Berbecines, Mandingae, which now are all Mahumetans. infected) who making a flattering Oration of two houres long, inclined the King to his faithlesse Faith. This Kings Dominion extendeth nine dayes journey, and containeth seuen of their pettie Kingdomes. Wee haue before spoken of the Mandingae, neere to Gambea.  These haue of late yeeres embraced Mahomet, and by Armes and Merchandize (the vsuall meanes) sought to propagate it to others, beeing excellent Horse-men, and couragious, vsually placed in the fore-front. Their Priests are called Bexerini, which write Arabicke Amulets to secure such as weare them in battell. These Preach to the people, and drawinge forth parchment rolls, spread them with great deuotion on the Pulpit, and standing a while with eyes fixed to Heauen, as it were in Diuine conference, presently will them to thanke GOD, and his Prophet for the pardon of all their sinnes: then reades hee his Scrolls, the people tending two houres together without once stirring their bodies, or turning away their eyes. One of them is chiefe ouer the rest, who hath taught the King of Bena a certaine Inchantment or Witchcraft, to make the Deuill the instrument of his Reuenge vpon any offender; which makes him dreadfull to all; Two of the Portugals confessing the experiment thereof  vpon themselues. The like appeared in a huge Serpent, which they call the King of Serpents, of most beautifull dolours, as bigge as a mans thigh, which the King played withall without any harme. The Iesuite speakes of one Man which had threescore and twelue Sonnes, and fiftie Daughters, which multiplied beyond credit. All the kindred mourne at the death of the great Men, assemble to the corpse, and offer, of which offerings one third is the Kings, the second the nearest kinsmans which is charged with the Funerall, the third is put into the Graue, together withall that Gold which they haue treasured for this purpose through their whole life, hiding it closely from the knowledge of all, so that if they die suddenly, their Gold is perished with them. Yea their Sepulchres (the Iesuites report) are kept secret, and made in the channels of Riuers, diuerting the streame, till it bee made, to preserue  these treasures to the vse of the dead. At the yeeres end they renue the memorie of the deceased with mourning and festiuall solemnitie, the more drunkennesse, the greater honour. They haue Idols of wood and straw, and their Chinas before mentioned, made of Poles in forme of a Pyramis, within which are many white Pismires that come not forth, and it is vncertaine what they eate. Before these they will adiure their Seruants to fidelitie, wishing that Serpents, Lizards, or Tygres may teare them if they runne away, which they feare with religious awe, and dare not flee vpon any hard vsage. Euery Kingdome hath a place sacred to the Deuill: such an one was the Iland Camasson a league from the shore, where all that sayled by offered Rice, Oyle, or some other thing. The King once a yeere sacrificed Goates and Hens, which were there kept, there being no feare of stealing them, where none durst aduenture  to set foot on land.
And now leauing the Coasts of Guinea, Benin, Melegete, and the other Regions of the Negros adjoyning to the Sea, we will looke backe againe into the In-land Countries: wherof Gualata is an hundred miles distant from the Ocean, and hath already beene mentioned. The next thereunto, inLeo, lib. 7. Leos Relations, is Gheneoa, which is not the same with Guinea before mentioned, if Leo had true int^lligence, but is situate betwixt Gualata, Tombuto, and Melli, and in one place bordereth on the Ocean, where Niger falleth into the Sea. They had great Traffique with the Merchants of Barbarie. They haue Gold vncoyned, and vse also Iron money. There is neither Towne nor Castle, but one, where the Prince, with Priests, Doctors, and Merchants reside. Those Priests and Doctors goe apparelled in white, the rest in  blacke or blue Cotton. In Iuly, August, and September, Niger ouer-floweth it. Izchia, the King of Tombuto, conquered it, and kept the King prisone rat Gago, till his death, Melli is the head Citie of a Kingdome, which hence taketh name, and hath in it great store of Temples,
 Priests and Readers or Professours, which reade in the Temples, because they haue no Colledges. They are more ingenious then other Negros, and were the first that embraced the Mahumetan Law. Izchia also subdued them.
Tombuto was founded in the yeere of the Hegeira 610. And it is situate within twelue miles of a branch of Niger. There are many Wells to receiue the ouerflowing waters of that Riuer.Salt deare. Salt is brought them fiue hundred miles from Tagazza, and is very deare. I, at my being there (saith Leo) saw a Camels burthen sold for fourescore Duckats. The King had many Plates and Scepters of Gold, some whereof weighed thirteene hundred pounds. They which speake to him, cast Sand ouer their heads, as Cadamosto obserued at Budomel. The King would admit no Iewes into his Citie, and hateth them so extreamely, that hee would confiscate the  goods of such Merchants, as held Traffique with them. Hee greatly honoured men of Learning, and no Merchand^ze yeelded more gaine then Bookes. There were many Iudges, Doctors, and Priests, to whom hee allowed their stipends. The people vsed much Dauncing in the streets, from tenne to one of clocke at night. They mingle Fish, Milke, Butter, and Flesh together in their Gallimaufrey kinde of dyet, neither toothsome nor holsome. Hamet, King of MaroccoPory in translat. Ro. c. Historie of Barbarie., conquered the same Kingdome 1589. and also Gago, and other Countries of the Negros, extending his Empire sixe moneths journey from Marocco, by Camels: whose riches thereby acquired, appeare in the Letters of LawrenceHak tom. 2. Madoc. Madoc; and wee before haue touched.
Gago is much frequented by Merchants, and things are sold at excessiue rates. In an hundred  miles space you shall scarce find one in those parts that can reade, or write: and the King accordingly oppresseth them with taxations.
In Guber they sow their Corne on the waters; which Niger, with his ouerflowings brings vpon the Countrey, and haue aboundant recompence. Izchia, King of TombutoLeo, lib. 7. conquered the King of Guber; of Agadez also, and of Cano, which haue great store of Merchants: Likewise of Casena, and Zegzeg, and Zanfara; in which I finde little worth the remembrance. Cano hath some Relikes of Christianitie, and they are named by the Apostles names. Guangara was not onely oppressed by the said Izchia of Tombuto, but by Abraham King of Borno.
Borno confineth with Guangara on the West, and extendeth Eastwards fiue hundred miles. The people haue no Religion, neither Christian, Iewish, nor Mahumetane; but like  Beasts liue with their Wiues and Chrildren in common: and as a Merchant which liued long amongst them, and learned their Language, told Leo, they haue no properEuen our Ancestors, the Saxons had no surn mes, but by some accidents, as White, Long, Short, etc. And the Normans brought ouer their customes of naming men by the place of their habitation, as the Towne, Oake, Sty^e, or their Occupation. A^d in ancient Writings few proper names, but their Christian, may bee found. So the Roman C^assi Nasones, etc. Vid. Camb. Rem. Versteg Antiq. Lamb Peramb. of Kent. names, as in other Nations, but as they giue him some name on di^tinction by his height, fatnesse, or other peculiar accidents. The King warreth with his neighbours: hee is descended of the Libyan people Bardoa. For maintenance of his Warres he will giue great prices for Horses, exchanging fifteene or twentie Slaues for one, which Slaues he tooke from his enemies. When I was in this Kingdome, I found there many Merchants that were wearie of this Traffique, because they stayed for their Slaues till the King returned from his Warres. Yet the King Teemes to bee rich: all his Horse-furniture, Stirrops, Spurres, Bridles, Bits, were all of Gold; and his Dishes, Platters, or whatsoeuer he did eate or drinke in: yea, his Chaines for his Dogges  were for the most pa^t or most fine Gold. He hath many both white and blacke people, subject to him.
Gaoga bordereth Westward on Borno, and thence trendeth to Nubia, betweene the Desarts of Serta on the North, and another Desart confining on a winding crooke of Nilus, about fiue hundred miles square. It hath neither Ciuilitie Letters, nor Gouernment. The Inhabitants haue no vnderstanding, especially they which dwell in the Mountaines, who goe naked in the Summer-time, their priuities excepted. Their houses are made of boughes, which easily take fire. They haue store of Cattell. A hundreth yeeres before Leo's time they were brought in subjection by a Negro slaue, who first slew his Master, and by helpe of his  goods made preyes in the next Regions, exchanging his Captiues for Horses of Aegypt: and so became King of Gaoga. His Nephewes Sonne Homara then raigned, and was much respected by the Soldan of Cairo. Leo was at his Court, and found him a man passing liberall. He much honoured all that were of the linage of Mahomet.
The Nubae in olde times were many Kingdomes, asStrab. l. 17. Strabo affirmeth, not subject to the Aethiopians: and were then Nomades, or Wand^rers, and Robbers. As it is now taken (Iohn Leo being our Author) Nubia stretcheth from Gaoga vnto Nilus, hauing the Aegyptian Confines on the North; and the Desarts of Goran on the South. They cannot saile out of this Kingdome into Aegypt. For the Riuer Nilus, whiles it is couetous of largenesse, loseth his deepnesse, and couering certaine Plaines, becommeth so shallow, that both men and beasts may wade ouer. Dangala is their chiefe Towne, and hath ten thousand Families,  but ill built, their houses being Chalke and Straw. The Inhabitants with their traffique to Cairo become rich.

There is in this Kingdome great store of Corne and Sugar, Ciuit, Sandall, and Iuorie. They haue strong poyson, one graine whereof giuen to ten persons, will kill them all in a quarter of an houre; and one man, if he alone take it, presently. An ounce hereof is sold for an hundred Ducats. It is not sold but to strangers, which first take their oath that they will not vse it in their Countrey. And if any sell thereof secretly, it costs him his life: for the King hath as much for Custome, as the Merchant for price.F. Aluare. cap. 30. and 137.
SomeG Bot, Ben. Portugals trauelling thorow Nubia, saw many Churches ruined by the Arabians, and some Images. The Iewish and Mahumetan Superstition haue there almost preuailed. In old time they had Bishops sent them from Rome, which by meanes of the Arabians was after  hindered.
The Nubian King warreth with the Inhabitants of Goran, called Zingani; who speake a Language that none else vnderstand; and with others in the Desarts, on the other side of Nilus, towards the Red Sea, whose Language seemes to be mixt with the Chaldaean, and resembles the speech of Suachen, in the Countrey of Prester Iohn. They are called Bugiha, and liue very miserably. They had once a Towne on the Red Sea, called Zibid, whose Port answereth directly to that of Zidem, which is forty miles from Mecca. This Zibid for their robberies was destroyed by the Sultan. OrteliusOrtel. Theat. saith, that in Nubia they were sometimes Christian, and now are scarcely of any Religion at all. They sent into Prester Iohns Countrey for Priests, when Aluares d was there to repaire their almost ruined Christianitie, but without effect.
SanutusSanutus lib. 7. reckons here other Kingdomes, Gothan, Medra, Dauma, whereof because wee haue little but the names, I can write nothing.
Now if any would looke that we should heere in our Discourse of the Negro's assigne some cause of that their Blacke colour: I answere, that I cannot well answere this question, as being in it selfe difficult, and made more, by the varietie ofTheodect. ^pud Strabonem. l. 15. Plin lib. 2. c. 78. Macrob. in som. S^ip lib. 2. c. 10. Alexan Probl. 2 saith, that the heate of the Sun brings the naturall heate into the outward parts, and therby maketh them black of hue, and fearefull of heart: and more easily die of a Feuer then others, lib. 1. Caelius Rhod. hath a long disputation therof, lib. 10. ca. 15. but all his reasons may as well conclude of America, which yet are not blacke. Odoardo Lopez, and P. Pigofetta. in the storie of Congo, deny the Sun to bee the cause. Ramusius, in hi^ Discourse of the Red Sea, attributeth the colours of the people to the differing scite of places, as of Mountaines, low, wet, dry, etc. Some tel a tale of Chams knowing his Wife in the Arke, whervpon by diuine curse, his sonne Chus was black with all his Posteritie. answeres, that others giue hereunto. Some alleage the heate of this Torrid Region, proceeding from the direct beames of the Sunne; and why then should all the West Indies which stretch from the one Tropike to the other, haue no blacke people, excep^ a few in Quareca, which haply were not Naturals of the place? And if this were the cause; why should Africa yeeld white people in Melinde,  and neere the Line? blacker at the Cape of Good Hope in fiue and thirtie, then in Brasill vnder the Line? Some leauing the hot impressions in the Aire, attribute it to the drinesse of the Earth: as though the Libyan Desarts are not more dry (and yet the people no Negro's) and as though Niger were heere dried vp. Some to the hidden qualitie of the soyle; and why then are the Portugals children and generations white, or Mulatos at most, that is, tawnie, in Saint Thomee, and other places amongst them, as also the Inhabitants of Melinde, Madagascar, and other places, in the same height, in and adioyning to Africa? Some ascribe it (as Herodotus) to the blacknesse of the Parents Sperme or Seed; and how made they the search to know the colour thereof, which if it hath (a thing by others denied) by what reason should it imprint this colour on the skinne? And how comes it that they are reddish at their birth,  yellowish in age? Some ascend aboue the Moone, to call some heauenly Constellation and Influence into this Consistorie of Nature; and there will I leaue them: yea, I will send them further to Him that hath reserued many secrets of Nature to himselfe, and hath willed vs to content our selues with things reuealed. As for secret things, both in Heauen and Earth, they belong to the Lord our God, whose holy Name be blessed for euer, for that he hath reuealed to vs things most necessary, both for body and soule, in the things of this life, and that which is to come. His incomprehensible Vnitie, which the Angels with couered faces in their Holy, Holy, Holy-Hymnes resound and Laude in Trinitie, hath pleased in this varietie to diuersifie his workes, all seruing one humane nature, infinitely multiplied in persons, exceedingly varied in accidents, that we also might serue thatVnu^ and sidici potest vnissimus. Bernard. One-most God: that theVid. Poly. olb. tawnie Moore, blacke  Negro, duskie Libyan, Ash-coloured Indian, Oliue-coloured American, should, with the whiter Europaean become one sheep-fold, vnder one Great Sheepheard, till this mortalitie being swallowed vp of life, wee may allIohn 17.22. bee one, as Hee and the Father are one; and (all this varietie swallowed vp into an ineffable vnity) only the Language of Canaan bee heard, onely the Fathers name written in their foreheads, the Lambes song in their mouthes, the victorious Palmes in their hands, their long Robes being made white in the bloud of the Lambe, whom they follow whither soeuer He goeth, filling Heauen and Earth with their euerlasting Halleluiahs, without any more distinction of Colour, Nation, Language, Sexe, Condition,Apoc. 7. and 14. all may be One in him that  is One, and only blessed for euer. Amen.






RELATIONS OF THE  REGIONS AND RELIGIONS IN AFRICA.  OF AETHIOPIA, AND THE AFRICAN ILANDS; AND OF THEIR RELIGIONS. THE SEVENTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of Aethiopia Superior, and the Antiquities thereof.

@. I.  Of the name and diuision of Aethiopia.
OVt of Nubia we needed neither Palinurus helpe, nor Charon, to set vs on the Aethiopian Territory: the Sea is farre distant, and the Riuer Nilus which parteth them (whether loth to mixe his fresh waters, with the Seas saltnesse, or fearing to fall downe those dreadfullThe falls of Nilus downe from steepe Rocks. Cataracts, or dreading the multitude of Pits, which the Egyptians make in his way to intrap him) heere sheweth his vnwillingnesse to passe further forward; and distracted with these passions,  hath almost lost his Channell, diffusing himselfe in such lingering and heartlesse manner, as Man and Beast dare here insult on his Waters; and I also haue aduentured to take the aduantage of these shallowes, and wade ouer into this anciently renowmed Aethiopia. The name Aehiopia came from Aethiops,A^thiopia dicta a Coryneta, Aethiope Vnicani, F.N com. l. 2. the sonne of Vulcan: before, it had beene called Aetheria, and after that Atlantia.Lydiat. in emend. Temp. Lydiat deriueth Aethiopia of Ai, and Thebets, the Land of, or beyond Thebais, which was called Aegyptus Superior, next to Aethiopia. Chytraeus saith, it is deriued of (...), splendeo, and (...) visus; of the Sunnes burning presence. Two Aethiopia's are found in Africke, as PliniePlin. l. 5. c. 8. witnesseth out of Homer (so ancient is the diuision) the Easterne and Westerne. And this partition is by some  still followed, as namely byOsor. de rebus gest. Emanuelis, lib. 4. Osorius. Others diuide the same into the Asiatike and African. Author hereof is HerodotusHerod. l. 7. in his Pocyhimnia, which reckoneth two sorts of Aethiopians in Xerxes huge Armie; the Easterne mustered vnder the Indian Standards; the other of Africa
 by themselues, differing from the former in Language, and their curled haire. EusebiusEuseb Chron. in A.M. 3580. mentioneth Aethiopians neere the Riuer Indus. And to let passe PausaniasPa^san. l. 6. in fine. his search among the Seres, or PhilostratusPhilostrat. l. 3. de vit. Ap. at Ganges, for some Asian Aethiopians; the Scriptures seeme to mention an Aethiopia in Asia. For Cush, the sonne of Cham (of whom IosephusIo. Ant. l. 1. c. 6 saith the Aethiopians called themselues, and were called by others, Chusaei) was Author not onely of the Aethiopians in Africa, but of many peoples of Arabia also in Asia, as MosesGen. 10. Vide Annot Tremel. and Inn. relateth. And hence perhaps it was that MiriamNum. 12. and Exod. 2. and Aaron contended with Moses for his Wife Zippora, because she was an Aethiopian. And yet was she a Midianite: but called an Aethiopian, in respect of the neighbour-hood which Midian had to Aethiopia Orientalis, as VatablusF. Vat^blus in Num. 12. obserueth out of the Iewish Writers; or for that Midian is also assigned to Aethiopia, taken in a  larger sense, as saithGenebr. Chro. pag 71. Genebrard. Iunius saith, because the Midianites dwelt in that Region which was assigned to Cush. Aethicus in his CosmographyAe^hic. cum Simleri notis. affirmeth, that Tygris burieth it selfe, and runneth vnder ground in Aethiopia; which Simlerus interpreteth of Arabia: for otherwise Tygris washeth no part of Africa.
Saint AugustineAug de Mirabil. sac. Scriptu^ae, l. 1. affirmeth, that the Region Northwards from the Red Sea, and so euen to India, was called Aethiopia Orientalis. This distinction is still acknowledged by laterF. Ribera. com. in Sophon. c. 3.
L^ra in Gloss. Num. 12.Caluen. in comment. Num. 12. Chytraeus in Onomastico. Writers. And therefore it is needlesse to fetch Moses a Wife out of Aethiopia beneath Egypt to interpret that place. For soIos. An^. l. 2. Iosephus as wee shall after see, telleth of a Wife which Moses in his prosperitie, before his flight, married from thence.
This obseruation is very necessary, because the Scriptures often mention Aethiopia, when  no part of Africa can beGibins in Gen. 2. q. 6. v. 5. vnderstood, as Genes. 2.13. where one of the Riuers of Paradise is said to compasse the whole Land of Cush, or Aethiopia. And so in other places, Cush, or Aethiopia. Learned IuniusIun. in Gen. 2. Praelection^b. obserueth, that Cush is either a proper name, as Genes. 10. or common to the people that came of him: it is also a name attributed to the three Arabia's, to the two (African) Aethiopia's, and to all the Southerne tract by the Persian Gulfe.
Leauing that Asian Aethiopia, which already wee haue handled vnder other names, wee will now proceed in our African iourney, where we find inPtol. l. 4. c. 6. and 7. Ptolemie not so exact description thereof, as in later Geographers, being then in the greatest part vnknowne.Maginus. Maginus maketh Aethiopia to containe two of those seuen parts, whereinto he diuideth Africa: one of which he calleth Aethiopia Superior; and Interior, which for the most part is subiect vnto the  Christian Prince, called in Europe Priest or Prester Iohn: the other, Inferior and Exterior, is all that Southerly part of Africa, which was not knowne to the Ancients. This doth not altogether agree with Homers,Hom. Odyss. in initio. diuision (whose GeographieStrab. l. 1. per totum. Strabo hath so largely trauersed and admired.) For how could Homer, or any in his time attaine to the knowledge of those remote parts? Neither yet may we reiect that renowmed Poet, seeing this partition may serue vs now in the better discouerie of places, where we may reckon all that to the Westerly Aethiopia, which from Guinea stretcheth to the Cape of Good Hope; and thence to the Red Sea Northwards, to the Easterly; Nilus, and a line from the head thereof vnto the aforesaid Cape, being the Arbiter in this diuision. But to let passe this curiositie in caruing, when all is like to be eaten, we will begin at Aethiopia vnder Egypt, and so take the Countries in our  way, going from the Red Sea, till hauing doubled the Cape, we come from the Abassine Christians, to those of Congo on the Aethiopian Ocean.
Aethiopia sub Aegypto (so the GeographersPtol. l. 4. c. 7. Dom. Niger. Aphric. com. 4. call this part) hath on the North, Egypt; on the West, Libya Interior; on the South Aethiopia Agisimba; on the East, the Red and Barbarian Seas, to the Promontory Raptum, which OrteliusOrtel. Thesau. placeth about Quiloa, PorieMercat. Tab. vniuersalis. Porie before Leo. cals it Quilimanci: Mercator interprets Magala. The Abissine Empire is by our lateOrtel. Theat. Maginus. Description of the World. Writers intended further, receiuing for the Southerne limits, the Mountaines of the Moone; and for the Westerne, the Kingdome of Congo, the Riuer Niger and Nubia: and therefore contayneth Aethiopia sub Aegypto, and besides Trogloditica, Cinnamomifera Regio, and part of the inner Libya. True it is, that the Great Neguz his titles comprehend thus much, yet rather  as a monument of what he hath had, then an euidence of what hee hath: The Turkes in the North, the Mores on the West, and others other-where circumcising this circumcised Abissine: and now according toG. Bot. Ben. Io; di Carros. Boterus and Barrius, the Lake Barcena is the Center of his Dominion. But euen still FrierF. Luys histor. de Ethiopia. Luys de Vrreta, giues him both all before named and more. The name Abissine or Abassine, which is giuen to this Region, NigerDom. Niger. deriueth from the Egyptian word Abases, which (StraboStrab. l. 17. reporteth) they gaue to all inhabited places, compassed with great Desarts, and situate therein, in manner as the Ilands in the Sea: three of which Abases, he saith, were subiect to the Egyptians. ScaligerScal. Em. T. pag. 638. saith, that the Arabians call these Aethiopians Elhabaschi, whence they are vsually named Abassines; and this with him is an argument, that they are not Natiues of the place, but thither deriued out of Arabia. For the Abaseni  are by Vranius (in Stephanus) placed in Arabia Thurifera: whose words are these;Step. in dictione (...). (...),
 (...), etc. This haue I inserted out of Stephanus for satisfying the more iudicious. Scaliger addeth that the Language in which their Ecclesiasticall and sacred Bookes are written, is as farre from the true Ethiopicke, as the Dutch or Italian. The tongue is most elegant, if care and diligence be added: and is called Libertie, because the Arabian Conquerors (therefore only free) did vse it. The Ethiopians themselues call it Chaldee; yet is it neerer the Hebrew then the Chaldee: it is onely learned by Booke, and of their Priests. They indeed haue other Histories of themselues, from the floud downewards, but whereto a man must not rashly giue credit. They call themselues Ethiopians.
 To take now some exacter view of these parts; leauing thoseVide Munster. in fine l. 6. Iewish monstrous Fables of Monsters of threescore and ten cubits, and their great lyes of the little Pigmey-Christianes with such other stuffe, fit for them to write, who are iustly credulous of2. Thes. 2.12. lyes, because they beleeued not truth: let vs see what others haue written, both of the people and place; and first of the first, and most ancient Relations.


@. II. Of the Nations neere the Falls of Nilus, and  of Meroe.
THe Cataracts or Falls of Nilus, which separate Ethiopia from Egypt, are by the most Authors reckoned two, the greater and the lesse: Stephanus addeth a third at Bonchis, an Ethiopian City. These are Mountaines which incroch vpon the Riuer, and with their loftie lookes and vndermining trecherie, hauing drawne vp the Earth, which should affoord him a Channell, into their swelling and ioynt conspiracie, as with a mixt passion of feare and disdaine, make the waters in their haste and strife ouerthrow themselues downe those steepe passages: the billowes bellowing and roaring so terribly  with the Fall, that the Inhabitants (as someThis reporteth Cicero in som. Scip. and cal^ these falls Catadupae. affirme) which dwell neere, are thereby made deafe: and the Riuer amazed and dizzie, whirles it selfe about, forgetting his tribute to Neptune, till forced by his owne following waters, hee sets, or rather is set forward on his iourney.
They areIoan. Bermudesius in Legat. Aethiopica. now called Catadhi, which signifieth noyse, of those dreadfull and hideous out-cries, which there are caused. Thus saith Bermudesius of those Falls in the Kingdome of Goiar^^, which rush downe from a Rocke almost halfe a league high, and steepe, sounding like Thunder.
Betwixt these Falls and Meroe, StraboStrab. l. 17. placeth the Troglodytae, of which we haue alreadie spoken: and the Blemmyes Nubae and Megabari. They are Nomades, without Towne  or habitation, and addicted to robbery. ProcopiusProcop. de Bello Persuo. l. ^ testifieth, that these were accustomed to doe much damage on the Romane Confines: and therefo^e Dioclesian brought them out of their barren Territories, and gaue them Elephantina, and the Region adioyning for habitation, communicating to them the Roman Rites and Superstitions, and built the Citie Philas, in hope of future friendship. Coelum non animam; they changed the Soyle not the Soule, but were no lesse iniurious to Oasis, and other the Romane subiects. They worshipped some Gods, borrowed of the Graecians; Isis, and Osiris, of the Egyptians; and Priapus. The Blemmyes also offered humane Sacrifices, with cruell inhumanitie, to the Sunne, till Iustinians time, who tooke away those bloudie deuotions. As for the tale that those Blemmyes wanted heads, and had their eyes and mouthes in their brests, the Authors had either no eyes to  see the truth, or more head then they should to deuise lyes: as we may say of other shapelesse and monstrous shapes of people, whichPlin. l. 5. c. 8. and 6. c. 29. Plinie and Solinus, out of other Authors report, to inhabit these vnknowne parts: some wanting lips, some nostrils, some tongues, or mouthes, etc. indeed all wanting truth. Rather would I counsell the studious of Geographie, to learne the names of the Peoples and Nations of these Regions, of Plinie and Solinus: which because we haue but names of them, I forbeare to name.
Meroe doth inuite mee to a longer entertainment, being an Iland which Nilus with louely embraces claspeth about, according to Iosephus and Cedrenus; sometimes called Saba, as now also the Abissines name it; the Egyptians call it Naule Babe; the Inhabitants, Neube, our Maps, Guegere; to which Theuet addeth more,Iouij. Girauae, Marmolij, etc. Opiniones lege apud Ortelium in Thesauro. if not more then truth. The Iland, afterHeliodor. h^st. Ae^hiop^ca, l. 10.  Heliodorus (the Bishop of Tricca) his description, is three square, each of which triangle limits are made by three Riuers, Astaboras, and Asasoba: (Strabo cals it Astapus, and Astosabus) this from the South, that from the East drowning their names and waters with Nilus; i^
 it is in length three thousand furlongs, in bredth a thousand, plentifull of Elephants, Lions, Rhinocerotes, Corne, and Trees, besides her hidden treasures, and Mynes of Iron, Brasse, Siluer, Gold, and Salt. It hath also Heben wood, as LucanLucanus. singeth, Laeta comis Hebeni. It receiued that nameNiger. com. Apb. 4. of Moroe, sister of Cambyses, or afterEusebius. Eusebius, of Merida, the Mother of Chenephris, King of Egypt. They worshipped a Barbarian God, and besides, Pan, Hercules, and Isis.Strab. l. 17. It was before called Saba, saith I. Antq. l. 2. They cast their dead into the Riuer, others reserued them at home in glasse shrines, others in earthen receptacles buried them neere to their Temples. They esteemed them for Gods, and sware by them. They ordained him King, who excelled in strength, or in person, or in husbandry of cattell, or in wealth. Their Priests enioyed the chiefe ranke of honour, who sending their Herald or Messenger, enioyned the King his death, and set vp another  in his roome. At length a certaine King abolished this custome, and rushing with his armed Souldiers into their Temple, where was a golden Chappell, slue all those Priests. This was at Meroe the head Citie of the Iland, where (PausaniasPausan. l. 1. sayth) they shewed the Table of the Sunne, and that they were the iustest men of all the Ethiopians.
Concerning that Table, and the expedition of CAMBYSES into these partes, HERODOTVSHerod. Thalia l. 3. related), that CAMBYSES designed at once three inuasions; against the Carthaginians, the Ammonians, and Macrobians (all in Africa.) These last haue their names of their long liues, which they draw forth farre beyond the vsuall course. Hee placeth them on the South shores of Africa, but MelaPomp. Mel. l. 3. 1. 10. in Meroe: Seneca, Plinie, and Solinus beyond. That Table of the Sunne, Herodotus and Mela thus describe. Neere to the Citie was  a place alwayes furnished with varietie of rosted meates, there set in the night by the Magistrates, and eaten on the day by such as listed, and therefore of this open feasting, called the Suns Table: whom the ignorant people also thought to be the Cater of these dainties. Cambyses sent an Embassage vnto the King with presents, but principally to espie the Countrey; whom the Ethiopian requited with a Bow, and bade that the Persians should then inuade the Macrobians, when they were able to shoot in such Bowes: thanking God that hee was contented with his owne. And because he had sent him golden Chaines, he asked to what vse they were; they said, for ornaments: hee answered with smiling, thinking them to bee Chaines for punishment, That he had stronger fetters then those. The like account hee made of his Purple Robes, Oyntments, and Wine: and asked further what the Persians eate: and  when they told him bread made of Wheate (the nature whereof they declared) and withall, that the oldest Persians exceeded not fourescore yeeres: hee said, that it was no maruell of their short life, that fed vpon dung: neither could they liue so long, were it not for that drinke of Wine which they vsed; it was not extraordinaryValer. Max. there to attaine to a hundred and twenty yeeres, their meate was boyled flesh, and their drinke Milke. Hee brought them to a Fountaine, wherein being bathed, they smelled as of Violets, it was so subtile that nothing could swimme thereon, not wood, or other lighter matter: this water was supposed to lengthen their liues. He brought them also to the Prisons, where they saw many manacled and bound with Chaines of Gold. Lastly, hee shewed them their Sepulchres made of Glasse, in this manner: After they haue embalmed the dead Corps, they anoint it with a  kind of pargetting mortar, and then put it in a case or coffin of Glasse, through which it shineth, and is apparant without any ill sauour. This they keepe one yeere in the house, offering thereto Sacrifices, and the first fruits of all things: and then carrie it out of the Citie. Thus farre Herodotus. Wherein, that which some Penny-father would most admire, their golden setters how common and rife is it in another sort with vs? euery couetous Miser, manacling, fettering, strangling himselfe with his Gold, in shew his ornament, in affect his God, in effect his Deuill, Iaylor, Chaines, and Hell. The Macrobij (Mela addeth) vsed Brasse for honour, Gold for punishments.
Of the Table of the Sunne before mentioned, thus writeth Friar Luys de Vrreta,Luys de Vr. hist. de la Aethiopia. l. 1. c. 2. in that his large History which hee hath composed in Spanish, of Ethiopia: that the King in a  curious brauerie, and sumptuous vanitie, caused there to bee set by night in a certaine field store of white bread, and the choysest Wines, hanged also on the Trees; great varietie of Fowles, rost and boyled, and set on the ground, Mutton, Lambe, Veale, Beefe, with many other dainties ready dressed. Trauellers and hungry persons which came hither and found this abundance, seeing no bodie which prepared, or which kept the same, ascribed it to Iupiter Hospitalis his bounty and hospitality, shewing himselfe a Protector of poore Trauellers, and called this field the Table of the Sunne. The report hereof passed through the World, and brought many Pilgrims from farre Countries, to visit the same. King Cambyses sent his Embassadors to see it. Plato the Prince of Philosophers hauing trauelled through Asia as farre as Caucasus and gone also to the Brachmanes, to see and heare Hiarchas in a Throne of Gold, amongst  a few Disciples, disputing of Natures Mysteries, and discoursing of the Starres and Planets, returned by the Persians, Babylonians, Arabians, and other Nations, and entred into
 Aethiopia, led with desire to see this renowmed Table, and to eate of those delicacies. The Aethiopians, since their Christianity, in zealous detestation of Idolatry, will not so much as name this field, and these ancient Rites, and giue in charge to the Priests at this day, that they handle not or create of the like vanities, because they were inuentions of Idolaters. CaeliusCael. Rbod l. 10 Rbodiginus affirmeth, that this Table of the Sunne grew into a Prouerbe, to signifie a House well furnished and prouided. Thus farre Fryer Luys: I doubt, farther then wee may safely follow in that of Plato's Pilgrimage hither.
Of the Pillar of Semiramis is before spoken out of the relation of Xenophon de Aequiuocis: concerning which, and his other companions and brethren, howsoeuer Posseuinus, Goro^ius,  and others doe reproue Annius for abusing the World with those glorious TitlesBeros. Metasihenes. Cato, Manetho, etc. and Ancient names, and proue them to bee counterfeit: yet in my mind that of Xenophon seemeth to fauour of some truth (whether of antiq^ity or no, I meddle not) and that more then others of the same Edition. In that Pillar consecrated to the memory of Ninus the Inscription testifieth, that Cush or Cuz was the Aethiopian Saturne; as Cham the Egyptian; and Nimrod the Babylonian. When CushF. Luys l. 1. c. 3 was dead, they say, Regma his Sonne succeeded in the Aethiopian Kingdome, and after him Dodan, after whose time is no record of certaine succession. Diodorus sayth, they chose him which wa^ most comely of personage for their King. Memnon is chanted by Homer and the Poets, which lost his life at Troy in defence of Priamus, and was (some say) King of Aethiopia. Of the speaking Image of Memnon, yee haue seene in our  Egyptian Relations. As for the wife of Moses, whereof IosephusIos. ant. l. 2. Zon Annal. to. 1. Cedren. sayth, That the Ae^hiopians hauing ouer-runne, and almost subdued Egypt, and none daring to make head against them, Mose (whom Thermutis Pharaohs daughter, had brought vp) was chosen Generall of the Egyptian Army, which he conducted into Aethiopia, and comming to the siege of Saba, Tharbis the Aethiopian Kings daughter fell in loue with him, and sent her Seruants to intreat of a Marriage with him: which hee accepted, vpon condition of deliuering the Towne vnto him; and that being done, married her: all this seemeth rather to be a Iewish Fable, thinking thereby to credit their Law-giuer, then agreeing to Moses, the Truth, and Scripture; and might haply arise from that speech, That MosesNum. 12.1. his wife was an Aethiopian; of which wee haue spoken alreadie. Neyther is it likely that Moses would accept of Treason for the dowry  with his wife, sealed with the bloud and ouerthrow of her Countrey and Citizens. And yet from hence doe some deriueHector. Boet. hist. Scot. the originall of their Nation. After the Father of this supposed Tharbis, Derianus is said to raigne; who valiantly withstood Bacchus (which is thought to be Osiris, the Egyptian King, and after, their God) when he inuaded Egypt with in Army. Diodorus mentioneth Actisanes, a King of Aethiopia. Cepheus also is numbred in that Royall Catalogue: but of all,Suidas. Ganges was most famous, who with his Aethiopian Armie passed into Asia, and conquered all as farre as the Riuer Ganges, to which hee left that name, being beforePlut. de Flum. called Chliaros. Hee conquered as farre also to the West, vnto the Atlantike Ocean, and gaue name to the Country of Guinea; which name, someF. Luy^ say, is corrupted of Gangina, the name it had receiued of Ganges. These things are written by some, and I wil  not swear for the truth, as safely we may do for that which the Scripture me^tioneth of some of their Kings, in the dayes of Asa and Hezekiah, Kings of Iuda; whose puissance then was such, that2. Chron. 14.9 Zerah brought into the field a Million of men: and Tirrhaca was Corriuall vnto proude and2. Kings 19. blasphemous Sennacherib, in sute for the Monarchy of the Wo^ld. But whether he came out of this Aethiopia, or any other parts of Asia or Africke, is not very certaine. Before that time the Aethiopians had warred vnder Shishak King of Egypt, whom some takeRibera in Soph. 2. for Sesostris. The Babylonians in Nabuchodonosors time conquered Egypt and Aethiopia, asLauat. in Ez. 30. Est. 8. some expound the Prophesie of Ezechiel. And the Persian Empire extended from India to Aethiopia.Agath. ap. Phot. 250. Agatharchides writeth, that the Inhabitants on both sides the Riuer Astabara,  liue on Roots dryed in the Sunne: they are much infested with Lions, and not lesse with a lesse creature, but greater Enemy, the Gnats, which driue them to hide themselues in the waters from their fury, when the Dogge-starre ariseth; which, with these his Armies of Gnats bayteth the Lions also, whom their buzzing and humming noyse chase out of the Country. He speaketh of other their Neighbours which feed on the tops of twigs, running and leaping on the trees, and from bough to bough with incredible agility: others dwell on trees for feare of wild beasts, on whose flesh and in want thereof, on their hides, they liue; as Ostriches, Elephants, Grashoppers are the daily dyet to others: to which he addes the Cynamolgi, which are nourished with the Milke of Bitches of which they haue great Heards;  which perhaps our Reader will nor beleeue, neyther can I force him.




CHAP. II. A continuation of the Aethiopian Antiquities and of the Queene of Saba.
HEliodorus in his Historie (which although for the substance it be fayned, as a loue Discourse, yet must hold resemblance with things done) and for the variety and conceit thereof, commended by that learnedPhil. Melanct. in Epist. ad Operium. German Philip; and  by our EnglishSir P. Sidney. Philip (the Prince of Potsie) imitated in his Arcadia; telleth of Hydaspes his Ethiopian King, that after his victory at Syene, and hauing there performed his deuotions, and seene their Niloscopium (like to that at Memphis, and now at Cairo) and enquired the originals of their Feasts, and holy rites done in honour of that Riuer: whenHeliod. histor. Aethiop. l. 9. and 10. he came to the Cataracts, hee sacrificed to Nilus, and the Gods of the Borders. He then sent Messengers to the Wisemen, whom hee calleth Gymnosophistes, which are the Kings Counsellers, at Meroe, to certifie them of his victory, and to call a publike Assembly wherein to gratifie the Gods for the same, with Sacrifices and solemne pompes, in the field consecrated to the Sunne, the Moone, and Bacchus. Persina, the Queene, deliuered those Letters to the Gymnosophistes, who dwelt by themselues in a Groue,  consecrated to Pan: and before they would giue answere, consulted with the Gods by prayer, and then Sisimitres the chiefe of them promised all should bee fulfilled. The Sacrifices were to be done to the Sunne and Moone, and therefore, except Persina the Queene, which was Luna's Priest, no woman, for feare of contaminating the Holies of those Pure and Bright Deities, might be present. Hydaspes was Priest of the Sunne. Much preparation was made of Beasts for their Hecatombe's and much concourse of people crossing the Riuer in those Boats of Canes or Reeds. There were presented the Images of their Gods, Memnon, Perseus, and Andromeda: and nigh to them sate the Gymnosophista. Three Altars were erected; two ioyntly to the Sunne and Moone, a third to Bacchus by himselfe; to him they offered all sorts of Beasts; to Sol, white Chariot-horses; to the Moone, a yoke of Oxen. And when  al things were ready the people with shouts demanded the Sacrifice, which vsually was accustomed for the health of their Nation: That was, some of the strangers taken in the wars to be offered: First, triallOur English and the German Histories mention the like cleering of Adultery by going with bare feet on burning plowshares. Bale. was made by Spits of Gold, heated with fire, brought out of the Temple, whether the Captiues had euer knowne carnall copulation, for treading on the same with their bare feete, such as were pure Virgins receiued no harme, others were scorched. These were offered in Sacrifice to Bacchus; the other, to those purer Deities. These things haue I here inserted, not as done, but as like to such things, which among the Meroites were vsed to be done, and agreeing with the generall deuotions of those Aethiopians. PhilostratusPhilost. de vita Apollonque lib. 6. cap. 4. reporteth like matters of their Gymnosophists, and of the Groue where they kept their generall consultations: otherwise, each of them by themselues apart, obseruing  their studies and holies. They worshipped Nilus, intending in their mysticall interpretation the Earth and the Water. They entertayned strangers in the open Ayre. Thesphesion was then (in Apollonius his time) chiefe of their societie. At his command, an Elme did speake. They held the Immortality of the soule. The Aethiopians sacrificed to Memnon and to the Sunne.
Lucian, after his scoffing manner gratulates the Aethiopians that fauour, which Iupiter vouchsafed them, in going on feasting, accompanied with the rest of the Gods, and that twelue dayes together, if HomerHom. Isiad. and Lucian. de sacri. reckoned truly. But moreIdem. de Astrologia. seriously elsewhere hee vnfoldeth that Mystery, shewing that the Aethiopians were Inuenters of Astrologie, helped  therein by the cleerenesse of the Skie in that Region, and like temperature of the seasons. Of them the Egyptians learned, and furthered that Science. In his TreatiseIdem de Saltatione. of Dancing, he affirmeth, that the Aethiopians vsed their haire in stead of a Quiuer, and neuer drew Arrow from thence to shoot in battle, but with a dancing gesture.
DiodorusD. Sic. l. 4. c. 1.Siculus telleth, that the Aethiopians were accounted most ancient of all other men: and that not onely Humanitie, but Diuinity, was borne and bred amongst them: Solemnities, Pompes, Holies, and Religious Rites, were their Inuention. And therefore (saith he) Homer brings in Iupiter feasting with the Aethiopians. The reward of their pietie, was the Immunity of their Region from forreine Conquests.Macro. in Somn. Scip. l. 2. cap 10. Macrobius interpreteth Iupiters Banket with the Aethiopians, of that Ocean, which Antiquitie imagined to bee vnder all the Torrid Zone, that the fiery bodies of the Starres, supposed to bee nourished with moysture,  might there quench their thirst. So would those good men drowne a great part of the
 African and American World, in hospitality to the Starres, by their imagined middle, earth Ocean: which experience hath now sufficiently confuted.
Cambyses attempted and lost his Armie, and Semiramis entred, but soone returned: Hercules and Dionysius ouer-ran the rest of the World; the Aethiopians eyther for their deuotion they would not, or, for their strength, could not conquer. The Egyptians, some say, were Colonies from hence; yea, Egypt it selfe the dregges of that soyle, which Nilus carrieth out of Aethiopia.
The Aegyptians borrowed of the Ethiopians, to esteeme their Kings as Gods, and to haue such care of their Funerals, the vse of Statues and their Hieroglyphicall Letters. PieriusPicr. Hieroglyphica. and  others haue written therof at large. Their best men they chose for their Priests: and he among them, who, when the God is carried about, shall be possessed with some Bacchanall furie, is chosen King as by diuine appointment, and is of them worshipped as a God. His gouernment is gouerned by Lawes. They doe not put a Malefactor to death, but an Officer is sent to him with the signe of death,The like is vsed in Iapan. whereupon he goeth home and slayeth himselfe. One would haue fled out of his Countrey; but the Mother of the Malefactor killed him, because he would not after his Country manner kill himselfe.
The Priests in Meroe exercised this authoritie (as is before said) ouer their Kings, and would send them word, that the Oracles of the Gods commanded them to die, neither might they reiect the diuine dispensation: and thus with arguments, not with armes, they perswaded  them to a voluntary death. But in the time of Ptolomeus Secundus, King of Egypt, King Ergamenes well skilled in the Greeke Sciences, and Philosophie, reiected that Superstition. They say, that the custome yet (till Diodorus time) remayneth, that if the King bee maymed, or by some accident want any member, his Courtiers also will depriue themselues of the same. Yea when the King dyed, his friends thought it good fellowship to dye with him, esteeming that death glorious, and the surest testimony of friendship.
The AethiopiansDiod Sic. Strabo l. 17. dwelling neerer to Arabia, armed their women in their warres, till they attained to a certaine age: the most of which ware a Ring of Brasse in their lip. They which dwelt further vp into the Countrey, were diuersly conceited of the Gods: For some they thinke immortall, as the Sunne, Moone, and the World: some mortall; as Pan, Hercules,  Iupiter, for their vertues exalted to that dignitie. Strabo tels it in the singular number, that they thought that God to bee immortall, which is the cause of all things. Their mortall God was vncertaine, and wanted name: but they most commonly esteemed their Kings and Benefactors, for Gods. Some that inhabit neerer the Line, worshipped no Gods: and were much offended with the Sunne, and hiding themselues in the Fennes, cursed him when hee did rise. These things you may reade gathered out of Diodorus, and Strabo,Laurentij Coruini Geograph. Io. Boemus de morib. gentium. Drandius in Solinum. Fr. Thamara de las Costumbras de todas las Gentes. in Coruinus, Boemus, Draudius, and Thamaia, with some other additions. Sardus saith,Sardus de morib. gentium. l. 1. cap. 10. that the Aethiopians were Circumcised; as were also (besides the Iewes, Egyptians, and Arabians) the Trogloditae, Macrones Creophagi, and Inhabitants of Thermodoon.
As we haue shewed of the Macrobij, or long-liued Aethiopians, so there were others called  Brachobij, of their shorter liues, whereof were reckoned two sorts: the Sidonij neere to the Red Sea, and the Erembi, which somePlut. de placitis Philosoph. take for the Trogloditae. They liue not aboue forty yeeres. PlutarchRaph. Volaeterranus Geograph. l. 12. out of Asclepeiades reporteth the like, saying, that they were old men at thirty yeeres. The same AuthorId. de non irascendo. telleth that they and the Arabians could not indure Mice: and that the Persian Magi did likewise, esteeming them Creatures odious to God. AlexanderGen. dierum l. 2. 25. c. 30. ab Alexandro writeth, concerning the education of their Children, that, the Aethiopians seared their new borne Infants in the foreheads, to preuent the distillations of Rheumes from the braine. And when they are somewhat growne, they make tryall of their forwardnesse, by setting them on the backes of certaine Fowles, on which if they sit in their flying, without feare, they bring them vp very carefully: but if they shrinke and quake  with feare, they expose them as a degenerate issue, vnworthy education: Their Letters they wrote not side-wayes, after the Greeke or Hebrew manner, but after the present Chinian custome, downwards. They had seuen Characters, euery of which had foure significations. What manner of writing they now vse, appeareth inDam. a Goes. Zaga Zabo de fide Aethiopium. Damianus a Goez, or of Zaga Zabo rather, an Aethiopian Bishop, in his Treatise of their Religion, done into Latine by Damianus: but more fully in IosephusIos. Scalig. de Emend. l. 7. See Lyturg. Aethiop. in Biblioth. patrum. Scaliger de Emendatione Temporum, who hath lent vs a long Tractate in that language and writing, with the same words expressed in Hebrew and Latine Characters, and the interpretation of them also into Latine, in foure seuerall Columnes. He that listeth to reade some Philosophicall speculations of Nature in these Aethiopians, wherein they differ, and wherefore, from others, let him reade CoeliusCoel. R. l c. 16. 15. l. 9. 23. Rhodiginus of  that Argument: hee sayth, that they were expert in naturall Magicke. NicephorusNiceph. hist. Eccles. l. 9. c. 18. writes, that Alexander the Great sent Assyrian Colonies into Aethiopia, which many Ages after kept their owne Language, and like enough their Religion. The Nations of Aethiopia, which
 are farre distant from Nilus, areDom. Niger. said to liue a miserable and beastly life, not discerning in their lust, Mother, Daughter, or any other name of kinred. Of their ancient exploits, wee haue no continued Historie.
About the time of Christ, it appeareth that Candace was Queene of Ethiopia. Shee was a manly Virago, as Strabo testifieth, who liued at the same time, and followed Aelius Gallus in this Expedition. Hee forced Candace to send her Ambassadours to Augustus for peace, which shee obtayned. SextusSexti Vict. Augustus. Victor mentioneth this Ethiopian ambassage. Plinie saith, the name Candace continued to the Ethiopian Queenes many successions; whence perhaps Diesserus collecteth, that Ethiopia was gouerned onely by Queenes. Dioclesian relinquished that part of Ethiopia, which the Romanes held beyond Egypt, as not able to beare the charges.  IustinianProc^p. de Bello Persico, l. 1. sent his Ambassadours vnto Hellistans the Ethiopian King, and to Esimiphaens King of the Homerites, his Arabian neighbour, to aide him against the Persian. This Hellisthaeus had warred against the Homerites for quarrell of Religion, because they were many of them Iewes, and others Gentiles, himselfe being a Christian, and because they made many forrages into the Christian Countries. He so farre preuailed, as hee made that Esimiphaeus, a Christian, their King: whose yoke they shooke off soone after: and Abram, a slaue, vsurped the State. He had beene seruant to a Romane at Adulis, a Citie of Ethiopia, worthy mention especially in this matter for the ominous prosperitie of seruants. For the Citie it selfe was built by fugitiue seruants, which ranne from their Egyptian Masters: and this Abram a seruant there, obtayned to be a King: neither could the Ethiopian with all his might  depose him. The likePauli Diaconi Iustinus. ambassage to Archetas King of Ethiopia was sent by Iustinus for and against the Persian: both which I mention, to shew the greatnesse at that time of his State, nothing comparable notwithstanding to that which after befell them. Among the Ethiopian Antiquities, Plato testifies, as OrosiusOros. l. 1 c. 9. cites him, that many plagues and vncouth diseases infested, and almost altogether destroyed Ethiopia, about that time that Bacchus inuaded India. If any delight himselfe in such Legendarie drosse as the counterfeitAbdias Bab. Apostolicae hist. lib. 7. Abdias, set forth by Wolfgangus Lazius, hath in it, touching the Magicians and Enchantments, and some other ceremonies of Ethiopia, I am loth to blot my paper with them: not because we are not certaine of the truth (for in others we may be deceiued) but because wee are certaine of the errors, so grosse, that they may be seene and felt. Maruell thatWolfg. Laius. Lazius an Historian,  would with his Notes illustrate such a hotchpotch of darknesse. And yet our CountrimanIewel and Harding. Harding leauing the cleare waters of Truth, hath swallowed the same swill, as the Iewell of our Church hath taught him. The Eunuch of Candace was the first Ethiopian Christian, as Luke Act. 8. and EusebiusEuseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. Papius speakes of Thomas, Matthew, and Mathias preaching in Ethiopia. doe shew.
But before we come to their Christian conuersion, wee are first to declare their conuersion to Iudaisme (if it bee true which the Ethiopians write) in the time of Salomon. The Ethiopians hauing liued before a vagrant life, like the Nomades of old; and the Arabians, and other Libyan Nations, not farre from them in Asia and Africa at this day; Aruc the Ethiopian King first fixed a settled abode at Axuma, and made it the Royall Citie;Genebr. chron. pag. 118. after whom followed Agab, and in the third place Ghedur, or Sabanut, which subdued all Ethiopia, and  left the Kingdome to his daughter Makeda, that reigned eightie yeeres. Anno 50. of her reigne shee visited Salomon. After her they reckon these Kings till Christs time, Melic, Andedo Auda, Gigasio, Zangua, Guasio, Antet, Bahara, Cauada Chanze, Endur, Guaza, Endrath, Chaales, Setija, Aglaba, Anscua, Breguas, Guase, Beseclugna, Baazena, in whose time they say Christ was borne. Genebrard sets downe the times of their Reigne, which hee confesseth, and it selfe conuinceth to be false. This Queene of Saba before mentioned in our discourse of Arabia (of which CountrieThe Abassen greatnesse is vnlikely to haue comne of Chams cursed stocke, which neuer yeelded any great Monarchy. Ful. Misc. l. 2 c. 1. and 4. Thus hee, yet the Phoe^ician and Carthaginians were more potent then euer w^s the Abassi^e. I thinke shee then was, and these Abassens since that time thence descended, and transplanted) is by(...) Anti. l. 8 c. 2 Iosephus called Nicaule, the Queene (saith he) of Ethiopia and Egypt. But Zaga ZaboZ^^a Zabo Ep^^c^^us Ethiop. in the Ethiopian Historie which hee wrote, and caused to be done into Latine by Damianus a Goes, calls her Maqueda, whose Historie  the Ethiopians haue written in a Booke as bigge as all Pauls Epistles. The summe of his report is this: Shee was a worshipper of Idolls as her Ancestors had beene, when as fame filled her eares with the renowme of Salomons name: and then sent a messenger to Ierusalem, to learne the truth, who at his returne confirming those former reports, shee went her selfe to visit him. Of him, besides many other things shee learned the Law, and the Prophets. By him shee conceiued also a sonne, of whom shee was deliuered in her iourney homewards, and named him Meilech. After twentie yeeres education in Ethiopia, shee sent him to Salomon his father, to be instructed of him in wisdome, desiring him to consecrate her sonne King of Ethiopia, before the Arke of the Couenant; shee ordayned also, that women should not henceforth inherit, as before had bin accustomed. Salomon did this, and changed his name  to Dauid: and after long instruction, sent him back to his mother, attended with many noble
 companions, among whom was Azarias the sonne of Zadok the Priest. This Azarias caused Tables to be made like to those in the Arke; and pretending to sacrifice for the good successe of his iourney, went in and stole the Tables of the Law, leauing in their roome these later counterfeits, which he reuealed not to any till he came to the borders of Ethiopia. Then Dauid being made acquainted with the fact, danced for ioy, as his Grandfather Dauid had done before the Arke wherein the Tables were inclosed, his people making great ioy. His Mother resigned to him the Empire, and from that time to this, the Kingdome hath passed in a ^ight Line, from male to male: Circumcision also with the Law of Moses hath beene obserued. The Officers which Salomon appointed his Sonne,Candac was the name of diuers Ethiopian Qu^enes, contrary to this report. are still continued in the same Families  and order; nor may the Emperour chuse them out of any other stocke then those of the Iewes. This long Legend I report, not for the truth, but for that Religious conceit wherewith it is accepted in Ethiopia: for who knowes not, that none but the High Priest, and that but once a yeere, entred into that holy place, where the Arke was, that I speake not of Nadabs and Abihu's fire, with other diuine Iudgements? Vzzahs touching; and the Bethshemites viewing the Arke at so deere a rate; could but make dreadfull so damnable an attempt. Besides, wee should haue looked for our blessed Sauiour out of Ethiopia, where Salomons Heires still reigne (if these say true) and not goe to Salathiel and Zorobabel, descended of another brother, and therefore further off from the throne of their Father Dauid, on which Christ was to fit, and to which he was borne, next and apparant Heire, euen according to the flesh. And yet  doth Genebrard credit these reports, and Baronius also in part, as Luys de Vrreta reporteth. This Luys hath written three large Bookes in Spanish, collected (as he sayth) out of Don Iuan de Baltasar, an Ethiopian of great account, who had beene Embassadour from his Master Alexander the Third, the great Negus, into Persia and other places, and came into Spaine with his licence to imprint his E^hiopian History. Out of him Luys reporteth, that the former Booke, whence Zago Zabo the Bishop, Embassadour to the King of Portugall, had taken those things, is Apocrypha: yet so, as that it is true concerning that report of Maquedas conception, and the Royall Discent from thence till these times. The stealing of the Tables hee denieth; and affirmeth, that the truth was, that Salomon had bestowed on the Queene of Saba a fragment of the Tables, which Moses brake in his zeale for the Israelites Idolatrie with  the Golden Calfe. For that conception by Salomon, hee proueth it by the Ethiopian Records, the title of their King, and his Armes; which are the same, which the Tribe of Iuda gaue, (...) a Lion rampant, crowned, in a field Or, with this Inscription, The Lion of the Tribe of I^^^ hath ouercome. Since they were Christians they haue added to this Armes a Crosse, which the Lion holdeth in his right foot. And in this right they lay challenge to Ierusalem for their Inheritance. Now for the fragment of the Table which Moses brake, it is receiued for a truth throughout Ethiopia, and it is still preserued in the Hill Amara as the greatest Iewell in the World. Baltasar had often seene and handled it. It seemeth to be of the Chalcedonie stone, shining, and transparent; and is a corner of a square Table, the broken edges yet being manifest, with the letters, some broken, some whole, much differing from the common  Hebrew (which Genebrard sayth the Iewes inuented, thereby to differ from the Schismaticall Kingdome of the Israelites, of the ten Tribes; the Samaritans still retayning the former, as both hee and Scaliger affirme.) But these letters cannot bee read; for hee brought a learnedR. Sedechias from Mecca. Iew, skilfull in all the Easterne Languages, Persian, Arabike, Indian, Chinois, etc. yet knew them not. This relique is with such deuotion admired of the Iewes, that when they passe but within sight of that Hill Amara, they prostrate themselues on the ground with reuerence, and for this cause make much of the Ethiopians (wheresoeuer they meete them) as a people beloued of God, to whom he hath imparted such a Relique. TheyVincent Ferrer, a Popish Saint. tell also a tale (I thinke so likewise of the former) of the Queene of Saba, that in her iourney homewards she had a reuelation concerning a piece of Wood which shee saw, that it should bee the same whereon  Christ should after die for Mankind: wherefore adoring the same with much deuotion and teares she wrote to Salomon thereof, who hid it in the earth foureFoure times the height of a man. Stades, where the Poole of Bethesda was made afterwards, and by vertue thereof wrought Miracles. But the Ethiopian Superstition hath Fables enough of her owne, and needeth not the officious helpe of Romish Saints in this kind.
As for that succession of Iewish Officers; Luys denyeth it (himselfe therefore denyed by later examiners) and sayth, the Iewes are no where more hated then in Ethiopia: and Alex^^der the Third, late Emperour among them, banished all Iewes and Mores out of all his Dominions: The Officers of the Emperour are (sayth hee) the Sonnes of the Tributary King his Vassals, and the noblest of his subiecti. And for the Iewes which came with Meilech, or  Meilelec, (after called Dauid) his next successor Lofu (so hee calleth him) becomming an Apostata, reduced Idolatry: and whereas Dauid his Father had giuen them one of the Temples dedicated to the Sunne in mount Amara, to make it an house of Prayer, to the God of Israel,
 casting forth the Idols therein; now in this Iosues dayes some of them returned to Ierusalem, or to other Prouinces of Africa, and some inhabited the vtmost parts of Africa, neere the Cape of Good Hope, and Desarts not before inhabited. And the said Don Iuan de Baltasar, being sent by the Emperour into the Lands of Monopopata (so he calleth it) and of Galofes, of Barbizin, of Mandinga, and of Zape, which are inhabited of Idolatrous Gentiles, hee found among them some of these Iewes descended of that exiled stocke (as themselues also hold) which had forgotten their Iudaisme, and all knowledge of the Scriptures, onely had retained some reliques of it, and abstinence from Swines flesh, differing also from those Gentiles, in worshi^ping one God, whereas the other acknowledge One great God, whom they call Caramus, but worship also Tigres, Lions, Flyes, Spiders, Snakes, Lizards, and whatsoeuer first  meete them in the morning. These GentilesGods curse and mans, follow the Iewes euery where, as the shaddow the body. call the Iewes Tabayqueros, and will not admit them to purchase houses, or inheritance, but eyther vse them as Interpreters, or Factors for Merchants (which is the higest step they can attaine to) or else to employ them in base drudgeries, to be their porters, slaughter-men, and such like, that they seeme rather slaues to those barbarous Nations, then to enioy any liberty of freemen. Rightly may those Nations hee called Barbarous, which seeme rather to barke then to speake, and yet they scorne that any should abase them, with the basest of titles in their opinion, to call them Tabayquero, and reuenge it with the death of the wrong doer. But I feare me our Frier will be found a Lyer, howsoeuer I am forced to relate many things out of him, hauing written so largely of this Ethiopian subiect with such boldnesse, and pretending such assurance from reports of that Balthasar,  as if no doubt were to be made of his assertions.


CHAP. III. Of PRESBYTER IOHN: and of the PEIEST-IOHNS in Asia: whether that descended of these.  
HAuing now declared the antiquities of Ethiopia, drawne out of ancient Authors, let vs neerer hand behold, what neerer our times, Others haue reported thereof. Wherein first we will heere insert out ofIos. Scal. de Emend. Temp. lib. 7. Scaligers annotation, vpon the Ethiopian Ecclesiasticall Calendar or Computation of times, somewhat remarkeable, and fitting to our present purpose. The name (sayth hee) of the Christian Ethiopians is not now first made knowne to vs. For their Church not onely at Ierusalem and Constantinople, but at Rome also and Venice, hath had liberty a good while to vse their owne Rites. The Portugals, and Francis Aluares haue further discouered them: Before, we onely heard the name of Ethiopia. A wonder it is, that  some ages since,Castaneda seemeth also to hold that the Negus is that Presbiter Iohn of Asia; though not of his race, lib. 1. cap. 1. their Emperours name was made knowne to vs out of Asia rather then out of Ethiopia it selfe. Three hundred yeeres agoe, the Ethiopian Kings reigned in Asia, especially in Drangiana, the borders of Susiana, India, and China, vntill the Tartars dispossessed them of the Asian Empire. For Cingis first, the first Tartar King, slue Vncam, the Ethiopian Emperour: and his Posteritie chased the Abissines out of Moin and China, and forced them to flee into Africa. Often haue I maruelled that a people of no knowledge in these times of Sea-affaires, could atchieue so mightie exploits, as to propagate their Empire, from Ethiopia to China. Since that time the knowledge of that Emperour hath come to vain the name of Prestegiano: (which in the Persian tongue (as much now of reckoning in Asia, as the Latine in the West) signifieth,So with vs, the French King is called Christianissimus: the Spaniard Catholicus, the English, Defender of the Faith. Apostolike, inferring thereby that he is a Christian King of the right  faith. For Prestegan signifieth Apostles, and Prestegani Apostolicall; Padescha Prestigiani, the King Apostolicall, in Arabian Melich ressuli, in Ethiopian Negusch Chawariawi. Of this greatnesse of their Empire, in Asia are witnesses those Ethiopian Crosses, which are seene in Giapan, China, and other places. Yea, the Temple of Thomas the Apostle in the Region ofMaliapur. see our Historie, Lib. 5. Man labar, hath nothing in it but is Ethiopian, the crosses, building, and name it selfe. It is called,In Ramusius copie it is Anauia, in the Latine Auarii. Marcus ^aulus lib. 2. cap. 27. Ram. 20. Hanarija, which in Ethiopian is as much to say, as, Apostle which Marcus Paulus falsly expoundeth, a Holy man. This name in the Author seemeth to be giuen not to the Church, but to the Apostle himselfe) Paulus addeth that the remainder of the Christians subiect to Prestegian aboue in Teaduch. The neighbouring Arabians call them now Habassi, and wee from thence Abissines, or Abassenes: they call themselues Chaldaeans: for their ancient and  elegant Language, in which their Books are written, is neere to the Chaldaean and Assyrian. Moreouer, the Ecclesiasticall History testifieth, and out of the same Nicephorus, lib. 9. c. 18.
 that many Colonies were sent out of Assyria into Ethiopia. They are there called Axumitae, of their chiefe Citie, but by themselues, as Aluares affirmeth, Chaschumo. More may we see hereafter of their Rites, and other things worthy of knowledge, in the InstitutionsScaligers Ethiopia^ Grammar. of that tongue which we haue diligently, and Methodically written.
These words of Scaliger haue made me take some paines in the search of the premisses; for hee differeth from the opinion of others, which haue written any thing of Presbiter, or Priest Iohn (as they terme him) in Asia, whom the Tartars subdued. OrteliusOrtel. Theat. in the Map of Tartaria. P Bertias and alii Geograph. maketh a Presbyter Iohn in A ia, and another in Africa, if I vnderstand him. As for that Vncam, William de  Rubruquis, which trauelled those parts in the morning of the Tartar-greatnesse, Anno 1253. reporteth that one Con Can raigned in Kata-Catay, or blacke Catay, after whose death a certaine Nestorian Shepheard (a mightie Gouernour of the people called Yayman, which were Nestorian Christians) exalted himselfe to the Kingdome, and they called him King Iohn, reporting of him tenne times more then was true, as is the Nestorians wont.Will. de Rubruquis Itinerarium ap Hak. tom. 1. cap. 19. For notwithstanding all their great boasts of this man, when I trauelled along by his Territories, there was none that knew any thing of him, b^t onely a few Nestorians. This Iohn had a brother, a mightie shepheard called Vut, which inhabited three weekes journey beyond him: hee was Lord of a Village called Cara Carum, his subiects called Critor Merkits, were also Nestorians. But their Lord abandoning Christianitie, embraced Idols, and retained with him  Priests of the said Idols. Tenne or fifteene dayes journey beyond his Pastures, were the Pastures of Moal, a beggerly Nation, and neere them the Tartars. Iohn dying, this Vut became his Heire, and was called Vut Can, (whom others call Vnc Can) and his droues and flockes ranged vnto the Pastures of Moal. About the same time one Cyngis a Blacke-smi^h in Moal, stole many of VutThis Vut or Vncam was called Prete, or Priest as Boterus coniectureth, because he had the Crosse borne before him, h^ is said with no great likelihood of truth to haue ruled 72 Kingdoms. Cans Cattell: who in reuenge with his forces spoyled the Moals and Tartars. They agrieued, made Cyngis their Captaine, who suddenly brake in vpon Vut, and chased him into Cataya; tooke his Daughter and married her, and had by her Mangu, that was then the Great Can when our Author wrote this. These Relations sauour not of any such Monarchie as should extend from Aethiopia, to those parts of Asia.
Marcus h Paulus telleth, that the Tartars were Tributaries to this Vncam, (so he calleth  him) which saith hee, after some mens opinion signifieth in our language, Priest Iohn, but through his tyrannie prouoked to rebellion, they vnder the conduct of Cyngis, slue Vncam. And afterwards hee saith, thatCap. 52. The Latine Copie want^ these things. Tenduc was vnder the subjection of Priest Iohn: but all the Priests Iohns that there raigned after Vncam, were tributarie to the Great Can: and in his time raigned one George, who was a Priest and a Christian, as were the Inhabitants.Marcus Paulus lib. 1. cap. 24. But hee held not so much as theSir Iohn Mandeuiles storie of Presbyter Iohn, is fabulous. Priests Iohns had done: and the Great Cans did still joyne in affinitie with this Familie, marrying their Daughters vnto these Kings. This George was the fourth after Priest Iohn, and was holden a great Seignior. Hee ruled ouer two Nations, called by some Gog and Magog, by the Inhabitans, VngHaply the Prince before mentioned was called Vncam of Vng. and Can: for Can signifieth a Diuiner or Ruler. and Mongul, where some were Mahumetanes; some Heathens, other Christians. It appeareth by their Histories, that Scaliger was  deceiued, to thinke that this Priest Iohn had so large an Empire, seeing Rubruquis in the same Age, or soone after, could in his owne Countrey heare so little of him: and his posteritie in Marcus Paulus his time, continued tributarie Kings vnder the Tartar. The name Priest was giuen them of that function, which hee testifieth, George receiued, and Iohn perhaps of that first Shepheard that vsurped Con Cans estate. To let passe therefore that Presbyter Iohn in the North-east, we stumble on another mid-way betwixt that and Ethiopia. For so IoannesIoan de Pl. Carp. Itinerarium cap. 5. de Plano Carpini (sent Embassadour to the Great Can, from Pope Innocent, Anno 1246.) and VincentiusVincentii Beluacensis spec. historiale, l 32. c. 10. in his Speculum, tell of the King of India Major, called Presbiter Iohn, being inuaded by the Tartars vnder the leading of Tossus Can, sonne of Cyngis, who before had subdued India Minor: Hee by a Stratageme acquitted his Realme of them. For making mens Images  of Copper, he set each of them vpon a saddle on Horse-backe, and put fire within them, placing a man with a paire of bellowes on the horse-back behind euery Image. And so with many Images and Horses in such sort furnished, they marched against the Tartars: and when they were ready to joyne, by kindling a fire in each Image; they made such a smoke, that the Indians wounded and slue many Tartars, who could not see to require them thorow the smoke: but were forced to leaue that Countrey; and neu^r after returned. Heere now wee meet with a new Presbyter Iohn in India Major, which whether he were the same with the Ethiopian, let vs a little examine.
India is by MarcusMarcus Paulus, lib. 3. cap. 37. Paulus diuided into three parts, the Lesser, Greater, and Middle; the first of them hee boundeth from Ciamba to Murfili, and saith, it had in it eight Kingdoms;  the Middle called Abascia, had in it seuen Kingdomes, three whereof were Saracens, the rest Christians. Sixe of them were subject to the seuenth. It was told me, saith hee, that after their Baptisme with water, they vsed another Baptisme with fire, branding three markes on
 their forehead and both their cheekes. The Saracens vsed one brand from the forehead to the middle of their nose: They warre with the Solden of Aden, and with the Inhabitants of Nubia, and are reputed the best warriours in India. The greaterAbdias nominat Indiam quae in Aethiopiam vergit. 1. 8. India extendeth from Malabar, to the Kingdome of Chesmacoran, and had in it thirteene Kingdomes. This Abascia by the bordering enemies of Nubia and Aden is apparant to bee this Ethiopia where wee now are: euen by their Brands wee may know them: And this the Ancients called India. For SidoniusSidonius ap. Ortel. i^ Thesauro. calleth the Ethiopian Memnones, Indians: and AelianusAelian. l. 17. animalium. placeth Indians at Astaboras, one of the Riuers of Meroe:Virg Gewg. 4. Virgil also bringeth Nilus out of India. Vsque coloratis amnis deuexus ab Indis: which must needes be meant of Ethiopia. NicephorusSabellicus Enn^ad 10. l. 8. Mo^e testimonies of this nature see in Scal. E. T. pag. 639. reckoneth the Sabeans and Homerites people of Arabia vnto India. SabellicusSabell. Aen. 10. lib. 8. complaineth  of the confounding of these names India, and Ethiopia, saying, that most men did thinke Ethiopia next to Egypt, to bee that India, where Alexander ouerthrew Porus. This confusion of names, I thinke, did first grow from confusion of Nations. For as is before obserued out of Eusebius the Ethiopians arose from the Riuer Indus, and setled their habitation neere to Egypt. Perhaps they brought the Indian name also to these parts. Or else the ignorance of these remote Countries might doe it: in which respect, not onely a third part of the old World, but another new-found World, is now named India. Therefore Acosta and Adrianus TurnebusIos Acost hist. Ind lib. 1. c. 14. Turn. Aduers. lib. 21. cap. 9. esteeme India to be a generall name to all Countries which are farre off, and strange to vs, although it be properly attributed to the East Indies.  
Now if any wonder at such an extrauagant discourse of India heere, let him know that in our search for Presbyter Iohn, which then was knowne to withstand the Tartars in Asia, I cannot see how hee can bee the Abessine or Aethiopian: but rather thinke that when a mightie Christian Prince was found in Aethiopia, they did imagine him to bee that Presbiter Iohn, of which they had heard in Asia, being furthered in this errour by the name, India, which, as is said, did generally comprehend both the true India, and this, more truely called Ethiopia. Now for that Presbiter Iohn in India, I take him for some Christian King: for at that time there were many Christians, as appeareth by Venetus, in manner dispersed throughout Asia: and some, called Saint Thomas Christians, remaine in India to this day. Why I thinke it not to agree to the Abissine, my reasons besides the former, are, the distance of place: all that huge tract of Arabia, with the wide Seas on each side, separating India from Ethiopia:  the vnpassable Desarts by Land: No mention in Historie who should dispossesse them of that India Maior, where the Tartar had neuer any great power: the HistoriesOf these Indian Histories touching the same times. See Linschoten lib. 1. cap. 12. and 27, and G. B. B. which wee haue of those Indian Princes, the Kings of Malabar, of Decan, the Samorin, etc. are against it: the difference of Religion; for those Indian Christians of Saint Thomas, are not branded with hoteThis branding is common to the Morish Christian, and Idolatrous Ethiopians, vsed to preuent rheumaticke distillations from the braine: sup^rstition hath caused some to annex it to their Baptisme. Irons, nor Circumcised, nor agree in other Rites with the Ethiopian: the Ethiopian Historie challengeth no such large extents to their Empire, except in Africa, where they seate them in a continuall descent, from the time of Salomon, till now, whereas those Presbiter Iohns, had their dwelling and abode in Asia, as their Stories signifie. And further, the nameOdoardo Lopez. l. 2. vlt. Priest Iohn is a name vnknowne in Ethiopia, and by ignorant mistaking of the Europaeans, applied to that Ethiopian Emperour when first they heard of him, as saith ZagaZago Zabo de 33. Fide Ethiopum. Zabo his  Embassadour to the King of Portugall, who reproueth the men of these parts; saying, that he is named of them Belul, which signifieth Excellent, or precious, and in the Chaldean tongue, Ioannes Encos, which signifieth the same. Sabellicus saith, the Ethiopians called him Gyan; Linschoten affirmeth, Bel Gyan: (Bel signifieth the highest, and Gyan, Lord.) ButLuys de Vrreta Hist. Ethiop. lib. 1. cap 7. Frier Luys out of Baltasar the Aethiopian, sheweth that in the hill Amara are ancient records which testifie that from the time of that Queene that came to Salomon, the Emperours haue beene called Beldigian, the signification whereof is, a precious Stone, or a thing of great value: which Title hath continued to those Emperours, as Pharao to the Egyptians, and Caesar to the Romanes. Some also of the Royall bloud (which are vsually kept, as after shall appeare in the  hill Amara) when they are elected to the Empire, if there bee many of that Imperiall issue take Orders, and become Priests, not procreating any Children. Such saith hee in our times haue beene Daniel the second, Paphnutius, that succceeded to Naum and Alexander the third his successour, all which were both Priests and Kings; and therefore by the Ethiopians which resort to the Holy Sepulchre at Ierusalem, and vsed to speake Greeke, were called Priest Beldigian. This by corruption of the name by Merchants, and such as knew not the signification and also for breuities sake, was pronounced Priest Gyan or Iohn.
Now for the Priest Iohn in Asia, hee tels that when Saint Thomas was martyred in India, the threeMatth. 2.1. Mags, who had visited CRIST, by the leading of a Starre, in his Infancie, and had after beene consecrated Bishops ouer their seuerall Kingdomes (you must not deny their royaltie) by the Apostle; chose one amongst themselues to bee Priest and King, who was called  Priest Iohn. If you beleeue not Peter de Natalibus, out of whom the Frier cites this, I should bee too much troubled in perswading you. Hee telleth also out of Otho Frisingensis,
 that about the yeere 1145. one Iohn a Christian, both King and Priest, reigning in the furthest parts of the East, warred vpon, and ouer-came the Medes, Assyrians, and Persians, and had intended to free Ierusalem out of Saracenicall seruitude, but not finding passage ouer Tigris, was forced to returne. This is like to bee that Presbyter Iohn, whose posteritie vsed that stratageme before mentioned against the Tartars. And to him, I thinke, might fitly agree that Title of Prestegian (easily deflected and altered to Priest Iohn) whereof you haue heard out of Ioseph Scaliger. I haue seene a ManuscriptCommunicated to me, by that industrious and learned Gentleman, Master Selden, of the Inner Temple. in old French, pretended to bee a Letter from Prester Iohn, to the Emperour Frederike, wherein is discoursed of the site, greatnesse, puissance, wealth, and other rarities of his estate: but finding so many monsters,  and vncouth relations therein, I could not bee so prodigall of faith, or penurious of iudgement, as to value his authoritie at any high rate: wherein Sir Iohn Mandeuill seemes to haue beene a lender or borrower, so iustly doe they agree, in disagreeing from both probabilitie and possibilitie of truth: yet both in the one and the other, wee may obserue the like situation of Prester Iohns dwelling in these parts of Asia, neere Persia: and that such a multitude of fables could not but haue some truth for their ground. My conclusion is, That for that name of Prestegian, I like well Scaligers interpretation, and thinke that it may agree either to this, or some other Christian Prince at those times in India, which is farre neerer to Persia, and from whence the Indians borrowed their Royall Titles, both in those times and since, as Garcias ab HortoGarc. ab Hor. lib. 2. cap. 28. Linschot. lib. 1. cap. 27. and Linschoten shew. Idalham or Adelham, the Title of the  King ofGo^ is the seate of the Portugall Vice roy. Goa, and the Countries about, commonly called Idalcan, is not a proper name, but a Title of honour, signifying (as Adonizedek, Iosh. 10.1.) Lord, or King of Iustice: Nisamaluco, the speare of the Kingdome; and such like: Ismael the Sophi (which name also is by some interpreted Elect, because they pretended to bee or doe so, and others, the reprobate followers of a reprobate Religion) added the Title of Xa or Sha, to such as embraced his new Sect, as Nisomoxa, etc. If the borrowing of names from the Persian language (so generall in those parts) bee still obserued: no maruell if some Christian King in those times might stile himselfe Prestegian, or Apostolicall (which others not vnderstanding, called Priest Iohn, or Prete Ianni) as being compassed with so many Saracens, the enemies of the Apostles, besides Heretikes and Heathens. At Mosul is yet a Patri^ke, who in PaulusM. Paul, lib. 1 cap. 6.  time was of farre greater iurisdiction, and as an Easterne Pope, ordayned Archbishops and Bishops, through all the parts of India, besides Cairo, and Baldach: and therefore no maruell if in India there were some great Christian Prince, able to make a head against the Tartars in those times: For euen in CranganorG Bot. Ben. part. 3. lib. 2. are yet supposed to hee threescore and ten thousand Christians: besides a great number in Negapatan, and in Malipur: and very many in Angamale, and fifteene thousand on the North of Cochin, where the Archbishop that dependeth on the Patriarke of Babylon, or Mosul, resided: All which haue no communion with the Greeke, Roman, or E^hiopian Churches. And for the Ethiopian names or crosses, either their Merchants when their state was great, or slaues, which taken from them are euen in these times sold dearest of any other, and mount to great preferments of warre, vnder  these Lords, might leaue such impressions: or, some other, which as they professed one Christ, so might haue some wordes and ceremonies common with the Ethiopian: although I must needes acknowledge, that many of those crosses haue not crossed my way, nor any other Ethiopian foot prints.
Pardon me, gentle Reader, if I seeme tedious in this dispute, seeing it is necessarie both for the vnderstanding of the extent of the Power and Religion of this Precious or Priest Iohn: and Scaliger hauing ascribed such large bounds to his Empire, I could not but examine the same, otherwise professing my selfe (si non magis amica veritas) euen willing, if I must needs erre, to erre with him, who hath in many tongues, and arts, shewed himselfe perhaps the worthiest Generall, and generallest Worthy, against Error, that euer wee haue had, the Alpha  of learned men in our Age, as our learnedD. Morton against Brerely. Marton testifieth of him, and a great ligh^ of learning, acknowledged byIumno and Scal. duo magna literarum lumina, Rex Iacobus in Declarat. contra Vorst. Royall testimonie. His authoritie I would not seeme to contemne, and therefore haue entred this long search. But Scaliger himselfe hath since altered his opinion in the last Edition of his Emendation; in which these later Editions of this worke, might haue excluded also this long dispute, but that it may serue to illustrate both  this and other parts of our Historie, and therefore doe still suffer it to remayne.



HONDIVS his Map of the Abissine Empire.
map of Abyssinia, East Africa
ABISSINORUM REGNU^




CHAP. IIII. Relations of the Aethiopian Empire, collected out of ALVARES, BERMVDESIVS, and other Authors.
TO come now to the Aethiopian Greatnesse of this great Aethiopian; his Title would be a sufficient Text for a more sufficient glosse, then we can giue. In a  LetterLit. ad Em. reg. vid. Marin. l. 10. c. 10. and seq. ad fin. and Sanut. lib. 10. cap. 11. to King Emanuel, after diuers words concerning the Trinitie, follow; These Letters sendeth Atani Tinghill, that is, the Frankincense of the Virgin, which was his name in Baptisme, but at the beginning of his Raigne,The Kings of Ethiopia change their names, as the P^pes vse to do^. hee tooke to name Dauid, the beloued of GOD, Pillar of the Faith, descended of the Tribe of Iuda, Sonne of Dauid, Sonne of Salomon, Sonne of the Pillar of Sion, Sonne of the seed of Iacob, Sonne of the hand of Marie, Sonne of NahuIn a Letter to the Pope is added, Sonne of the Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, according to grace. according to the flesh, Emperour of the Greater and Higher Aethiopia, and of most large Kingdomes, Territories and Iurisdictions, the King of Xoa, Caffate, Fatigar, Angote, Baru, Baaliganze, Adea, Vangue, and Goiame, where Nilus springeth; Of Damaraa, Vaguemedri, Ambeaa, Vagne, Tigri-Mahon; Of Sabaym, the Countrey of the Queene of Saba, of Barnagasso, and Lord as farre as Nubia, which confineth vpon Aegypt. 
 Heere are names enough to skarre a weake braine, a great part whereof are now his (as some say) in Title onely. For at this present, if Barros and Botero bee beleeued, his Neighbours haue much encroched vpon him: as a little before we haue shewed (a thing wholly denied by the later Relations of FrierLuys de Vrreta and Thes. Polit. Apost. 34 make Prester Iohn the greatest prince in the world, except the King of Spaine. Luys de Vrreta:) Yet seeing we are to trauell through all these Countreys, we will leaue the question of dominion to him and his neighbours, to try it with the sword: Our pen shall peaceably point out the places, and after that, the conditions. BarnagassoG. Botero Benese. p. 1. Pory his description of places vndescribed by Leo. A Maginus. is the nighest to vs, at least, by the neere situation of the red Sea, nighest to our knowledge. It stretcheth from Suachen almost to the mouth of the Streyt, and hath Abagni, or Astapus, on the South. It hath no other Port on the red Sea, but Ercocco. Neither  hath the Prete any other Port but this in all his Dominion, being Land-locked on all sides. Anno 1558.G. B. B. parte 2. lib. 2. The Turks committed heere great spoile: They haue since taken from the Prete, all on the Sea side, and specially that Port of Ercocco, and the other of Suachen or Suaquem, and forced the Gouernour or vnder-King of this Prouince, to compound for a yeerely summe of a thousand ounces of Gold: besides his Tribute to the Ethiopian. To him are also subiect the Gouernmenrs of Dafila, and Canfila. And the Turke hath a BaslaHe is called The Bassa of Abassia, a fift Bassa or Belgerbeg, of the Turke in Africa, omitted by Knolles. at Suaquem, called by Ptolomey, Sebasticum. Tigri-Mahon lyeth betweene Nilus, Marabo, two Riuers, Angote, and the Sea. Tigrai hath in it Cazumo, which is supposed the Seat-Royall of that great Queen, which visited Salomon. Angote is between Tigre-Mahon and Amara. Heere in AmaraFr. Aluares. is a steepe Hil, dilating it selfe in a round forme, many dayes iourny in compasse,  enuironing with the steepe sides, and impassible tops thereof, many fruitfull and pleasant Vallies, wherein the kindred of the Prete are surely kept, for the auoiding of all tumults and seditions. Xoa hath store of corne and cattell: Goiame hath plenty of Gold: as Baguamedri hath siluer. In Fatigar is a Lake on the top of a high mountaine, twelue miles compasse, abounding with great varietie of fish; and thence runne many Riuers, stored with the same fish.
Damne is ennobled with slauerie. For the slaues that are hence caried captiues, in Arabia, Persia, and Egypt, proue good souldiers. The greater part of this Kingdome are Gentiles,Io. Bermudez. and the residue Christians. The Oxen (as Bermudez relateth) are almost as great as Elephants, their hornes very great, and serue for vessels to carie and keepe Wine and Water, as  Barrels or Tankerds. There is found also a kinde of Vnicorne, wilde and fierce, fashioned like a horse, of the bignesse of an Asse. Neere hereunto he addeth a Prouince of Amazons, whose Queene knoweth no man, and is honoured as a goddesse: they say, they were first instituted by the Queene of Saba: both like true, as that which followeth of Griffons, the Phoenix, and fowles so bigge, that they make a shaddow like a cloud. Couche is subiect to Damur: they are Gentiles: The Prince called Axgugce, that is, Lord of riches: he shewed vs (saith Bermudez) a Mountaine glistering in some places like the Sun, saying, all that was gold. More gold is said there to be, then in Peru, or in these parts iron. The head of the M^^asteries of Amara Christned him, Gradeus the Emperour being his God-father, and named him Andrew. Gueguere was sometimes called Meroe: the Inhabitants are confederate  with the Turkes and Moores, against the Abissines. Dancali and Dobas, are neere the red Sea, inhabited with Moores.
Many of these Countreys are diuersly placed by diuers: through ignorance of the exact situations: which AluarezFr. Aluares. in his so many yeares trauell in those parts, might well haue acquainted vs with, if he had first acquainted himselfe with rules of Art; to haue obserued by Instruments the true site and distances.
In the Kingdome of Angole, iron, and salt is currant money. The Moores of Dobas haue a Law, prohibiting marriage to any, that hath not first slaine twelue Christians. The diuorcesAluar. c. 21. and marrying the wiues of their brethren deceased, is heere in vse much like as  with the Iewes.
In Bernagasso, Aluarez and his company, in their trauell were encountred with many great Apes as bigge as Weathers, their fore-parts hairie like Lions, which went not lesse then two or three hundred in a company: they would climbe any Rocke: they digged the earth, that it seemed as it had been tilled.
In the Countrey of the Giannamori,Cap. 50. as they trauelled, they crossed a certaine brooke or Riuer, that came downe from the Mountaines, and finding a pleasant place, shaded with the Sallowes, there they reposed themselues at noone: the water of the brooke was not sufficient to driue a Mill. And whiles the company stood, some on one side the brooke, some on the other, they heard a thunder, which seemed a farre off, but saw no likelihood of raine or winde; when the thunder was done, they put their stuffe in order to be gone, and had taken  vp the Tent, in which they dined, when one of the company going by the brooke about his businesse, suddenly cried out, Looke to your selues: whereupon turning about, they saw the water come downe a speares depth with great furie, which caried away part of
 their stuffe: and had they not (by good hap) taken vp their Tent, they together with it had beene carried away with the streame. Many of them were forced to climbe vp the Sallowes. Such was the noise of water, and the rattling of stones, which came tumbling downe the Mountaines together, that the earth trembled, and the sky seemed to threaten a down-fall. Suddenly it came, and suddenly it passed. For the same day they passed ouer, and saw very many and great stones ioyned to those which they had seen there before,
In the Kingdome of Goyame,C. 135. see. c. 12. Some draw Nilus from certain mountaines, which are named mountaines of the Moone: but it comes first from the Lake Zembre, or Zaire: and passeth by this, where it is encreased. Berumdez. the Riuer Nilus springeth, it is there called Gion, and comes from two Lakes, which for their greatnesse may seeme to bee Seas, in which, report goeth that Mermaydes, Tritons, or Men-fishes are seene, and some haue told me (saith Aluarez) that they haue seene it. Peter Couillian a Portugall, which had liued a great part of his  life in those parts, told me, that he had been in that Kingdome by order from Queene Helena, to build there an Altar in a Church built by her, where she was buried. Beyond that Kingdome, I was told, there were Iewes.
Don Iohn de Castro mentions a high Hill inhabited of Iewes, in these parts, which came, no man knowes from whence: but they defended the Prete against the Moores. Of the fals in Goyame, before is related out of Berumdez, that they make a noyse like thunder. He saith saith that in Dembia Nilus runneth within thirty or fortie leagues of the Red-Sea, to which the Emperour purposed to cut a passage, as his Predecessor had begun. There is a great Lake thirtie leagues long, and twenty broad, with many Ilands, inhabited onely of Religious men. Agao is possessed of Moores and Gentiles mixed. He speakes of the Kingdom of Oghy, seuen  or eight dayes iourney from Doato, vnder which is a Prouince of Gentiles called Gorague, bordering with Quiloa and Mongalo, which are great Witches, and obserue the entrails of sacrificed Beasts. They kill an Oxe with certaine Ceremonies, and anointing themselues with the tallow thereof, make a great fire, seeming to goe into it, and to sit down in a chaire therein; thence giuing Diuinations and answers, without burning. Their Tribute is two Lyons, three Whelpes, an Ounce of Gold molten, with certaine Hens and Chickens of the same metall. Sixe Buffes laden wi^h Siluer, a thousand Beeues, and the skinnes of Lyons, Ounces and Elkes. The Goffates are vulgarly reported to haue beene Iewes: they are hated in other Prouinces.
The houses of the EthiopiansC. 159. are round, all of Earth, flat roofed, couered with thatch,  compassed with yards. They sl^epe vpon Oxe-hides. They haue neither Tables nor Table-cloathes, but haue their meat serued in on plaine woodden Platters. Some eate flesh raw; others broyle it. Artillery they had not, vntill they bought some of the Turkes. Writing is little (and scarce a little) vsed amongst them: the Officers dispatch matters of Iustice by Messengers, and word of mouth. There is no wine made of the Grape (but by stealth) except at the Pretes andAbuna is their Patriarch. Abunas: Others vse Wine made of Raisins, steeped ten dayes in water, and strained, which is cordiall and strong. They haue plenty and want of Metals; Gold, Siluer, etc. the soyle yeeldeth, but they haue not Art to take it. They haue no coine of Gold or Siluer; Salt is the most currant money. Sugar canes they haue, but want skill to vse th^^. The Mountaines and Woods are full of Basill and other odoriferous plants. They haue store  of Bees and Honey: but their hiues are placed in Chambers, where making a little hole in the wall, the Bees goe in and out. There are some places very cold. The Commons are miserably oppressed by their superiours. No man may kill an Oxe though it be his owne, without licence from the Gouernours: there were no Shambles but at the Court. The common people seldome speake truth, no not vpon an oath, except they are compelled to sweare by the head of the King; they exceedingly feare excommunication. Their oathes are in this sort: The partie to bee deposed goeth with two Priests, carrying with them fire and incense to the Church-dore, whereon he layeth his hand.
Then the Priest adiures him, saying: If thou shalt sweare falsely, as the Lyon deuoureth the beasts of the Forrest, so let the Diuell deuoure thy soule: and as corne is ground vnder the Milstone,  so let him grinde thy bones: and as the fire burneth vp the wood, so let thy soule burne in Hell: (^he party answereth to euery or these clauses) Amen. But if thou speake truth, let thy life bee prolonged with honour, and let thy soule enter into Paradise with the Blessed, Amen. Then doth he giue his testimonie. They haue Bookes written in Parchment.
Let vs now come vnto the Court of their Emperour, which was alway mouing, and yet the greatest Town that his whole Empire containes. For there are few which haue in them one thousand and sixe hundred Families, whereas this moueable Citie hath fiue thousand, or sixe thousand Tents, and Mules for carriage about fifty thousand. In his march from one place to another, if they passe by a Church, he and all his company alight, and walke on foot, till they be past. There is also carried before him a consecrated stone or Altar, vpon the shoulders  of certaine Priests appointed to that office. They call him Acegue, which signifieth Emperour, and Negus, that is, King.

By commandement of the Queene Maqueda, which visited Salomon; womenStrabo lib. 16. tels of circumcised women in these parts. Quemadmodum vtri praeputium habent, mulieres etiam habent quandam glaudulosam carnem quam Nympham vocant, non ineptam accipiendo Characteri Circumcisionis. Any one man may Circumcise, and it is done without solemnitie, or ceremonie. are (say they) circumcised: Both sexes are circumcised at eight dayes old: and the males fortie dayes after; the females fourescore; (vnlesse sicknesse hasten the same) are baptized. As for the rites of their Christianitie, it belongeth not to this place to expresse. Their circumcision Zabo saith, is not obserued, as if it made them more worthy then other Christians, for they thinke to bee saued onely by Faith. They vse this and distinctions of meates, and Mosaicall rites, yet so, as he that eateth, should not despise him that eateth not, and not condemning others that refuse them: but yet thinking that neither Christ, nor the Apostles, nor the Primitiue Church had disannulled them, interpreting also the Scriptures to their purpose. Of their agreeing  with other Churches in the most points of substance, the Author of theCatholike Traditions. Catholike Traditions hath written: and when I make a Christian Visitation of these parts, it shall bee further discouered.
The succession is not tyed to the eldest, but to him whom the father appointeth. For Dauid which sent his Embassage to Portugall, was the third sonne in order, and for modestie in refusing to sit in his fathers Throne, which in the same triall his other brethren had accepted, was preferred to that which he had refused: the other reiected for their forward acceptation. The King offeredLitera ad Eman. the King of Portugall an hundred thousand drammes of gold, and as many Souldiers towards the subduing of the Moores, besides other things meete for the warre. It seemes, the difference of the Ethiopian, and Popish superstition was the chiefe  hinderance in this businesse: neither partie being able (if willing) to reconcile their long-receiued differences from each other, and the truth. Eugenius the Pope, and the King, then named, The Seed of Iacob,Literae ad Papam. had written to each other: and Aluarez yeeldedObedienza del Prete Ianni, etc. apud Ramustum. obedience to the Pope, in the name of the Prete at Bologna, in the presence of Pope Clement the seuenth, and Charles the fift. But all this sorted to none effect. For Pope Paul the fourth sent an Ambassage to Claudius, then the Abassine Emperour, employing in the same thirteene Iesuites, one of which was made Patriarke, and two Bishops, in their hopefull Ethiopian Hierarchie. Ignatius, the Founder of the Iesuites, wrote a long Letter also, which Maffaeus andP. Maff. hist. Iudic. lib. 16. Iarric haue inserted at large. Thus in the yeere 1555. Iohn the third, King of Portugall, vndertooke the charges to conuey them thither: and sentEman. Acosta. in Commentario rerum in criento gestarum. Consaluus Roterigius, to prepare  them way by a former Ambassage to Claudius, whose eares hee found fast closed to such motions: Whereupon the new Patriarke stayed at Goa, and Ouiedus one of the Bishops, with a Priest or two went thither, where when they came, they found Claudius slaine, and his brotherOuiedo B. of Hierapol^. Adamas, a cruell man, and an Apostata sometimes from his Faith, in the Throne. Hee cast the new Bishop into bands, and drew him into the warres with him, where the Emperour was discomfited, and he taken and stripped of all, and at last miserably dyed, and with him the hope of Romish Abassia. Iohn Nounius Barretus, the designed Patriarke, refused (as Maffaeus saith) the Archbishoprick of Goa, where his brother was Vice-roy, and remayned subiect to the Iesuiticall Societie to his death. In the yeere 1559. Ioannes BermudesiusIo. Bermudez relat. Legat. Atani Tinghil: returned to Lisbone. He wrote a discourse of his Ambassage from the Ethiopian Emperour  to Iohn the third, King of Portugall, and of his aduentures in those parts befallen him. In which he relateth, that Abuna Marcos being at the point of death, An. 1535. the Emperour willed him to nominate his Successor, whereupon hee appointed this Bermudez, and ordered him with all sacred Orders: which hee accepted vpon condition of the Popes confirmation, whereto the Emperour consented, desiring him to goe to Rome to giue obedience to the Pope, and from thence to Portugall to conclude Tagazano (so he calleth him) his Ambassage. Paul the third confirmed him Patriarke of Alexandria. Hee apprehended Tagazano, as Onadinguel enioyned, and clapt Irons on him. His Emperours request was a marriage to be had with the Kings sonne of Portugall, the Ethiopian succession to remayne his Dowrie: also to send men against Zeila; and Pioners to cut thorow a Hill, thereby to bring  Nilus to annoy Egypt. Foure hundred and fiftie were sent accordingly by Garcia of Noronya. But Onadinguel was dead, and Gradeus was Emperour, who ouer-threw the Moores, and slue the Kings of Zeila and of Aden. This Emperour fell out with the Portugals, and sent to Alexandria for another Abuna, whose name was Ioseph, so that none acknowledged Bermudez but the Portugals. SabellicusSabel. En. 10. lib. 8. saith, hee had conference with some Ethiopians, which said that their Lord ruled ouer threescore and two Kings. They called him Gyam, which signifieth Mightie. They wondered why the Italians called him a Priest, seeing hee neuer receiued Orders, onely he bestowed Benefices: and is neither called Iohn nor Ianes, but Gyam. Some report of him things incredible, as one WebWebs Trauels. an English man in his Tales of his Trauels. Hee hath gold enough shut vp in a Caue, to buy the moytie of the world, as  L. RegiusL. Le Roy, l. 9. affirmeth, and can rayse an Armie of ten hundred thousand (saith Sabellicus.) Yet the Pesants are not employed in militarie seruice: but onely the Cauas, which are men brought vp thereto. They warre not in the Lent,Aluarez cap. 113. except against themselues with extremitie
 of fasting, so weakning their bodies, that the MooresThe Moores also vse to giue assaults on the Saturdaies and Sundaies, because (of a Iewish superstition) th^n they refuse to fight. make that their Haruest of Abissine captiues. Of this their fasting, Aluares saith, that they begin their Lent ten dayes before vs: and after Candlemasse, fast three dayes in remembrance of Niniuehs repentance; many Friars in that space eating nothing: and some women refusing to suckle their children aboue once a day. Their generall fast is bread and water, for fish is not easily had, they being farre from Sea, and ignorant to take it. Some Friars eate no bread all Lent long for deuotion: some, not in a whole yeere, or in their whole life, but feede on herbes, without oile or salt: that I speake not of their girdles of Iron, and other their hardships, which my pen would willingly expresse, if my method forbade mee not. This fasting (as exposing their State to hostile inuasions and insolencies) may finde place and mention here. Their Friars  and Priests in Lent eate but once in two dayes, and that in the night. QueeneLit. Helen. ad Em. Reg. Portugal. Helena, that sent her Ambassadour to King Emanuel, was reported to eate but three times a weeke, on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. On Sundayes they fast not. In Tigray and Tigremahon they fast neither Saturday nor Sunday: and they marry (because they haue two moneths priuiledge from fasting) on Thursday before our Shrouetide. They that are rich, may there marry three wiues, and the Iustice forbids them not; onelyAluarez. they are excommunicated from entring the Church.
SomeF. Luys histor. and l. 1. c. 20. Briefe description of the whole world* affirme, that the Princes of Egypt haue time out of minde payed to Prester Iohn a great tribute (continued by the Turkes, which Luys saith is three hundred thousand Zequis, euery Zequi being sixteene Rials, and with vs eight Shillings) for that by him the furious  spirit of Nilus is slacked and cooled, being detayned in the way by many Sluces for that purpose made. The great Turke denying this,Alfons. Albuquerque deuised to diuert Nilus into the Red Sea. F. Luys saith, that Pius 5. the Pope prouoked Menna the Prete to refuse the tribute, and to stay it by diuerting the streame, whereupon the Turke sent Christians out of Greece and other parts to dwell there, and in Cairo placed 30000. families, which caused there Pope and Prete to alter their course. the Abassine caused those Dammes to be broken, and by drowning Egypt in vncouth manner, forced that great Monarch to composition. Aluarez denies both the Mountaynes of Luna, and the melting of Snow, which is supposed the cause of this Riuers hastinesse, and ascribeth the ouer-flowing of Nilus to the extreme raines in Ethiopia, whose Fountaynes diuers Portugals haue seene (hee saith) in Goyame. The Turke notwithstanding hath (by warring vpon him) erected a new Beglerbegship in his Dominions. Aluarez liued there sixe yeeres, and was once within thirtie miles of Nilus, but in all his trauels neuer saw that Riuer. So little accesse haue the Ethiopians (barred out by vnpassable passages) vsually to the same.  
Andrea CorsaliAndrea Corsali liter. 2. ap. K. reporteth, that the Prete Dauid was of oliue colour, but shewed his face but once in the yeere, hauing at other times his face couered for greater state, and therefore also spake to none, but by an Interpreter. The Inhabitants are branded with fire, which they vse not for Baptisme, but in obseruation of a custome of Salomon, who so marked his slaues, as they affirme. Friar Luys giueth another reason thereof, saying, that when the world groned vnder Arrianisme, the Abassine Emperour caused his Subiects to brand themselues with a threefold marke or stampe in the forehead, to testifie their faith of and in the Trinitie: which now since their commerce with the Roman Christians, is in manner wholly left, except in the ruder and more vnciuill parts of Barnagasso, the borders of the Empire. The same AuthorLuys de Vrreta hist. de la Ethiopia, l. 1. p. 247. and d. saith, that in Ethiopia are Elephants, the Rhinoceros, and (besides other  beasts) the Vnicorne in the Kingdome of Goyame, and in the Hills of the Moone, but seldome seene, onely the horne is found, which he casteth in manner as the Hart. There are also (he saith) birds of Paradise: and such store and varietie of flowers all the yeere long, that their Eunuchs are alway decked with them. There is one flower not any where else known, called Ghoyahula, much resembling a Mary-gold, but exceeding faire in varietie and excellency of colours, fragrant smell, abundance of leaues in the flower, and with a more rare qualitie; beginning to open at noone, and so by little and little opening more and more till midnight, alway the sent encreasing with the opening: after midnight it shuts by little and little, till noone; denying by the same degrees her pleasing offices to both senses, of Sent, and Sight. He tells also of a little Bird, to which Nature hath committed the tuition of this  Flower, which all the time that it is open flyes about it, driues away things offensiue, sings sweetly, and spreads her selfe thereon, with other things very strange, I dare not affirme very true. He mentionethPag. 344. In their language Alicomeinos. also a bird, called the Rhinoceros of the ayr^, much bigger then an Eagle, and hauing a bow-fashioned bill or beake foure foot long, and a horne betweene the eyes, with a black line alongst it. It is a cruell fowle, and attends on battells and camps. The Portugalls had sight of one at the Red Sea, when Soliman the Eunuch had his Nauie in the Red Sea. The horne is of the same propertie with that of the Vnicorne and Rhinoceros. There are fishes also called Rhinocerotes of the Sea; many of which are paid the Prete for Tribute.
Many many other Ethiopian rarities wee might obserue out of this Authour; but (if it  deserue credit) the Hill Amara after his description, may furnish you for and beyond all the rest of Ethiopia, as a second earthly Paradise.



CHAP. V. Relations of Ethiopian rarities, collected out of Friar LVYS, a Spanish Author.

@. I. Of the Hill Amara.
THe hill Amara hath alreadie beene often mentioned, and nothing indeed in all Ethiopia more deserueth mention, whether wee respect the naturall site, or the employment thereof. Somewhat is written thereof by Geographers,E. Aluareza C. 58. ad 62. and Historians, especially by Aluarez whom we haue chiefly followed in the former Relations of this Countrie, as an eye-witnesse of the most things reported; but neither they, nor he, haue any thing but by relation, sauing that he passed two dayes iourney along by the said Hill, and that also had almost cost him his life. But Iohn de Baltasar (saith our Friar) liued in the same a long time, and therein serued Alexander which was afterwards Emperor, and was often by commandement of the same man, when he was Emperor, sent thither: out of his Relations,Luys de Vrreta de la historia de la Ethiopia: l. prim. c. 8. and deinceps. Friar * Luys saith hee hath borrowed  that which here we offer you. And here we offer you no small fauour to conduct you into, and about this place, where none may come but an Ethiopian, and that by expresse licence, vnder paine of leauing his hands, feet, and eyes behind, in price for his curiositie, and not much lesse is the danger of such as offer to escape from thence: Aluarez himselfe being an eye-witnesse of some such cruell executions inflicted for that offence. This Hill is situate as the Nauill of that Ethiopian Body, and Centre of their Empire, vnder the Equinoctiall Line, where the Sunne may take his best view thereof, as not encountring in all his long iourney with the like Theatre, wherein the Graces and Muses are Actors, no place more graced with Natures store, or furnished with such a store-house of bookes, the Sunne himsel^e so in loue with the sight, that the first and last thing hee vieweth in all those parts, is this Hill; and  where Antiquitie consecrated vnto him a stately Temple: the gods (if yee beleeue Homer,Hom. Il. ^. that they feasted in Ethiopia) could not there, nor in the world find a fitter place for entertainment, all of them contributing their best store (if I may so speake) to the banquet, Bacehu^, Iuno, Venus, Pomona, Ceres, and the rest, with store of fruits, wholsome ayre, pleasant aspect and prospect; secured by Mars, lest any sinister accident should interrupt their delights; if his garrisons of Souldiers were needfull where Nature had so strongly fortified before; onely Neptune with his ruder Sea-deities, and Pluto with his black-guard of barking Cerberus, and the rest of that dreadful traine (whose vnwelcome presence would trouble all that are present) are all, saue Charon, who attends on euery feast, yea now hath ferried away those supposed deities with himselfe, perpetually exiled from this place. Once, Heauen  and Earth, Nature and Industrie, haue all beene Corriuals to it, all presenting their best presents, to make it of this so louely presence, some taking this for the place of our Fore-fathers Paradise. And yet though thus admired of others, as a Paradise, it is made a Prison to some, on whom Nature had bestowed the greatest freedome, if their freedome had not beene eclipsedIam nocet esse Deum, Ouid. with greatnesse, and though goodly starres, yet by the Sunnes brightnesse are forced to hide their light, when grosse and earthly bodies are seene, their noblenesse making them prisoners, that one Sunne onely may shine in that Ethiopian Throne.
It is situate in a great Plaine largely extending it selfe euery way, without other hill in the same for the space of 30. leagues, the forme thereof round and circular, the height such, that it is a daies worke to ascend from the foot to the top; round about, the rock is cut so smooth and  euen, without any vnequall swellings, that it seemeth to him that stands beneath, like a high wall, wheron the Heauen is as it were propped: and at the top it is ouer-hanged with rocks, jutting forth of the sides the space of a mile, bearing out like mushromes, so that it is impossible to ascend it, or by ramming with earth, battering with Canon, scaling or otherwise to win it. It is aboue 20. leagues in circuit compassed with a wall on the top, well wrought, that neither man nor beast in chase may fall downe. The top is a plaine field, onely toward the South is a rising Hil, beautifying this Plaine, as it were with a watch-tower, not seruing alone to the eye, but yeelding also a pleasant spring which passeth through all that Plaine, paying his tributes to euery Garden that will exact it, and making a Lake, whence issueth a Riuer, which hauing from these tops espied Nilus, neuer leaues seeking to finde him, whom  he cannot leaue both to seeke and finde, that by his direction and conueyance hee may together with him present himselfe before the Father and great King of waters, the Sea. The way vp to it is cut out within the Rooke, not with staires, but ascending by little and little
 that one may ride vp with ease; it hath also holes cut to let in light, and at the foote of this ascending place, a faire gate, with a Corpus du Guarde. Halfe way vp is a faire and spacious Hall cut out of the same Rocke, with three windowes very large vpwards: the ascent is about the length of a lance and a halfe: and at the top is a gate with another guard. The aire aboue is wholesome and delectable; and they liue there very long, and without sicknesse. There are no Cities on the top, but palaces, standing by themselues, in number foure and thirtie, spacious, sumptuous, an^ beautifull, where the Princes of the Royall bloud haue their abode with their Families. The Souldiers that guard the place dwell in Tents.
There are two Temples, built before the raigne of the Queene of Saba, one in honour of the Sunne, the other of the Moone, the most magnificent in all Ethiopia, which by Caudace,  when shee was conuerted to the Christian faith, were consecrated in the name of the Holy Ghost, and of the Crosse. At that time (they tell) Caudace ascending with the Eunuch (whose proper name was Iudica) to baptize all of the Royall bloud, which were there kept, Zacharie the eldest of them, was in his baptisme named Philip, in remembrance of Philips conuerting the Eunuch, which caused all the Emperours to be called by that name, till Iohn the Saint, who would be called Iohn, because he was crowned on Saint Iohns day: and while they were busie in that holy worke of baptizing the Princes, a Doue in fierie forme came flying with beames of light, and lighted on the highest Temple dedicated to the Su^ne, whereupon it was afterwards consecrated to the Holy Ghost by Saint Matthew the Apostle, when he preached in Ethiopia. Those two Temples were after that giuen to the Monasticall  Knights of the Militarie Order of Saint Anthonie, by Philip the seuenth, with two great and spacious Couents built for them. I should lose both you and my selfe, if I should leade you into their sweet, flourishing, and fruitfull gardens, whereof there are store in this Plaine, curiously made, and plentifully furnished with fruits both of Europe plants there, as Peares, Pippins, and such like; and of their owne, as Oranges, Citrons, Limons, and the rest; Cedars, Palme-trees, with other Trees, and varietie of herbes and flowers, to satisfie the sight, taste and sent. B^t I would entertayne you, onely with rarities, no where else to be found; and such is the Cubayo tree, pleasant beyond all comparison in taste, and whereunto for the vertue is imputed the health, and long life of the Inhabitants; and the Balme tree, whereof there is great store here: and hence it is thoughtIos. Ant. l. 8. cap. 2. the Queene of Saba  carried and gaue to Salomon, who planted them in Iudaea, from whence they were transplanted at Cairo long after. The plentie of Graines and Corne there growing, the charmes of birds alluring the eares with their warbling Notes, and fixing the eyes on their colours, ioyntly agreeing in beautie, by their disagreeing varietie, and other Creatures that adorne this Paradise, might make me glut you (as sweet meates vsually doe) with too much store. Let vs herefore take view of some other things worthy our admiration in this admired Hill, taking the Friar for our guide, whose credit I leaue to your censure.


@. II. His liberall reports of the Librarie, and incredible treasures therein.
SVch is the stately building of the two Churches aforesaid, with their Monasteries, the pillars and roofes of stone, richly and cunningly wrought, the matter and the workmanship conspiring magnificence; that of Iasper, Alabaster, Marble, Porphetie; this with painting, gilding, and much curiositie; the two Monasteries, contayning each of them 1500. religious Knights and Monkes; each hauing also two Abbots; one of the militarie Knights; the other spirituall, of the Monkes, inferior to the former. In the Monasterie of the Holy Crosse are two rare peeces, whereon Wonder may iustly fasten  both her eyes: the Treasurie and LibrarieThe Library of the Prete. of the Emperor, neither of which is thought to be marchable in the world. That Librarie of Constantinople,Zonar. An. lib. 3. wherein were 120000. bookes, nor that at Pergamus of 200000. nor the Alexandrian Librarie, wherein GelliusGell. l. 6. c. 17. numbreth 700000. (had the fire not beene admitted, too hastie a Student, to consume them) yet had they come short, if report ouer-reach not, of this whereof wee speake; their number is in a manner innumerable, their price inestimable. The Queene of Saba (they say) procured bookes hither from all parts, besides many which Salomon gaue her, and from that time to this, their Emperors haue succeeded in like care and diligence. There are three great Halls, each aboue two hundred paces large, with bookes of all Sciences, written in fine parchment, with much curiositie of golden Letters and other workes, and cost in the writing, binding,  and couers: some on the floore, some on shelues about the sides: there are few of paper, which is but a new thing in Ethiopia. There are the writings of Enoch copied out of the stones
 wherein they were engrauen, which entreat of Philosophy, of the Heauens and Elements. Others go vnder the name of Noe, the subiect whereof is Cosmography, Mathematikes, Ceremonies and Prayers: some of Abraham, which he composed when he dwelt in the Valley of Mamre, and there read publikely Philosophy and the Mathematikes. There is very much of Salomon, a great number passing vnder his name: many ascribed to Iob, which he writ after the recouery of his prosperitie: many of Esdras, the Prophets and the High Priests. And besides the foure canonicall Gospels, many others ascribed to Bartholomew, Thomas, Andrew, and others: much of the Sibelles, in Verse and Prose: the workes of the Queene of Saba: the Greeke Fathers all that haue written, of which, many are not extant with vs; the WritersFr. Luys hath a very large catalogue of them, l. 1. c. 9. taken ou^ (as he saith) of an Index, which Anthony Gricui and L. Cremones made of them, being sent thither by th^ Pope Gregory 13. at the instance of Cardinall Garlet, which saw and admired the varietie of them, as did many others then in their company.  of Syria, Aegypt, Africa, and the Latine Fathers translated, with others innumerable in the Greeke, Hebrew, Arabike, Abassine, Aegyptian, Syrian, Chaldee farre more Authors, and more of them then we haue; few in Latine; yet Titus Liuius is there whole, which with vs imperfect, and some of the Workes of Thomas Aquinas, Saint Augustines Works are in Arabike: Poets, Philosophers, Physicians, Rabbines, Talmudists, Cabalists, Hieroglyphikes, and others would be too tedious to relate. When Ierusalem was destroyed by Titus; when the Saracens ouer-ranne the Christian world; many bookes were conueyed out of the Easterne parts into Aethiopia; when Ferdinand and Isabella expelled the Iewes out of Spaine, many of them entred into Aethiopia, and for doing this without licence, enriched the Pretes Library With their bookes: when Charles the fift restored Muleasses to his Kingdome, the  Prete hearing that there was at Tunis a great Librarie, sent and bought more then three thousand bookes of diuers Arts. There are aboue two hundred Monkes, whose office is to looke to the Library, to keepe them cleane and sound, each appointed to the bookes of that language which he vnderstandeth: the Abbot hath strait charge from the Emperour, to haue care thereof; he esteeming this Library more then his Treasure.
And yet his Treasure is such,Litterae Dauid. as leaues all others of all Princes in the world behind, quite out of sight: it is a Sea, that euery yeere receiueth new Riuers, neuer running out: the Emperours, euen from the time of the Queene of Saba, laying vp part of their reuenue heere. And thereforeSpannes. Dauid the Prete, in Letters to King Iohn the second of Portugall, said, that he had Gold as the sands of the Sea, and the Starres in the skie.The Treasurie of the Prete. The first that coyned money,  was Alexander the third, which dyed in the yeere of our Lord 1603. stamping in the one side, the figure of Saint Matthew, the Aethiopian Patron, and on the other, the Lion and Crosse, which is the Armes of Aethiopia. His jewels, heere kept, are incomparable: Topazes, Amethists, Saphires, Diamonds, and others. Hee hath one jewell, which was found in the Riuer Niger (that brings forth more gemmes then any Riuer in the world) which is one piece of stone or rocke, diuer^^fied with a thousand varieties of stone: it is square, about two palmesSpannes. and a halfe, and thicke withall: there are in it an hundred and sixtie Diamonds, one as large as the palme of ones hand, others of one, two, or three fingers, and some lesse: it hath about three hundred Emeralds; Rubies the greatest in the world: aboue fiftie Saphyres, Turqueses, Balazes, Amethists, Spinels, Topazes, Iacinths, Chrysolites,  and all other kinds: Nature heere playing the Ieweller, and representing a Map of the worlds Gemmes in one jewell, without, and infinitely beyond all Arte of Man. Being set in the Sunne, it seemes a combined marriage of heauenly and earthly Excellence, that no mortall eye hath seene the like, nor is able to endure the sight of this. When Bernardo Vech^t^, a Ieweller, was sent thither by Francis de Medicis Duke of Florence, hee accounted it beyond all estimation or value. The Emperour keepes it in a Boxe of Gold. By the perswasion of that Bernardo, hee hath made him Tables set wi^h thousands of stones in them. Corrall is more esteemed in Aethiopia then Gold, and therefore Frier Luys denies that Corrals in the bottome of the red Sea, make it red, as some affirme: and that which BarrosBarros dec. ^. lib. 8. cap. 1. saith, hath been  found there, is vnperfect.


@. III. Of the Princes of the Blood there kept, and of the Election of the EMPEROVR.
BVt greater Iewels then those are kept in Amara, the Princes of the Blood Royall, which are sent to this hill at eight yeeres old, and neuer returne thence, except they be chosen Emperours. The first Author of this custome was Iosue the Nephew of Salomon, and sonne of Meilec or Melilec, to remoue all occasions of ciuill warres about Succession.  And their continued succession in one Line, without alienation, is imputed to this. Some Emperours for a time had left it, till Abraham being Emperour had, or pretended to
 haue a Reuelation to renue that custome, if hee would continue the Scepter in the Linage of Dauid. The Princes which liue there, are sixe, eight, twelue, and sometimes more. An. 1608. they were sixe; euery of which liues by himselfe, and that in great estate and maiestie in royall Palaces, with spacious Hals richly hanged, remoued to another Palace at pleasure: they meet alrogether when they will play, hunt, walke, and on Holy-dayes to Diuine Seruice: they take place according to their age; each hath his ten seruants for ordinarie attendance, which are the sonnes, or descended of the Tributary Kings: for baser offices, the great master or military Abbot employeth the Souldiers that guard at the foot of the Hill, which without license may not ascend. They haue other graue persons to instruct them in vertue and learning. Euery Citie, that is, euery habitation of a thousand houses, is at their owne  charge to send thither three men, a Gentleman, a Citizen, and a Plebeian, for the guard of the Hill, which make vp the number of seuen thousand fiue hundred, there being two thousand and fiue hundred Cities in the Empire. The militarie Abbots order them in their seuerall Wards, the baser at the foot of the Hill, the Citizens at the middle, and the Gentlemen at the top; their Captaines changed at euery two moneths end. Besides the Souldiers Tents, are many others of Merchants and Officers. No woman may ascend, nor hath done since Queene Candace was heere baptized by her Eunuch: the Princes liue single, and marrie not, as Aluares hath (saith our Frier) vntruely affirmed of them.
When the Emperor is dead, many solemne ceremonies are obserued, both religious and ciuill about the Election of another, which is in the authoritie of the two militarie Abbots of  St Anthonies Order in the Mount. Oathes are taken both of the Electors and Elected, the first to vse sinceritie, the other to raigne iustly, obseruing, and causing in his Empire to be obserued, the Lawes of God, Christian Religion, the foure first Councels, of Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Constantinople: and (if theF. Luys de Vr^^t. Hist. Aethiop. Fryer reach not, for in their Holy Fathers case I relye not much on their Holinesse) to acknowledge the Florentine Councell, and the Popes Supremacie, and lastly, the Constitutions of Iohn the Saint, and Philip the Seuenth, ancient Emperours: which done, in solemne Procession of all Estates they goe to Church, and hauing set the Emperor in his Throne, the Princes of the Blood are brought out of the Palace, where in the time of the Election they had been inclosed, to kisse his hand, and sweare fidelity, cloathed in the habite of the Knights of St Anthony: the same oath is giuen also by the Kings his Vassals, (foure of which are present at the Election) the Counsellors, Prelates and others, according  to their place. After this, fires are made on the Towres of the Mount, to giue notice of this Election, which being seene by the neerer Cities, they also by the like fires (as it were) proclaime the same in a moment through all the Empire: which is confirmed by Posts sent thence on Dromedaries, by the Abbot of the Abbey of the Holy Ghost, one of the Electors, and the Councell vnto the Citie of Saba, and the mother of the New-Elect, if she be liuing, and to his neere kindred, to come and reioyce with him. The next day the Emperour goeth, in black habite to the Palace where the Princes are, and saluteth them with kinde embracements, one by one, with his Bonnet in his hand: which is done in the next place by the Prelates, whom in honour of their Ecclesiasticall dignities the Princes re-salute standing, with their heads vncouered. The tributarie Kings follow, not with embracements, but kissing  their hands, rendring their salutations, and after them the Embassadors. The Emperour, hauing remained sometime in priuate talke with them, goeth to the Abbey of the Holy Ghost, and putting off his black habite, is clothed in Scarlet; and being on horsebacke, attended with his Family, the Abbots and Counsellors, passeth to the Abbot of the Holy-Crosse, where the two Abbots of that Abbey meet him; and after oath giuen to preserue the ancient customes, present him with the keyes of the Treasurie and Library: the Emperour bestowing as much of the said Treasure as he pleaseth. After all other ceremonies, the Counsellors of the Court come to the hill with 12000 Knights of Saint Anthonies Order (which are the Emperours Guard) and the eldest Sons of the King, to conuey him solemnly to Zamb^a the Citie, where Court and Councell reside, where with all solemnity and magnificence he is likewise receiued,  and conducted into the Palace, and placed on his Throne of twelue steps, with acclamations of long life and happinesse on all hands. Fiue dayes Festiuall being here passed in al publike reioycings, he goeth to Saba to take the oaths of all his subiect Kings in person (whereof onely foure had been present at the Election) and one holding the Crowne, another the Scutchion of the Armes of that tributarie King, he sweareth on the Scepter (which is a golden crosse) true fidelitie and obedience, and the Emperour puts on the Crowne againe on his head; and the said Scutcheon, with his Armes, he giueth into his hand, and licenceth him to depart to his Pauillion without the Citie. These Kings are truely Kings, and succeed in the inheritance of their Fathers, receiuing the tribute of the subiects of their seueral Kingdomes, and are not Deputies, or Vice-Royes, at the meere pleasure of the Emperour: but if one bee  vpon iust cause displaced, his sonne succeedeth: and therefore the Prete is called King of
 Kings. The eldest sonne of euery of the Kings attend alwayes on the Emperour, and haue attending on them ten seruants of the sonnes of the Nobles of their Kingdomes.
The Emperour is bound by ancient custome to take a wife of the posteritie of those three Magi which adored Christ in his infancie, whom the Aethiopian and Romane Tradition calleth Kings by the names of Gaspar, Melchior, Balthasar; of which, the Aethiopians say, that Melchior was of Arabia, and Balthasar of Persia, which being forced by persecution ofWhen were the Arrians of such power in Arabia but especially in Persia? Arrians, came into Aethiopia, in the time of Iohn the Saint, which raigned after Philip the 7, and receiued of his hands the Kingdomes of Fatigar, and Soa, the former giuen to the posterity of Balthasar, the other to the linage of Melchior. The Fryer addeth, That all the legitimate descendents of these three Families are born with a starre on one of their sides; and that at the Jubile, in the time of Gregory the thirteenth, 1575. there were three of those three Families at Rome, with that naturall ensigne of the supernaturall and miraculous Star. Yea, the legitimate Mahumetans in Arabia and Persia, remaining of those kindreds, haue the same signe, as Don Iohn sware to him, that he had seene. The Councell gouerneth according to the 127. Statutes, made by the first Philips, and Iohn the Saint. Nothing is punished with death but treason, vnder which name they also comprehend murther and adultery: of this mortall sentence the Lyons are the Executioners, which in euery Citie are kept for that purpose. Some Italians had been found guilty of the sin against Nature, a thing for which the Aethiopians (as some of theCic. Orat. pro S. Roscio. ancients for Parricide) had no Law, as not thinking any would so far degenerate; and therefore knew not how to punish them: but it was committed to the Latine Councell, which adiudged them to bee burned; a punishment not knowne before in those parts, yet fitting to those vnnaturall burnings. The fault and punishment being of equall trangenesse, the Emperour would not haue it executed there, but sent them to Goa to the Portugall Viceroy for that purpose. Heresie and Apostasie are likewise punished with death. That Latine Councell was instituted by Alexander the third, for causes and persons of Europe to be tryed, and iudged by Iudges of their owne, resident at the Court (as the Grand Councell is) and chosen of each Nation two, of the Venetians, Florentines, and Portugals: the two former come thither by the way of Cairo. Andrew Ouiedo a Iesuite, sent thither by the Pope with the title of Bishop of Hierapolis, and after Barretus his death, his Successor in the Patriarch-ship of Aethiopia, was Author and Counseller to the Emperour of this Institution, and by him made President of the same. This man (G. Bot. part. 3. lib. 2. Maff. Hist. Ind. l. 10. Eman. Acosta. Botero Maffaeus, and others say) had miserable entertainment, with the residue of his society: but by Fryer Luys (from the relation of Don Iohn) tels, That he liued and dyed in great honour amongst them, as he doth elsewhere magnifie exceedingly their respect to the Romane Papacy and Religion. Credat Iudeus Apela. Cui bonoCic. pro Milone. is the rule of my faith to Fryers and Iesuites in their Relations: In Naturall and Morall Histories, which serue not to the building of Babylons Towre, I receiue them with attention, with thanks, and if need be, with admiration in some things: but when them come with Slime in stead of Morter, and would get Rome a Name, I remember their Vowes and Profession, and yeeld no further attendance. That Claudius which was then Emperour, and his Successor Adamas, were of Scismaticall and Tyrannicall quality, as other Historians affirme, Frier Luys not onely denies, but extolleth their good parts.
He which now is Emperour, was elected An. 1606. and called himselfe Zaraschaureat, a sprout or bud of the linage of Dauid assister of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. He is a man haughtie and valorous, and was therefore chosen, because the Turkish Empire was so full of seditions, and the Sophi had sent his Embassadour to them, to chuse a fit warrior, that they might with ioynt forces assault the Ottoman.


@. IIII. Of their Schooles and Cities.
THere are in all the Cities of Aethiopia two Schooles or Colledges, for the instruction of youth; one for the male sexe, the other for the female; each diuided into three parts, the first for the Gentlemens children, the second for Citizens, the third for the baser vulgar, with their seuerall instructers, and without communion, medling, or conuersing of the one with the other. the Seminarie or Colledge of Boyes is a quarter of a league without the City, the other within. There are they taught Letters and Religion. All, euen the Kings themselues, are bound to send their children thither to be instructed: and the Priests resort thither for Confession, and ministring the Sacrament to them. They may resort home at Festiuall times: otherwise they are there detained. The Virgins, from ten to twenty; the other, from ten to sixteene yeeres of their age. They haue not only this order in their wel ordered Schooles, but in their disordered misorderly Stews, the deuils work-houses, and suburbs of Hell, which yet in Rome, and places of that Religion, are permitted
 and admitted the Cities, and his Holinesse selfe is not a little enriched with (that which God prohibited)Deut. 23.18. The price of the Dogge, and of the Whore. The Ethiopians permit not any to bee strange women, but strangers of other Countreys, which may not enter into their Cities: nor may the Nobles enter into the common houses which belong to the Citizens, or these to those of the Plebians, nor any but to those peculiarly designed their state, vnder paine of death; as adulterers, to bee cast to Lyons. These women are hired by certaine Officers at a common price, and are not to take any thing of particular men: they goe in pale-coloured garments, and if they distaste and forsake that beastly trade, they send them to some places subiect vnto the Portugals, not admitting them to conuerse with their women for feare of infection.
But to leaue these Beasts, the Ethiopians giue great respect to their Physicians, which are onely of their Gentry, and that not all that will, but onely such as certaine Officers shall chuse, of euery Citie to be sent to their generall Vniuersities (of which there are seuen in Ethiopia) there to be taught naturall Philosophy (Logicke and other Arts they know not) together with Physicke, and the Arts of the Apothecarie and Chirurgian. They are there maintained at the publike charge of the Cities that send them. When the Doctors and Instructers see them fit for Graduates, they go with them to the Monks of Alleluya, and of Plurimanos, who with a Monkes Cowle, or Hood, and other Doctoricall Ensignes, doe inuest and inaugurate them in that Degree. They are great Herbarists. They makeMaking of Mummie. Mummia otherwise then in other parts, where it is either made of bodies buried in the Sands, or taken out of ancient Sepulchres, where they had been laid, being inbalmed with Spices: For they take a captiue Moore, of the best complexion; and after long dieting and medicining of him, cut off his head in his sleepe, and gashing his body full of wounds, and therein all the best Spices, and then wrap him vp in Hay, being before couered with a Seare-cloth; after which they burie him in a moist place, couering the body with earth. Fiue dayes being passed, they take him vp againe, and remouing the Seare-cloth and Hay, hang him vp in the Sunne, whereby the body resolueth and droppeth a substance like pure Balme, which liquor is of great price: The fragrant sent is such, while it hangeth in the Sunne, that it may be smelt (he saith) a league off. The priuiledges of Physicians are, that they are freed from the common custome of giuing one in three of their sonnes for the Emperors warres, that they may ride on Elephants in the Cities, which is allowed onely to the Emperors, Prelates, and Priests that are Virgins. They may also weare Miniuer-hoods, and are free from Subsidies and Paiments. Theologie and the Chaldee tongue is taught onely among their Priests and Ecclesiasticall persons in their Churches and Monasteries. They reade Diuinitie in their natiue tongue: the Text is the foure first generall Councels: the Scripture they reade in Chaldee,Of this Chaldee, see sup. c. 1. which is with them as Latine with vs. They handle not questions as the Schoolemen, in Logicall disputations and Arguings, but copiously and eloquently interpret the Scriptures.
Because we haue mentioned their Cities Saba and Zambra, let vs take some briefe view of them, and so leaue this Spaniard, whose Discourse hath (I hope, not without some delight) thus long holden you. Besides these two Cities, none haue aboue three thousand houses in them. But these are populous and magnificent, with Towers, Temples, triumphant Arches, Obeliskes, Piramides, and the like tokens of industry, Antiquitie, and Maiestie. Saba was founded by that Queene which visited Salomon, and was the mother-Citie of the Empire. It hath fiue thousand houses, great and sumptuous, the streets spacious, with Portals or Pent-houses, that men may walke safe from the Sunnes violence. It hath foure chiefe Gates, all of Alabaster and Iasper, wrought with Antique-workes; the Gate-doores of Cedar curiously carued. The wayes that leade to these Gates, for the space of two leagues are set with Palmes, Planes, Oranges, Cedars, Cypresses, and other trees on both sides, for shade and fruit: the foure high streets goe thorow the Citie acrosse, and where they meet, is an Arch or Vault erected on high Pillars, fairely wrought and gilded, with the brazen Image of S. Matthew, their supposed Patron, as bigge as a Giant, gilded also; the worke of Architects sent by Francis Duke of Florence. Neere to this Citie are Mines of Gold, Gardens, and other places of pleasure and profit.
Zambra is greater, containing thirty thousand houses, and innumerable concourse of people. It stands in the Kingdome of Cafates, and nigh that great Lake, which hereof is called Zambra: where the Emperor, leauing his wonted maner of remouing vp and downe in Tents haue fixed his Court-royall: and yet without the Citie are many Tents that belong to the Court. Here the Prete liueth, with two and forty sons of Kings, and with his great Councell, and the Latine. Alexander the third built the Palace here 1570. by the Duke of Florence his workmen. If I should follow the Frier further, I could leade you on in a delectable way, but doubtfull, like the Poets writings, and bring you into Elisian, but fabulous fields, fertile in al things but truth: wherein let the Reader pardon that I haue already been so long,
 rather then tedious, in this Vtopian Aethiopia: at the first much suspected by me, as by many passages in the Story is expressed: but since largely written against by Godignus, a Iesuit, and by latter Relations found eyther vncertaine or false; whose paines shall helpe make vp another Chapter, and then will we proceed in our Pilgrimage.



CHAP. VI. Relations of Aethiopia by GODIGNVS, and other Authours lately published seeming more credible.

@. I. The seuerall Countreyes of Abassia, Their Situation, Inhabitants, Riuers and Lakes.
 IF I should haue left out the former Chapter for the vncertaine truth or certayne falshoods therein contayned, some perhaps would eyther for the Pilgrims words, or the Friers inuention, haue desired it, were it but as a Comedie to delight our tyred Reader. For my selfe, had my Intelligence so well serued me at first, it had been easier then, not to haue admitted, then here now to haue omitted it. I haue therefore suffered it still to enioy a place, rather for your delight then credit, and here would giue you those things that are more likely; I hope, I cannot warrant more true, such as Nicolaus Godignus and others haue written, some things being the same, which before out of Aluares and others are mentioned, besides other things exacter  or later. And first of the Countrey it selfe.Ioan. Gabriel. ap. Nic. Godig. De Abassinerum Rebus l. 1. c 4 and P. Iarric. Thes. Rer. Iud. l. 5. c. 31 and seq: This Gabriel was borne in Abassia, the Issue (as were his followers) of the Portugals, which had assisted vnder Christopher Gama, Claudius the Emperour against Gradigna the Moore, whom he slew, and was slaine himselfe by those Moores, An. 1542. Ioannes Gabriel, Captayne of the Portugall Souldiers, in these parts, hath written, that the Abassine Empire contayneth sixe and twentie Kingdomes in ancient right; diuided in foureteene Regions: eight of these Kingdome lye in successiue order from Swachen towards to West; the first of which is Tigrai, contayning seuenteene great Tracts, vnder so many Lieutenants or Gouernours, which rule all affaires of Peace and War. The Turkes possesse the Sea parts, the Saracens the Coast adioyning; the Inland is inhabited promiscuously by Christians, and Ethnicks. They are blacke of hue, deformed in shape, in condition miserable, of conditions wicked. They haue goodly Riuers dryed vp in Summer, where yet with little digging, both water is found, and fishes, called Sagasi. The next Kingdome to Tigrai, is Daneali, hauing the Red Sea on the East,  thence extending Westwards, not farre nor fertile inhabited by Moores tributaries to the Abassine. Angote, Amara, Boa, L^^ca, are foure Kingdomes inhabited by Christians only. The seuenth Kingdome is very large, of seuenteene Tracts, partly inhabited by Ethnickes, partly Christians; it is called Abagamedri. Dambea hath also Ethnickes mixed with Christians, being but two Tracts. On the other side of Dancali towards the Red Sea, Aucaguerle trends alongst the Coast, possessed by the Moores, not subiect to the Abassine. Adel followeth in twelue degrees Northerly, in which is Zeila, sometimes called Aualites, a famous Mart: the whole Kingdome is inhabited by Moores, vnneighbourly Neighbours to the Abassines, whence came Gradagna, or Gradamar, the Mahumetan King, which had wel-nigh  subdued all Aethiopia, when the Portugals opposed themselues, who after diuers ouerthrowes, tooke him, and cut off his head. After this is Dahali, which trendeth towardes Membaxas: the Inhabitants, some Christians, some Ethnikes, pay tribute to the Prete. Oecie followeth, more within land; the Inhabitants, Moores and Ethnikes, subiect to the Abassine. Arium and Fatigaer the next Kingdomes are Christian; Zinger, Ethnicke. Rozanagum the sixteenth Kingdome is Christian, but not subiect to the Abassine Empire. From hence extend other Kingdomes towards the North; Roxa of Ethnickes; Goma of Christians and Ethnickes; Such is Nerea, a large Kingdome towards Monomotapa. Zethe is inhabited by Ethnickes subiect to the Emperour. The next are Conche and Mahaola small and altogether Ethnicke, Goroma a great Kingdomoe of twenty Tracts, Christians and Heathens, almost wholly compassed by Nilus, able for plenty to feed many Armies, with which it is vsually  infestect. The Seedman followes the haruest man, and presently after the reaping, sowes new Seed without other tillage. The three last Kingdomes lye towards Egypt, Damote, Sua, Iasculum: through this euery Lent passe great troupes of Pilgrimes to Ierusalem. The foureteene
 Regions or Prouinces I forbeare to mention. Of all these Kingdomes at this day onely Tigrai, Abagamedri, Dambea and Goroma, are obedient to the Abassine. There are foure principall Riuers in this Aethiopia: Taucea running from the South to the North, the sandy Earth in the way, continually stealing, and vnderearth passages robbing him of the watery Tribute which he intendeth to the Sea: neere it are high vnpassable Mountaynes, inhabited by Abassine Iewes, which still obserue the Mosaicall Law, fierce and terrible to their Neighbours, and could neuer be conquered by the Abassines. The second Riuer is Oara, exceeding Nilus in watery store, which he bestoweth in like manner on the Countrey by which he passeth into the Zeilan Sea. The waters are pleasant; but the Abassine Christians will not drinke thereof, because passing through the Countries of Mahumetans, it yeelds them nourishment.  The third Riuer is Gabea, which neere to Mombaza visits the Ocean. The fourth is Nilus. There are as many Lakes: The first Aicha, in Angote: The second, Dambeabahar; that is, the Sea of Dambea, not farre from Gubbai, where the Emperours in these times reside, if they betake themselues out of their Tents into the City. This Lake is sixty miles long, and fiue and twenty broad, receiues on one side the waters of Nilus, is full of fishes, and Riuer-horses, which sometimes are dangerous to passengers; two Iesuits in one of their Boates made of Rushes, hardly escaping their assaults. Many small Ilands are in this Lake, in one of which is a Towre, their Treasury, and to which M^lefactors are confined. The third Lake is Zella in Oecie: the fouth Xacala, not farre from it.  


@. II. Of the Soyle, Fruits, Creatures, Seasons, and Climate.
ANtonieAnt. Fernand. Soc. Iesu.Fernandes in an Epistle dated here in Iune 1610. numbreth aboue fortie Prouinces in Abassia, but in substance agrees in the former. The Soyle (hee sayth) is hollow, and full of deepe Clifts: in the midst of the plaine fields you shall often see steepe and high Rockes of solid stone, which in time of warre serue them  in stead of Forts. The whole Region is full of Metals, but neglected partly by the sloth of the Inhabitants, partly for feare to bring Turkish Inuasions vpon them, if such baits were discouered. They take so much Iron only, as they finde without digging on the face of the Earth. Corne, Herbes, Trees are there in variety, but these not excellent in their fruits, except one, the fruit whereof saues their liues by the vertue it hath against Wormes, whereto this people is much subiect by their eating of raw flesh, and therefore euery moneth purge themselue^ with this fruit: they haue Peaches, Pomegranates, Citrons, Indian Figges, but not in great plenty: They haue Hares, Harts, Goats, Swine, Elephants, Camels, Buffles, Lions,Cantlopardalis. Panthers, Tigres, Rhinocerots, and other like Beasts. One so huge, that a man on horsebacke may passe vpright vnder his belly, feeding on leaues from the tops of trees, and  formed like a Camell.Hippopotami. Their Riuer-horses doe much harme to the fruits of the Earth, being of Vast bodies, and their mouth three quarters of a yard in the opening. In the night they come forth, and if the Husbandmen did not keepe diligent watch, would doe extreme harme to the Corne; they feed also on grasse. In the water they are very fierce, and like Dogges assault men and teare them. They are so afraid of fire, that one Boy with a burning firebrand will chase away thousands of them. Some there are which hunt these beasts with Launces and Arrowes, and liue on their flesh little differing from Beefe. There is also found in their Riuers and Lakes the TorpedoTorpedo. or Crampfish, of strange effect in Nature: if holden in the hand and not stirring, it makes no alteration; but if it moues it selfe, the arteries, ioynts, sinewes, and all the members of the body, suffer an exceeding torture and astonishment,  which presently ceaseth with letting goe the Fish. The Aethiopians haue a superstitious conceit,Nilus: the Ethnicks neere dwelllng offer Sacrifices to this spring, out of which alway issueth a grosse vapour. There is a great heape of bones by reason of these sacrificed beasts. that it is good to driue away Deuils out of Men, thinking it torments those Spirits no lesse then humane bodies. They say (I haue not made tryall thereof my selfe) that if this fish bee laid amongst dead fishes and there stirre it selfe, it makes them also to moue as if there were life in them. There are many of them in Nilus in the end of the Prouince of Goyama, where is a bottomlesse Lake (so the Portugall thought that could not sound the bottom with his Pike) whence continuallly springs abundance of water, being the head of that Riuer, little at the first, and after a dayes iourney and a halfe running to the East, and then entreth a Lake supposed the greatest in the World, passing swiftly through the midst thereof without mixture of waters, and casting it selfe ouer high Rockes, takes freer scope, but presently is swallowed  of the Earth, so that it in some places it may be stepped ouer. After fiue dayes iourney towards the East, it winds it selfe againe to the West, and so passeth on in his way towards
 Egypt. The Aethiopians affirme, that it is easie to diuert the Riuers course, and to famish Egypt, but I thinke it farre easier to say then doe it. Low places in Abassia are intemperately hote. Their Winter continues from May to September: and then begins in the Red Sea, which I haue obserued (Fernandes reports it) to flow in all time of the Moones increase, and to flow continually out all the time of the decrease. In their Winter it raineth and thundreth commonly euery afternoone. In the Kingdome of Zambea in which we now liue, wee may see both the Poles, the Antarctike higher, with his Crosse-starres. In this Tract of Heauen there is as it were a cloud or blot, supposed more thinne then other parts: about it are many Starres lesse then those which illustrate the other Pole. They beginne their yeere with the  Spring on the first of September, numbring twelue moneths, in each thirty dayes, reckoning the odde dayes betweene August and September by themselues. The Abassines expresse their ioy most by eating and drinking, and therefore on Holidayes resort to their Churches, which are shaded with trees, where are set Vessels full of a liquor, which they vse in stead of Wine (which they make of Honey, adding Opium) and thereafter their holies, they serue their bellies, drinking to drunkennesse, quarrels, fighting. They haue Grapes, but (except in the Vintage season) they straine their dryed Raisons, insomuch that Peter Paez a Iesuite writ from thence, Anno 1604. that the Emperour desiring him to say Masse after the Romane rite, they could find no Wine to doe it.



@. III. Of their Customes in priuate life and publike Gouernment, and their late miseries.
THey sow little more then they must spend. And for their apparell, the richer buy it of the Moores, attiring themselues after their fashion, the rest both Men and Women vse a skinne, or some course piece of linnen, without adorning by Arte. When they doe reuerence to any, they cast off this cloth from their shoulders to the  Nauell, stripping themselues halfe naked. They weare their haire long, which serues them for a hat or head a-tire, and for greater neatnesse and gallantry they curle it in diuers manners; and anoint it with Butter, which in the Sunne shewes like dew on the grasse. So curious are they herein, that for feare of disordering their curles, they haue a crotch fastned in the Earth, whereon at night they lay their neckes, and so sleepe with their heads hanging. They brand themselues on the whole body, specially on the face. The nailes of their little fingers they suffer to grow to the greatest length, imitating, as much as may be, the spurs of Cocks, which also they sometimes fasten and fit to their fingers. Their hands and feet (which commonly are bare) they dye reddish with the iuyce of a certaine barke.N. Godig. l. 1. c. 12. They are a slothfull people, scarsely prouiding necessaries for life, not giuing themselues to hunting or fishing: and  although the materials of Woollen, linnen, Cottons, are at hand, yet doe the most of them couer their bodies like beasts, with rude skins; each man commonly wearing a Rammes skin, the ends fastned at his hands and feet. They lye on the hides of their Kine, without other Beds. In stead of Tables they haue great troughes rudely hollowed wherein they take their meat without cloth or Napkin. Their vessels are of black Earth. Few of them are Merchants, besides the Mahumetans. They haue no great Cities, but many vnfortified Villages. Their greatest Towne hath scarcely sixteene houses. They vse little writing, no not in their publike Iudgements: they haue no Bookes, but for their Holies, and Officers for their accounts. And because we haue mentioned their Iudgements, it shall not be amisse to expresse  their forme out of Fernandes. The Emperour hath a House called Cala, low, without any vpper storie. To the doore all such come as haue any suite, euery one according to their differing Language, crying, Lord, Lord: some also imitating the voyces of Beasts, whereby is knowne of what Prouince they are. Then doth the Emperour commit their case to the Vmbari (so are the Iudges called of the word Vmbare, which signifies a three-footed stoole, on which each of them sits, some on the right, others on the left hand.) In the Townes the Lords are Iudges, where when any one sueth, the Lord sends one of his Seruants to the Defendant, assigning him a time to make his appearance; and then the Plaintiffe and Defendant plead each his owne case (this is the fashion in Barbary also, and many other places:) and after they haue both said what they can, all that are present giue sentence. From this they may appeale to the Vmbares, from them to the Azages, or Supreme Iudges, and from these to the Emperour.  Sometimes Iustices Itinerant or Visitors, are sent into the Prouince to enquire of Crimes, which places being bought, cause Iustice to be sold, and these to be Legall Theeues, more dangerous then Out-lawes.

In the flourishing state of the Empire, they say, the Emperour was wont to hold a continuall Progresse in Tents, esteeming it base to liue in any City: But wheresoeuer he abode, there was presently a City of Tents, hauing due places assigned to all publike and priuate employments, Churches, Hospitals for sicke, and for the poore, Victualling-houses, Shops of seuerall Trades, and the like. They say also that this mouing City was thirty miles about, and that many thousand Mules, besides Camels, and innumerable Porters attended on the baggage at euery remoue. But if these things were euer true, the case is much altered in this last Age, and euery day growes worse and worse; those things which yee haue heard out of the Frier being false: Neyther was there euer any such Emperour as Alexander the third, by him so often mentioned; but what with the Turkes on the North side, the Moores on the  East, the Gallae from other parts, and intestine Rebellions, each challenging his right, not by Election or Inheritance, so much as by the Sword, all things are brought almost to nothing; and the Aethiopian greatnesse is now in a great Eclipse. And for that Balthasar which the Frier pretends his Authour, Godignus sayth, that he being examined hereof, affirmed them to be the Friers Inuentions: somethings he confessed he had published not true, but such as hee thought could doe no man harme. Whatsoeuer therefore in this Booke is borrowed from that Spaniard, I doe neither in all things disclaime; nor can exact credit thereto, this being the lyers reward, that euen in true reports he is doubted. More full Relations of the present State of this Empire, I referre to our next Aethiopian Visitation. The Gallae before mentioned, are a Nationlesse Nation, eyther the same, or like in conditions to the Giacchi or Iagges,  of which we shall anon speake, which as in Congo and other parts, so heere also brought confusion and desolation where they came.
As for those Patriarches, Barretus and Ouiedus, Godignus hath bestowed on each of them a Booke in Relation of their Liues: and inserted Epistles of their owne, to prooue the Frier a Lier: Barrettus desiring to be rid of that Title, which he could not make reall, and Ouiedo hauing a Briefe or Bull from Pius Quintus to free him, and send him to Iapan; which hee yet refused vpon hopes of better successe eyther amongst the Christians,See the Copie of this Bull, and Ouiedos answer, God. l. 3. c. 12. or Ethnickes in those parts, many of which in Damut and Sinaxis had desired Baptisme, and by the wicked Emperour were reiected. He propoundeth also an Ouerture to send fiue hundred Portugall Souldiers into those parts, by which strength they might succour themselues and their followers;  an argument of their weaknesse, which could with so small a handfull be awed.
This may be added, that these Aethiopians haue their blacke colour in such estimation, that they paint Christ,Iarric. l. 5. c. 31. the Angels, and Saints blacke; the Deuill, Iudas, Caiphas, Pilate, and wicked persons they paint white. They take Salt out of Minerals in pieces of halfe a foote, which serues there instead of money,Pet.. Paez. lit. Iul. 24. 1603. ten or fifteene of those pieces being the price of a slaue; the cause that when Paez the Iesuit first entred these parts, his Gold could doe him little seruice, and when a Saracen in his company had dressed him a Hen, yet durst not he taste of it, for offending the scrupulous Abassines, who will eate nothing which a Turke hath killed. Hee writes that their houses are base and little, round, of earth, couered with thatch, contayning but one roome, except the Palaces of great Men. In that yeere 1603. the Grasse-hoppers  did great harme, which ate vp all that was greene where they came: a greater misery of Ciuill Warre accompanying, the Emperour being deposed and imprisoned, and another legitimate (for the former was a Bastard) brought out of Prison to the Throne. This new KingThis seemes a common appellation to their Kings. Paez. lit. Iul. 1605. Malac Ceged wrote kind Letters to Paez, to bring him the Lawes of Portugal, and Ouiedos Bookes, praysing God, that after seuen yeeres imprisonment, The stone which the builders refused, was become the head of the corner. He was presently assaulted and much distressed by the Gallae, whom at that time hee ouercame. Not so other Traytors; the chiefe of which was Zezelazeus, who slue the Emperour Sauenquil, and erected one Iacobus, whom after hee relinquished and tooke part with Sazinosius which ouerthrew Iacobus, and after that imprisoned Zezelazeus, who escaped the Prison, but not a Traytors reward, being slaine by Husbandmen,  whose Oxen hee would haue taken away. This Sazinosius (still infested with Treasons for euen an Heremite or Anachoret, which had liued a solitary life twenty yeeres together, conspired against him, aspired to Souereignty, besides many many Others and the Gallae, and the effect of both, Robbers and Theeues through the Countrie) deuised of an vnion with the Romish Church, and writ Letters to the Pope, dated Octob. 14. and to the King of Spaine for supplies of Souldiers, Decemb. 10. 1607. the Copies of which, Iarric hath inserted in his fift Booke. So farre from truth is that Frier which in these times proclaymes such felicity in Aethiopia, vnder I know not what Alexander, the birth of his crowing braine.




@. IIII. Of the Sabaeans, and their Queene which visited SALOMON.
LEt vs conclude with Saba, and the Queene thereof, touching which (as elsewhere we haueSup lib. 3. c. 1. shewed) we rather beleeue that this Queene (the supposed founder) was of the Sabaeans in Arabia, whose neighbours the Abasenes were, and both, as it is very probable, her subiects. These after many ages (it is the coniecture of greatIos. Scal. E.T. pag. 638 ed. vlt. Brerewood c. 23. Enquirie of Rel. Clerkes) passed into these parts of Africa, and seated themselues here by conquest, retayning their old language in their Lyturgie to this day. This Lyturgie (or Canon of their Masse, which with other their Formes and Rites of Baptisme, Confirmation, Purification, etc. is extant in BibliothecaTo. 4. ed. 1576. Paul. a princip. virtus @ Benedictia @ and sanctificatio @ S. Trinitatis in hanc Ecclesiam S.N. de Sceua, etc. Patrum) doth call their Church, the Church of Sceua, or Sheba: and Stephanus placeth the Sabaeans and Abasenes together, as before in this first Chapter of this Booke is shewed.
Tradition might well continue the memorie of this Queene amongst them, and Superstition might easily adde (where Diuine and Humane learning wanted) aboundance of errours: which is not the Ethiopian case alone, but almost all Ecclesiasticall Histories written of things done long before, and deliuered onely by Tradition, rolled like a Snow-ball by superstition of succeeding times, haue yeelded such Legendarie lumps, that neede much licking before any forme of Truth can appeare. As therefore I reiect not the Ethiopian Historie wholly, nor deeme it a meere changeling in this challenge of the Sabaean inheritance: so yet, I hold it needes iudicious examination and censure; the most whereof hath beene obtruded on that simple credulous Nation in later times, as our Monkes dealt in these parts many ages. Ptolomey calls the chiefe of Ethiopia Auxume, which Stephanus calls (...),Ptol. l. 4. c. 8. in 65. 30. and 11. ArianusPerip marie Erythraei. Axomite, ProcopiusProcop. de bello Pers. l. 1. Auzomide, all of them giue it the Metropolitan honour: it is supposed to be the same which now is calledVid. Ramus. Chaxumo, whereof Barbosa, Corsali, and Aluares haue written: in witnesse whereof are many ancient buildings there yet remayning, and pillars (somewhat resembling the Egyptian Obeliskes) admirable for their heightVid. Aluarez. c. 38. and seq. of their huge fabricks aboue and beneath ground. and workmanship, some aboue threescore yards high, full of Letters.
These Letters (of which are many there seene in many ruines) not one of all the Abassens can vnderstand, which argueth a greater antiquitie then the Abassens, and that these are more lately planted or ingrafted into the Ethiopian stock or stemme. Yea for their Christianitie also, howsoeuer the Eunuch of Candace was conuerted, and the Apostolicall labours in Ecclesiasticall Histories mentioned, might sort to good effect in this Ethiopian Haruest, yet it seemeth the conuersion of this Nation was not generall till the dayes of Iustinian. For so Nicephorus Callistus writeth, That Dauid the King of the Axumite Indians (why he calls them Indians you haue heard) warring vpon the Homerites which professed the Iewish Religion, vowed to the God of the Christians to become one of his followers, if hee obtayned the victorie; which accordingly he did. For taking Danmus the Homerite King aliue, he sent to Iustinian to further him in the performance of his vow, who sent thither a holy Bishop, which baptized the whole Nation. It might be that the Ethiopians had before receiued the Gospell, after which time the Abassens out of Arabia might conquer them, and retayning their heathenish superstitions, vpon occasion of this warre might bee conuerted: as we reade ofPaul. Aemil. Cl. d. 1. Clodoueus the first christned King of France, and of the French, notwithstanding the Galli had long before receiued Christianitie: which might also bee paralleld in the Britans and Saxons inhabitants of this Land. Howsoeuer, it is likely that euer since, this Nation hath continued Christian. Of Hellesthaeus, you haue seeneSup. cap. 2. before Procopius his testimonie. As for their owne reports of themselues, Zaga Zabo tells one tale, Aluares another, Friar Luys a third: that we neede none other testimonie against them. Their exceeding store of zeale, and defect of learning, with the good intents of piae fraudes (to whet deuotion by any meanes) and that selfe-loue, which each, both Person and Nation bearesCredimus? an qui amant ipsi sibi somnia fiugunt? Virg. to it selfe; haue made, no doubt, readie Inuenters and Receiuers of fables, ascribing to themselues the stories of both the Queenes, mentioned in the Old and New Testament, the Sabaean and Ethiopian Antiquities, and a world of other fancies, which neuer in the world were done: whereto the names of later Workes, Cities, Temples, Orders, and other occurrents haue beene applyed. But it is time for our Pilgrim to passe further, where yet he is like to speed worse, and to find little truth of Ciuilitie or Religion.




CHAP. VII. Of other Countries betweene the Red Sea and Benomotapa.

@. I. Of Adel, Adea, Zanzibar and Melinde.
EThiopia Exterior or Inferior, is that Southerly Tract of Africa, which to Ptolemey and the Ancients was vnknowne. It comprehendeth all that great wedge of Land (such is the forme) which beginning in the West, at the Countries aboue Zaire, stretcheth to fiue and thirtie degrees of Southerly latitude, and from thence Northwards, to the entrance or mouth of the Arabian Gulfe; all this way besieged and enuironed with theG. Bot. Ben. part. 1. lib. 2. Maginus. Pory before Leo. Ocean. Maginus diuideth it into fiue parts, Aian, Zanguebar, Benomoptapa, Cafraria, and Congo: but Congo is here taken in a very large sense. Aian, after the Arabians account, contayneth al^ that Region which lyeth betweene the mouth of the Red Sea, and Quilimanci; being, for the most part, on the Sea-coast inhabited by the said Arabians: but in the In-land parts thereof, are people which are a blacke heathenish Nation. It comprehendeth two Kingdomes, Adel and Adea; the former of which extendeth from that mouth of the Sea before mentioned, to the Cape Guardafu, byPtol. l. 4. c. 7. Ptolemey called Aromata. South and West it bordereth vpon the Dominions of Prete Ianni, about the Kingdome of Fatigar. The chiefe Citie is Arar. Zeila also before spoken of, and Berbora pertayne to this Kingdome, Cities without the Streit, on the Sea, much frequented with M^rchants. Zeila is situate in eleuen degrees, where Ptolemey placeth the Aualites. It is stored with varietie of merchandize, and yeeldeth some representation of Antiquitie in the buildings thereof, consisting of lime and stone. The King is a Moore, and esteemed a Saint among the superstitious Mahumetans, for his continuall warres with the Christian Abassines, whence he transporteth innumerable slaue^ to the Arabians and Turkes, receiuing in exchange armour and other helpes for his warres. Anno 1541. Gradaameth the King before mentioned, or Gradagna, by the helpe of some Portugals, which Claudius the Abassine had in his warres, was slaine, and his Armie ouerthrown: but his successor, An. 1559. slue Claudius in battaile, and got (as Iohn de Castro affirmeth) the greatest treasure of the world: the Moore acknowledging diuine assistance in this victorie, triumphed on an Asse. Zeila was burnt and sacked by the Portugals, An. 1516. as AndreaAndrea Corsali. Adea. Corsali, who was then present in the action, testifieth.
Adea is situate betweene Adel, Abassia, and the Sea. The Inhabitants are Moores, descended of the Arabians, who many hundred yeeres agoe, partly by their rich traffique, and especially by force of armes, became Lords, not onely of Aian, but of all the Sea-coast, to Cape dos Corrientes, which is somewhat to the South of the Southerly Tropicke. In all which space, before the Portugall Discoueries, that part of the Cities which lay open to the Sea, was open and vnfortified, but toward the Land were walled for feare of the In-land people. Adea payeth tribute to the Abassian. In this Kingdome is Magadazzo, being it selfe a petite Kingdome of the Moores, which are of an oliue colour.Lud. Romanus lib. 7. Zanguebar. Braua was a free Towne, which, with Pate and Gogia, were taken by the Portugals, vnder Tristan de Cugna. All the Countries adioyning to Prester Iohn, as Dauid the Emperor in his Letter to King Emanuel relateth, are either Moores or Gentiles, of which some worship wood and fire, some the Sunne, others Serpents, etc.
Zanzibar, or Zanguebar, is a name by the Arabians and Persians giuen to that Tract, extending from the Riuer Qualimanci, which Ptolemey calls Raptus, to the borders of Benomotapa. Some in a larger extent, include Benomotapa and Cafraria. Sanutus affirmeth, That it is a lowe, fenny, and woody Countrie, with many Riuers, which by extremitie of moysture cause the ayre to bee intemperate. From the waste vpwards they goe naked. Herein are contayned the Territories of Melinde, Mombaza, Quiloa, Mosambique, and others. MelindeIo. di Barros, Dec. 1. lib. 4. c. 6. saith, At Melin de Gamma receiued kinde entertaynement, and Pilots to conuay him to India, when it was first discouered by the Portugals. Marmol. l. 10. c. 1. and seq. describeth these Cities and countries largely. is the name of a Kingdome, and of the chiefe Citie thereof: the Inhabitants especially neere to the Sea, are Moores, and build their houses after the manner of Europe. The women are white, and the men of colour inclining to white, notwithstanding the situation vnder the Line. They haue black people also, which are Heathens for the most part. Of like condition isVascus Gamma 1500. subdued Mombaza, and Almeida fiue yeeres after, and after Nonnius, Acuna, Osor. de reb. Eman. Mombaza (which is said to haue some resemblance with Rhodes) but enemie to the Christians, and was ruinated by Thomas Cotigno, in the yeere 1589. for receiuing Alebech the Turke; as Ampaza in the same Coast, by Alphonso Mello, a yeere or two before.



@. II. The Portugals exploits in Mombaza, and of the Imbij.
THis Expedition deserues mention, because it giues light to the knowledge of other parts adioyning. The Portugals holding in manner all these Nations,Iarric. Thes. Ind. l. 3. c. 13. which inhabit from the Cape of Good Hope hitherto, either in termes of friendship or subiection: this Alebech with Turkish Gallies infested these Seas, and made diuers of the Portugall  vassals to wauer in their fidelitie, being of the Saracenicall faith or religion: wherevpon the Vice-roy sent forth a Nauie vnder the command of Thomas aforesaid, his brother, which arriued first at Braua and thence passed alongst the shore to Ampaza, still continuing almost desolate: thence to Lamus, by the helpe of the tyde passing vp the Riuer full of dangerous sholds: thence they came to Melinde, and after that to Mombaza. This is a small Iland of a league circuit, the Citie then compassed with a wall. The Mahumetans bad built a Castle on the Riuer which entreth the Citie, which was taken by the Portugals, and soone after fiue Gallies, which Alibech the Turke had there at that time, not without rich spoile. Here the Turkes and the Mombazan Inhabitants were now in a double distresse, by the Portugall forces from the Sea, and a more terrible enemie from the Land. These were the Imbij,Imbij a barbarous Nation.  impious and barbarous monsters, bred not farre from the Cape of Good Hope, tall, square, and strong men, addicted alwayes to warre and rapine, and feeding on the flesh, both of their captiued enemies, and of their owne people, in time of sicknesse, hastening their death for the shambles. The skulls of men serue them for drinking pots. Their weapons are poysoned arrowes, and poles burned at the ends: their shields are little, of wood, couered with a skin. They are supposed destitute of Religion, giuen to Incantations and Sorceries, and adoring their King with diuine honor, thinking him to be Lord of the whole Land, and the Portugals of the Sea. Such is his arrogance, that hee threatneth the destruction of all men, yea shootes his arrowes against the heauens, if wet or heate offend him. Some 80000. followed him in his warres, destroying Townes, Cities, and Beasts, together with the Men: in his  march driuing many troopes of beasts before him, so to breake the assault of the enemie, and hauing fire carried before him, as menacing to boyle or rost, and eate all such as he shall take. It seemes that they are either the same, or of like condition to the Gallae, which intest the Abassines, and the Iagges in otherSee ins. c. 1^ parts of Africk, which also by a neere name call themselues Imbangolas, compounded of Imbij and Gallae, a terrible rod of Gods anger, whereby he plagues and whips the barbarous Africans, with the worst of African barbarians. These Imbians had at this time approched to Mombaza, and the Turks with their Gallies did their best to hinder their entrance, the water encompassing, quenching the violence of that fire, which the Imbian beares before him, wherewith he had now burned a great wood. In this warre were the Mombazans and Turkes entangled, when the Portugals fleet came vpon  them, those that escaped by flight the Portugals furie, falling into the bellies of the Imbians, which caused many to yeeld themselues voluntarily to the Portugall, as seeming the lesse of two euils. Many Turkes were slaine, others captiued, Christian Gally-slaues freed, three and twentie greater, and as many smaller peeces of Ordnance taken, the Citie (narrow built, that scarcely two could goe together in the streets, the houses of bricke built high, but with small lights, both to defend them against the Sunne) fired, the walls and Moschees razed;Mombaz^. and the Nauie being readie to depart, they were haled by some Turkes on shore, and earnestly desired to admit them into their ships as slaues and captiues, Alebech himselfe being one, with thirtie others, besides two hundred Mombazans, hauing scarcely escaped the deuouring mawes of the Imbians, which had euen then buried the King and the chiefe Magistrate  of Mombaza in their bowels, and taken innumerable captiues destined to the like Caniball disaster. The King of Lamus, called Panebaxira, the Portugals imprisoned and executed for betraying some of theirs to the Turkes, and conuented the neighbouring kings of Sian, Patus, Ampaza before them: they razed Mondra, and after other things set in order, returned to Goa.
They which haue desire to acquaint themselues with what Antiquitie hath deliuered of these parts, may resort to Arrianus his Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, and the labours ofStuckius ad Ar. Ortel. Map thereof. Stuckius and Ortelius. For vs, to name you the Townes of ancient Trading (as Aualites, Malao, Mundi, Mosyllum, Apocopon, Opone, Rhapta) which hee reckons on the African shore, with other Riuers and Promontories, would not much further vs in this our Pilgrimage-Mart  of Religions.



@. III. Of Quiloa, Sofala, and Ophir.
QViloa stands nine degrees to the South of the Line: the name of a City and Iland, which is a Kingdome of the Moores, and extendeth her Dominion farre in theMaff. hist. Iudic. lib. 2. Arthus hist. Ind. cap. 20. Coast. It was built (as Marmolius affirmeth) about the foure hundreth yeere of the Hirara (so he nameth it) by one Ali, Sonne of Sultan Hoscen, who not agreeing with his other brethren, by reason their Mothers were Persian, and his an Abissine, sought new Aduentures in these parts, and bought this Iland: the History of whom, and  of his Successours, you may find in thatMarmol. l. 9. c. 39. and 40. Author.
The King grew mighty by the Trade of Sofala; but it was made tributary to Portugall by Vascui Gamma, Anno 1500. In the yeere 1505. the Portugals for denyall of that Tribute, depriued Abraham, the Arabian King, of his Scepter, and built a Fort there; which the Moores soone after destroyed, together with the new King made by the Portugals. The people are whitish, their women comely, rich in attire: their houses faire built, and richly furnished.
Betweene Coaua and Cuama, two Riuers which spring out of the same Lake with Nilus, are the Kingdomes of Mombaza, Mozimba, Macuas, Embeoe, and against them the Promontory Prassum. Heere is Mosambique,See Linschot. l 1 c. 4. Paludanus, ibid. by which name is signified a Kingdome in the Continent, and an Iland also, with a safe Harbour, which with two other Ilands are in the  mouth of the Riuer Moghincats, in fifteene degrees South. Mosambique is inhabited by Portugals, which haue there a strong Castle: here the Portugals Shippes winter. In this Iland are Sheepe, with tayles of fiue and twenty pound weight (a beast common in Africa:) Hens blacke both in feathers, flesh, and bone, and sodden, looke like Inke, yet sweeter then other in taste: Porke very good, but for the deare sawce. There are some Mahumetans, as they were all, before the Portugals arriuall there. They haue trade in the Continent, in Sena, Macurua, Sofala, Cuama, a people for the most part differing in speech and behauiour, each Village fighting with her Neighbour, captiuing them: and some (as at Macu^ua) eate them. Their chiefest liuing is by hunting, and by flesh of Elephants. In euery Village is a new King. The Captaine of Mosambique, in his three yeeres gouernment, maketh three  hundred thousand Duckets gaine especially, by Gold, from Sofala.
Vp, further within Land the people goe almost naked, and were so simple, when first the Portugals traded thither,L. Romanus Lib. 7. that Ludouico Barthema, or Vertomannus, for his Shirt; and another for a Razor, and a little Bell, bought fifteene Kowes of them; and then they were ready to fall together by the eares among themselues for the Bell, who should haue it. But they could not enioy their purchase, beeing driuen to their heeles by three Female Elephants, which hauing young ones, were very fierce, and made them leaue their Kine to saue themselues. In these Seas the Moores sayle in Vessels sowed with Leather, the sayles of Palme-tree leaues calked with Gumme, gathered off the trees in the Woods.
Sofala.Sofala lyeth betweene Cuama and Magnice, two Riuers. Heere the Portugals haue on a  little Iland (whence the whole Kingdome hath his name) a Fort and Factory of very rich Trade, the people bringing great quantity of Gold (whereof they haue plentifull Mynes) for their Cloth and other Commodities: it is supposed amounteth two Millions yeerely. OrteliusOrt. Thesaur. is of opinion, That this Cephala, or Sophala, is that which in Salomons time1. Reg. 9.28. 2. Chron. 9.21. was called Ophir, from whence so great quantity of Gold was brought by his Nauy. IosephusIoseph. Antiq. seekes for it in India: EupolemusEuseb. de praep. l. 9. c. 4. in the Red Sea, imagining it to be an Iland there placed: Dom.Niger. Geog. Tremel. and Iun. Annot. Niger, Tremelius, and Iuniu, in Aurea Chersonesus, where Malacca standeth (although we reade not of any great quantity of Gold found in that soyle.)Gaspar. Var. de Ophyra. Gaspar Varerius is of the same minde, but reckoneth to the Chersonesus both Pegu and Samotra, with all that lyeth betweene them. And in Somatra they haue a Tradition, that Salomon had his Gold from  thence: and in the Letter of the King to his Maiestie, hee entitleth himselfe King of the Mountaine of Gold, Solida, VatablusVat. in 1. Re. 9 P. Mar. dec. 1. l. 3 with lesse reason, applyeth it to Spagniola, discouered by Columbus, and by Columbus himselfe so called. AriasAr. Mont. Morn. de verit. Postellus. Gorop. Hispania. Montanui, Philip Moruay, Postellus, Goropius, would by their authority much moue vs to thinke with them, that Ophir is Peru, if the ignorance of the Load-stone, and those huge Seas, esteemed by Antiquity vnnauigable, did not detaine vs from consent: and where should Peru yeeld him Iuory, where neuer was yet seene an Elephant? Doctor Dee that famous Mathematician hath written a very large Discourse of that Argument, which I haue seene with Master Hakluyt, much illustrating what the Ancients haue written of those Seas and Coasts, and concludeth that Hauila is the Kingdome of Aua (subiect to Pegu) and Ophir is Chryse or Aurea before mentioned,  first, possessed by Ophir, mentioned Genes. 10. that golden name eating vp the former of Ophir.

IosephusIos. Acosta. l. 1. cap. 14.Acosta maketh Ophir and Tharsis to signifie no certaine places, but commonly to bee taken in a generall sense, as the word India is now with vs, a name giuen to all remote Countries East and West. He thinketh, that Salomons Gold, Iuory, etc. came from the East-Indies.
But some reasons doe yeeld great cause of coniecture for Sofala, both because of the plenty of the commodities which Salomons seruants are said to bring with them, and because of ancient buildings of stone-worke, which theJo. di Barro^ Dec. 1. l. 10. c. 1. Inhabitants call, The worke of Deuils; supposing it impossible for men (ghessing of others by their owne ignorance) to haue built: which also haue strange Letters, that the Moores (though learned) could not reade: (and why  might they not be the old Hebrew Letters, which the Phoenicians of old, and Samaritans to this day obserue, as elsewhere we haue shewed.) And further, ThomasNauigationi di Thome Lopez ap Ramusiam. Lopez telleth, that certain Moores related vnto them of the riches of those Mines; that ships from Mecca and Zidem vsed to trade there; and that yearely there were taken forth of the Mines two millions of Mittigals, euery Mittigall being a Duckat of Gold, and a third part: That the Warres in those Countries at that time had ceased the Traffique: and that they had Bookes and Ancient Writings, which testified, That these were the Mines whence Salomon in his three Voyages fetched his Gold, and that the Queen of Saba was naturall of the parts of India. As for India, ye haueCap. sup. euen now read that it was a name giuen to many Nations, and among the test to Aethiopia. And if a man consider the small skill which that Age of the World had in  Marine affaires, still as much as might be holding their course within the sight of Land, hee can scarce thinke, that long Nauigations could then be performed. Barrius accounteth all Sofala to the Empire of Benomotapa, of which we shall speake anon; wee haue now mentioned the same, by reason of the Isle which is subiect to the Portugals. These, besides Gold, here haue great Trade for Iuory of which Barrius saith, that in Benomopata are yeerely slaine foure or fiue thousands, and of Water-horses (whose teeth are accounted Iuory also) all the great Riuers in Africa are full. These feed sometimes on the Medowes, where the Mariners haue chased them, as LopezTh. Lopez. reporteth: and after long chasing by Land, they haue taken the water: where, in reuenge, they haue assaulted the Mariners in their Boats, and bitten chips off the same, being, by the thicknesse of their Hides armed against their Pikes, and  haue made them afraid, that they would ouerwhelme the Boat.


@. IIII. Of Monoemugi, the Moores, Baduines, Caphars, in these parts.
WIthin the Land, behinde these parts, is the Kingdome of Monoemugi,Monoemugi. which is rich in Gold: their vnfortunate Warres with Monomotapa haue made them knowne. Nilus is their Westerne border, and Abassia on the North. They haue little red Bals made of a kinde of Clay in Cambaya, and resembling Glasse, which  they weare for ornament, and vse for money. This King warreth with the Benomotapa, and hath terrible Souldiours, called Giacqui, or Agab, or Agog, who inhabite between the Lakes whence Nilus and Zaire take their beginnings; which liue a wandering life, like the Nomades, in Cottages which they make in the fields. They are of stature tall, and of countenance terrible, making lines vpon their cheekes with certaine iron Instruments, and turning their eye-lids backward, eating their enemies.
These not long since (asOd. Lopez. l. 2. c. 5. some say) inuaded the Kingdome of Congo, and forced the King to keepe in a small Isle, where himselfe was taken with a D^opsie, and his people famished, as after shall follow in due place. The Amazones of Monomotapa are euery way equall vnto them in prowesse. Little is knowne of the Religion of these Heathenish Nations nor of  other Kingdomes, whereof we haue little but the names to relate, Goroua, Colta, Anzuga, Moneulo, Baduis.
Now, for those Moores which inhabited the Sea-coasts as we haue said, they are dispersed as farre as Benomotapa, but are not allIo di Barres. Dic. 1. l. 8. c. 4. Catholike Mahumetans, especially such of them as haue conuersed, and taken their habitations further within Land. And the first Moores or Arabians that came to inhabite those Coasts, were banished persons, called as the Chronicles of Quiloa is reporeed, Emozaidin of Zaide, the Nephew of Hocem the sonne of Hali, whose Doctrine they followed in some opinions, contrary to the Alcoran, and therefore esteemed Heretikes.
Long after them came three ships with great multitudes of Arabians, that fled from the King of Laza their enemy, vnder the conduct of seuen Brethren, which built Magadazzo, and  after that, Braua; which in manner of a Common-wealth, was till the Portugals time gouerned by twelue Aldermen, or chiefe Gouernours, that descended of the seuen Brethren.

Baduini.These Moores and the former differing from each other in their superstitions, could not agree, and therefore the Emozaidin were forced vp higher into the Countrey, and thereby mariages mixed themselues with the Cafers (so the Arabians call all Heathen people) and became Mungrels in a Galli-maufrey of Deuotions, whom therefore the Sea-coast-Moores called by a generall name,Botero. Baduini, which in Arabia and Egypt, is the title of the people that liue in the Champaine, and In-land Countreys: and those that liue neere the Sea-coast are called Arabians.
They make no difference of meats, Don Iohn of CastroIn a great written Booke giuen by Sir W Ral. to M. Hak. writeth, that Badoil signifieth a man that liueth onely by cattell: and that the Troglodites, and Nations from Melinde and Magadoxa to Cape Guardafu, and on both sides of the straits, and on the Arabike Sea, to  Ormuz (occupying rather then inhabiting the soyle) are called Badoies. They are (saith he) sauage, without truth or ciuilitie, they are Mahumetanes, but accounted badde Moores, Theeues and Robbers, eating raw flesh, drinking milke, their habite filthy; very swift, holding warre with all men; (as was prophecied of Ismael their Progenitor) from Zeila to Suachen with the Abexijs from thence to Alcocer with the Nobijs, from thence to Soez with the Aegyptians, from Soez to Ormus with the Arabians. They haue no King nor great Lord, but liue in troupes and factions; permit no Towne in their fields, haue no certaine habitation, but wander from place to place with their cattell. Their Xeque determineth suits as hee listeth. Their lodging is in Caues and holes, of the most in Tents, their colour very blacke, their Language Arabicke.  
The Heathens in those parts are giuen to Auguries and Witcheries: and in their highest attempts and greatest resolutions, yet will leaue off, if any of these phantasies bode vnluckinesse. The fruits, birds, beasts, and seeds, are in manner like to the people, all wilde. The ayre is vnholesome. But what vnhealthsomenesse can there be found, where gold as found? which makes men commit themselues (no maruell what they commit with others) to the most scorching heats, to contagious ayres, to tempestuous Seas, and the darkest prisons of the disembowelled Earth.
Modesty had almost forbidden me to recite that, which may with some easily obtaine a Plaudite, in the last Act and finishing of this Chapter, concerning the Caffares. LinschotenLinschot. c. 41. shall recite it for me. They liue, saith he, like beasts (he speaketh of those which liue neere Mosambique, and those especially more within the Land) they are blacke as pitch, with  flat noses, thicke lips, some haue holes both aboue and vnder in their lips, and, as it were, other mouthes in their cheekes, wherein they thrust small bones to beautifie themselues: for which cause they raze and seare their bodies with Irons. If they will make a diuellish forme and Picture, they represent a white man in his apparell, as thinking nothing more vgly. Some also file their teeth as sharpe as Needles. They haue Villages wherein they dwell together, and in euery Village a Lord or King, to whom they are subiect. Religion and Faith are vnknowne to them. They vse mutuall warres, and some eate mans flesh. When they take Prisoners in warre, or kill their Enemies, they obserue a more then beastly testimony of their great valour, which is after this manner.
They cut off their priuy members (to depriue them of all hope of generation) and then dry them well for preseruation: after which they come before the King with great reuerence, in the presence of the principall men of the Villages, and there take these members, so dryed, one by one in their mouthes, and spit them on the ground at the Kings feet, which the King with great thankes accepteth; and the more to honour them, causeth them all to be taken vp and giuen to them againe, which is from thenceforth an Ensigne of their Knight-hood. For they take all those members, and tye them on a string like a bracelet or chaine; and at all solemne meetings, as when they marry or goe to a wedding or feast, the Bride, or wiues of these Knights, doe weare that chaine about their necks, being, saith our Author, among them as great an honour as the Golden-Fleece, or the Renowned GARTER with vs, and their wiues as proud thereof, as if some Crowne or Scepter had befalne them.




CHAP. VIII. Of Benomotapa, and the parts adioyning.

@. I. Of the Empire of Monomotapa.
 BEnomotapa,L. Marmol. l. 9. c. 31. called also Benomotaxa, and Monomotapa, is a large Empire, so entituled after the name of the Prince thereof (for Benomotapa is with them a Title, as Caesar or Emperour with vs, the Portugals call him Emperour of the Gold) extendeth after some mens reckoning almost a thousand Leagues in compasse, betweene the great Lake, whence Nilus springeth on the North-East, Magnice and Toroa on the South, and the Sea-coast of Sofala on the East. It is betweene the Sea and the fresh waters, accounted a huge Island. Betweene Cuama and Corrientes it is pleasant and wholesome and fruitfull: and from the Cape Corrientes to Magnice, it abounds with beasts; but it is cold. Their principall Cities are Zimbas (haply the  same which PtolomeyPtol. Georg. l. 4. c. 9. cals Agisymba) and Benamataza; that one and twenty, this fifteene dayes iourney, from Sofala. Of the abundance of Elephants in Benomotapa is said before; whereof Aethiopia is euery where stored with manifold herds:Io di Barros. Dec. 1. l. 10. c. 1. although I dare not subscribe to their opinion that esteeme Elephants as common there, as heere we haue Oxen. It is a creature nine cubits high (in their largest stature) and fiue cubits thicke: with long and broad eares, little eyes, short tayles, and great bellies. Of their disposition is spoken already. Some say fiue thousand are yeerely slaine in these parts.
The Mines neerest to Sofala, are those of Manica,Vid. Marmol. l. 9. c. 32. and seq, See sup. c. 7. which are in wide Champaines compassed with mountaines, ninety miles in circuit. The places where the Gold is, appeare and are knowne by the drinesse and barrennesse of the soyle, as if Nature it selfe could not hord vp  Gold in her spacious chest, but she must needs proue bare and barren of her wonted good works; and how much lesse vnnaturall and degenerate mankinde? The Prouince is called Matuca, the people Botonghi (which although they are betweene the Line and the Tropike) yet in Winter haue such snowes in the mountains, that if any abide there, they dye frozen in them: and in Summer-time the ayre in the tops of those hils is so cleare and pure, that some of our men, which were then there, saw the New-Moone, the same day that shee had kissed her bright and bountifull Brother.
And who can now charge that bright Eye of the World, with the obscure darknesse of this Peoples hue, which so cold Winters, nor pure Summers, can lessen or lighten? Yea, euen in the cold Countries neere the Cape of Good-hope, the Aethiopians haue no hope or  hap of good colour; whereas the hotter Countreys of Libya, and in manner all America (notwithstanding the Sunnes strait looking, and neerenesse, not allowing them a shaddow to attend them in the greatest height of his bounty) know not this blacke tincture in the Naturals thereof.
But to returne (and who will not returne?) to the Mines: There are other Mines in the Prouinces of Boro and Quiticui, in which and in the Riuers, is found Gold not so pure. The people are carelesse and negligent to get, and the Moores which traded with them, were faine to giue their wares in trust, with promise by such a time to pay them in Gold, and the people would not faile in their word.
Other Mynes are in Toroa, wherein are those buildings which Barrius attributeth to  some forrenAs the Portugals haue their Castles of Mina, Sofala, etc. so some Prince, Master sometimes of thos^ Mines. Prince, and I, for the reasons before alledged, to Salomon. It is a square Fortresse of stone; the stones of maruellous greatnesse, without any signe of morter or other matter to ioyne them. The wall fiue and twenty spannes thicke, the height not holding proportion. Ouer the gate are letters, which learned Moores could neither reade, nor know what letters they were. There are other buildings besides, of like fashion. The people call them the Court, for an Officer keepes it for the Benomotapa, and hath charge of some of his women, that are there kept. They esteeme them beyond humane power to build, and therefore account them the workes of Deuils and the Moores which saw them, said the Portugals Castles were no way to bee compared to them. They are fiue hundred and ten miles from Sofala, Westward, in one and twenty degrees of Southerly Latitude: in all which space is not found one building ancient or later; the people are rude, and dwell in Cottages of Timber.
All the people of this Region is of curled hayre, and more ingenious then those which
 are against Mosambique, Quiloa and Melinde, among whom are many that eate mans flesh, and let their Kine blood to satisfie their thirst. These seeme prone to receiue the Faith: for they beleeue in One GOD, whom they call Mozimo, and haue no Idols, nor worship other thing: They punish nothing more seuerely then Witchcraft, whereunto other Negros are exce^dingly addicted; no such person escapeth death. The like detestation they conceiue against Adultery and Theft. Euery one may haue as many wiues as they will: but the first is principall the other serue her; and her children are heires. A woman is not mariageable with them, till her naturall purgation testifie for her abilitie to Conception: and therefore they entertaine the first fluxe thereof with a great Feast.
In two things they are Religious; in obseruation of dayes, and Rites concerning their  dead. Of dayes, they obserued the first day of the Moone, the sixt, the seuenth, the eleuenth, the sixteenth, the seuenteenth, the twentieth, and the eight and twentieth, because in that day their King was borne. The Religion is in the first, sixt, and seuenth, all the rest are repetitions, aboue ten. When any is dead, after his bodie is eaten, his neere kindred, or his wife which hath had most children by him, keepe the bones, with some signes whereby to know, whose they were: and euery seuenth day they obserue Exequies in the same place where they are kept: They spreade many clothes, and set thereon tables furnished with bread and sodden flesh, which they offer to the dead with prayers and supplications. And the principall thing they request of them, is, the good successe of their Kings affaires. These prayers they make, being cloathed in white garments: after which the good man and his family  eate their offerings. The Benomotapa must weare cloathes of the same Country, for feare of infection; others may weare forren cloth. He is serued on the knee, and when he drinketh or cougheth, all they which are about him make a shout, that all the Towne may know. None may cough in his presence: also, euery one must sit in token of reuerence, to stand, is a signe of dignity which he affordeth the Portugals and Moores, and is the chiefe honour can bee yeelded any. The second honour is to sit on a cloth in his house: the third, that a man may haue a doore in his house, which is the dignity of great Lords. For meaner persons, they need not feare to haue any thing stolne out of their open houses seeing the seuerity of Iustice doth secure them. Doores are not for necessity, but for honour. Their houses are of pyramidall or steeple forme, all the timbers meeting in the middest at the top: couered with earth and straw. Some of them are made of timbers, as long and as bigge as a great ships mast: the  greater they are, the more honorable.
The Benomotapa hath musicke whithersoeuer he goeth, with singers: and more then fiue hundred iesters, which haue their Captain or Master of Reuels. The royall Ensigne is a little plow-share, with an Iuory point, which he carrieth alway at his girdle; by which is signified peace, and husbanding of the ground. He beareth likewise one or twoPorta vna due Zagait. Boterus saith vn^ Zapea due dardi: a Mattocke and two Darts. swords in token of Iustice, and defence of his people. The Country is free, and giues him no other payments, but presents when they come to speake with him: and certaine dayes seruice. No inferiour comes before his superiour without some present; in token of obedience and courtesie. The Captaines of warre with all theirs, bestow seuen dayes in thirty in his husbandry or other businesse, Hee must confirme all sentences of Iudgement in his owne person: there  needs no Prison, for matters are presently dispatched, according to the allegations and testimonies, that are brought. And if there bee not sufficient testimonies, then the matter is tryed by oath, in this manner. They beat the barke of a certaine tree, and cast the powder thereof in water;Of such like water, see the tenth Chapter. which the party drinketh, and if he doe not vomit, he is cleared; if he vomit, he is condemned. And if the accuser, when the accused party vomiteth not, will drinke of the same, and doth not vomit, he is then acquitted, and the matter dispatched. If any sue to him, he speedeth not, but by mediation of a third person, which also sets down the summe that the King must haue, somtime at so deare a rate, that the suter rather refuseth the Kings grant. They haue no Horse, and therefore warre on foot: the spoyles are generally shared amongst all. When he marcheth, in the place where he is to lodge, they make a new  house of wood, and therein must continuall fire be kept, without euer going out; saying, that in the ashes might be wrought some witcheries to the indamagement of his person. And when they goe to the warres, they neuer wash their hands nor faces, till they haue obtained victory. They haue their wiues with them, which are so loued and respected, that if the Kings sonne meet with one of them in the street, hee giues her way. Benomotapa hath more then a thousand women; but the first is principall, although she be inferiour in bloud, and her sonne succeeds. And in seed-time and haruest, the Queene goeth to the field and ouerseeth the stuffe, esteeming it a great honour. Thus farre out of Barrius.
Od Lopes Congo h^st. lib. cap. 9. ^rthu^ hist. Ind. ^rient. cap. 19.Iohannes BoterusG Bot. Ben. pag. 1. tels, that his chiefe warriours are women, namely, certaine Amazones,  which seare off their left paps, as Odoardo d Lopez reporteth, lest they should hinder their shooting, after the manner of the ancient Amazones: they are quick, bold, couragious, and
 constant in battaile, and most constant in inconstancie: for when they make shew of flight, they will returne (espying their aduantage) with the greatest fury. They dwell in certaine Countries by themselues, and at certaine times haue men to accompany with them for generation, to whom they send their Males, reseruing all the Female Children which they haue. Thus we find Amazons, which the Ancients reported in Asia, and Diodorus in Libya, now in these times, if this report bee true, in Aethiopia: and HuldericusShmidel historia Nauigat. in Am. c 37. Shmidel hath told of the like in America. OthersA. Battel which liued neere those parts. deny it: and none hath yet written of them from his owne sight. For my part, no Amazonian hath yet conquered my credit.
In the yeere 1560. ConsaluusEman. Acosta Rerum in Oriente gest. Commen, Iarric. l 3. c. 9. Silueria, with two other Iesuites, went from Goa to the  Kingdomes of Inhamban, and Monomotapa: and comming to Inhamban, they went to Yonge, the City Royall, where they baptized the King and all his people in a short space, naming the King Constantine, the Queene Mary. Thence went Consaluus to Monomotapa, and so preuailed with his Images, Preaching, and contempt of the World, that he wanne the King and his Mother, with multitudes of others to Baptisme. But soone after, the King, by suggestion of the Moores, slue him. Sebastian in reuenge raysed an Armie of sixteene hundred,Botero part. 2. lib. 3. most of them being Gentlemen, which he sent vnder the conduct of Francis Barretto. The Benomotapa fearing the Portugals forces, offered reasonable conditions, which Barretto refusing, was discomfited, not by the Negro, but by the Ayre, the malignity whereof (the sowre sauce of all these Golden Countryes in Africa) consumed his people. There are  other Kingdomes adioyning to Monomotapa, and the Mountaynes of the Moone, Matana, Melemba, Quinbebe, Berteca, Bauagul, of which I can giue you but the names.


@. II. Of Caphraria, the Cape of Good Hope, and Soldania.
CAphraria, or the Land of the Caphars is next to bee considered, which Maginu^  boundeth betweene Rio di Spirito Sancto, and Cape Negro, extending to the Cape of Good Hope Southwards. Why hee should call this part the Caphars, I know not: for the Arabians, of whom this word is borrowed, giue that name to all the Heathen people in Africa; yea both the Arabians, and all of their Religion, call all such as receiue not that Superstition, Caphars, euen Christians also, as Master IenkinsonA. Ienkinson in Hak. tom. 1. p. 327. long since told vs. And for the Heathens in Africa, Barrius affirmeth, that it is by the Moores giuen to them all: signifying, Without Law, or lawlesse people. Zanguebar is in this respect called Cafraria. It should seeme it is appropriated to these the Southerliest Nations of Africa; for want of other the more true proper names which were vnknowne. With the names of the Capes, and other places of note, Master PoryPory before Leo. hath already acquainted his English Reader: Onely that notable and famous Cape of Good Hope, (so namedOsor. de reb. Eman. l. 1. This was An. 1487. The discouerie therof is largely related by Io. di Barro in his first Decad of Asia, l. 3. by Iohn the Second, King of Portugall,  for that hope which he conceiued of a way to the Indies, when it was first discouered) deserueth some mention. It hath three head-lands, the Westermost beareth name of Good Hope: the middlemost Cabo Falso, because they haue sometimes in their returne from the Indies, mistaken this for the former: betweene which two Capes runneth into the Sea a mighty Riuer, called by the Portugals Rio dulce, which springs out of a Lake called Gale, situate among the Mountaynes of the Moone, so much celebrated by the ancient Geographers: The third and Eastermost, is that of Agulhas or Needles about fiue and twenty leagues from the first: both which seeme as two hornes, wherewith it threatens the Ocean, which in these parts is found oftentimesBartholomeo Dias, who first discouered this Cape, called it Ca. Tormentoso, in regard of the troubles and dangers hee there sustayned, called, sayth, S. Ed. M. the Lion of the Sea, where they found great stormes. tempestuous, and when it cannot preuayle against  this rough-faced and horned Promontory, it wrekes the whole malice vpon the ships, whose ribs in the enraged fits, it would breake if they were of Iron; as LinschotenLins. l. 1. c. 93. Nauig Verbuf. testifieth of his owne experience. True it is, that sometimes it is passed with more ease; but not so vsually: and Linschoten tels, that at his returne from India, the Saint Thomas, a new Carricke, was heere cast away,They found it there in April as cold as with vs in winter, when it freezeth not; and yet the people are blackish, and their ship wherein he sayled, in such danger, that one while they prayed, another while murmured, another time would returne backe, and the Captaine professed no small maruell, why our Lord suffered such good Catholikes to indure such torments, and the English Heretickes and Blasphemers to passe so easily. The waues there (sayth hee) strike against a ship, as if they strucke against a Hill, that if it were of stone it would at last be broken.
CapaineSir Iames Lancaster Hak. to. 2. part. 2. 1600. Lancaster traded with the people neere these parts, and for two Kniues bought  an Oxe, for one, a Sheepe, etc. in good quantity. Their Sheepe are great, with great tailes,
 but hairy, not woolled. Their Oxen great, not fat, but well fleshed. The Captaine killed there an Antelope as bigge as a Colt. There were diuers great beasts vnknowne to them. When they had passed this Cape, they lost their Admirall, Captaine Raimond, and neuer saw them, or heard of them more. And foure dayes after they found as terrible an Enemy from aboue, and encountred with a Thunder clap, which slue foure of their men out-right, their neckes being wrung asunder: And of fourescore and fourteene men there was not one vntouched; but some were blind, others bruised in their legs and armes, or brests, others drawne out, as if they had beene racked; which all yet, God be thanked, did after recouer.
The same Sir Iames Lancaster was after this sent Generall for the East India Company; which hauing made a stocke of threescore and twelue thousand pound, bought the Dragon  of sixe hundred tunnes, the Hector of three hundred, the Ascension of two hundred and fourescore, the Susan of two hundred and threescore, and sent in them in Merchandize and Spanish Money, to the value of seuen and twenty thousand pound. The Scorbute so weakened their men, that they were not able to hoyse out their Boates, except in the Generals ship, whose men (drinking euery morning three spoonefuls of the juyce of Limons) were healthfull. He bought a thousand sheepe in SoldaniaSoldania is a Bay in 34 Lar. Long. 51. Of which see the East Indian Voyages which we new s^t out, in the Iournals of Sir T. Roe, Iohn Tatton, Downton etc. and forty two Oxen as bigge as ours, the sheepe greater, but hairy, and might haue bought more, for old Iron. The people, he sayth, are tawny; Cornelius Houtman sayth, Oliue blacke, blacker then the Brasilians, their haire curled and blacke, as in Angola, not circumcised, clocke like a brood-hen in speaking, paint their faces with diuers colours, strong, actiue, swift, subiect to Monomotapa: they sl^e some  Flemings for wrongs, which made the English warie in trading with them. Sir Edward MichelborneSir Ed Mich. 1604 Dauid Middleton ^aith the like, 1606. found here great reliefe. Besides great Herds of Oxen and Flocks of Sheepe, heere is abundance of Deere, Antilopes, Baboones, Foxes, Hares, Ostriches, Cranes, Pellicans, Herons, Geese, Duckes, Phesants, Partridges, etc. A great Bullocke they might buy for an old Iron hoope not worth two pence, a Sheepe for a piece not worth two good Horse-nayles. The people liued on the guts and filth of the meate which our men cast away, not so much as washing the same, but couering them ouer wi^h hot ashes, before they were through hot, pulled them out, and shaking them a little with their hands, did eate both guts, excrements, and ashes. They liue vpon raw flesh and certayne Roots. Sir Henry Middleton,Tho. Clayborne. a Generall of the foure ships aboue-named, found (in his returne) three and fifty men dead in the  Hector at this Bay, and but ten left: The Susan was lost, it was thought for want of men. And long before the Trade of the English (which is now very much increased in the Easterne parts) Giouanni da Empoli1503. telleth, That neere the Cape, the Countrey people would giue them a Kow for a little Bell. The men and women were clothed, or rather a little couered with hairy skinnes, the women beautifyng this their beastly habits with the tayles of the beasts, hanging downe before and behind to couer their shame. These women had large and deformed pap^. Religion they could obserue none amongst them, and thought that they eat their flesh raw.
The Hollanders also in the yeere 1595. trafficked with these Cafres, which were valiant, but base in apparell, couered with Oxe or Sheep-skins wrapped about their sholders, with  the hairy side inward, in forme of a Mantle; their priuy parts couered with a Sheepes tayle, fastened before and behind with a Girdle. But now we see it made a daily matter to the Portugall, English and Dutch, so capable of Hope of Good, that the Cape of Good Hope is nothing feared: although at home many take exceptions as if there were no good hope of publike good, and wish that they would carry out of Europe lesseFor monie, both Portugals and others haue found that the Indians more esteeme it far then Merchandize. Vid. Lit. Fr. de Sagitta in N. Orbe. And men die much by the change and vnwholesomenesse of the Climate and dyet, their own intemperance with women, and fruits in the Countrie, Calmes, Scorbute, etc. See l. 5. c 2. Mony, and bring home more men: but of this elsewhere is spoken at large. I cannot omit,Botero. that vpon the top of this Promontory, Nature hath as it were framed her selfe a delightfull Bower, here to sit and contemplate the great Seas, which from the South, East and West beat vpon this shore: and therefore hath here formed a great plaine, pleasant in situation, which with the fragrant herbes, variety of flowers, and flourishing verdure of all things seemes a terrestriall-Paradise. It is  called the Table of the Cape. That which from hence lyeth to Cape Negro, hath not to our purpose any thing notable. This also deserueth mention, that notwithstanding all the damages of this dreadfull Promontory, and the Seas on this side and beyond,Maffaeno hist. Ind. l. 11. 1535. Iames Botellius, a Portugall, to recouer the fauour of his Prince, Iohn the third, by the first bringing newes of a happy accident that then befell in India, in a little Boat or Vessell scarce eighteene foote long, and six broad, sayled from Cochin to Dabul, and from thence alongst the Arabian and African shores, doubling this terrible Cape, and missing Saint Helena, came yet safe to Lisbone, worthily welcomed both for his message, and the messenger, that durst aduenture to encounter Neptunes strongest forces, notwithstanding so weake furniture.
The HollandersDe Bry Ind. Or. part. 3. at the Cape of Good Hope, (if you will heare other testimonies) had of  the Inhabitants two Kine for two rusty Kniues, and one much greater for a new one: two fat Buls and three Sheepe for a barre of Iron, weighing threescore and ten pound. The people
 make much account of Iron: they are of short stature: darkish colour: their armes are adorned with Copper and Iuory, their fingers with Rings of Gold, and with Beads of bone and wood. They brand their bodies with diuers markes: And because they alway anoint themselues with grease and fat, they yeeld a ranke smell. If wee killed a beast for our vse, they would aske the inwards, and eate them raw, the filth being not well clensed from them. At their Feasts they would seethe a beast in his hide, fastned on foure stickes with fire vnderneath. They liue miserably, yet for gallantry weare bones and pieces of dryed flesh about their neckes. Neere this Cape are weeds growing in the Sea fiue and twenty fathome long.
 The AscensionCap. Rob. Couert. built their Pinnasse, Anno 1608. at Soldania, about fifteene or sixteene leagues from the Cape of Good Hope, and there tooke in for their prouision about foure hundred head of Cattell, as Oxen, Steeres, Sheepe, and Lambes, together with fowles and fresh water. They filled their Boat with Seales at the Ile Pengwin, a little from thence. Such was the brutish nature of the Inhabitants, that when the English had cast out of their ship one of those Seales, and the same had lien fourteene dayes, and now swarmed with crawling Maggots, they would take them vp and eat them; as they would also doe the guts, garbage, and panch of the beast. They more esteemed Iron, then Gold or Siluer. Heere the first night after they weighed Anchor. The Ascension lost the Vnion, and the Good Hope their Pinnasse (so neere the Cape of Good Hope) which, mee thinkes, obseruing what after befell them,  seemes an ominous presage, written in these names, of their other losses which followed, concluded with the losse of their ship on the Coast of Cambaya. It is morally true, that ascending and aspiring minds lose Vnion (Prou. 13.10. for onely by pride doth man make Contention) Vnion being gone, Good Hope followeth, Quae concordia crescunt, discordia and res and spes pereunt: and so it befell in this their Tragedie, after the losse of thos^ Vessels which bare such names. The ship was lost by the Masters indiscretion, but yet hath the honour (suruiuing her fates) that shee was the first English ship that euer sayled on those Seas.
Although we haue beene tedious in this Cape and the Bay of Soldania, yet I haue thought it not amisse to adde somewhat out of later Relations.Patt. Copland. In the Dragon 1611. Master Copland writes that the Ayre here is so wholesome, and the Earth so fertile, as might with helpe of Art become a Paradise.  Euen Nature it selfe hath diuersified the Soyle in an entercourse of Mountaynes, Plaines, Woods, Medowes, Streames, as intending so pleasant a variety, in a seeming artificiall Order. Their many sicke men, exposed on shore in Tents, within twenty dayes were all (one excepted) sound as at first day. They bought nine and thirty Beeues, and one hundred and fifteene Sheepe for a littleSamuel Castleton saith, that Copper is in request with them and not Brasse. Brasse or Copper cut out of two or three old Kettles. The people are louing, but were at the first afraid by reason of some vnkindnesses receiued from the Dutch, which had beene there to make trane, and had killed and stolne their Cattell. They are of of middle size, well limmed, very nimble and actiue, dance in true measure: weare short Clokes of Sheepe or Seales skings to their waste with a Cap of the same, the haireIt was then Iune, which is their Winter. The people are said to haue their heads lothsome, as if they were couered with Kow dung, which is done by the iuyce of herbs. inwards, a Rats skin about their priuities, some of them haue soles tyed about their feet, their  neckes adorned with Chaines of greasie Trypes (or guts also in many doubles) which they would sometimes pull off and eate stinking and raw; they did also eate the entrayles by vs throwne away, halfe raw (and would scramble for it like hungry Dogges) lothsomely besmeared with the bloud: they weare Bracelets of Copper or Iuory about their armes with Ostrich feathers and shels. The habit of women is like the former, which at our first comming seemed shamefast, but at our returne would impudently vncouer that which here must bee couered with silence; their brests hang downe to their middles; Their haire is curled: Copper with them is Gold, and Iron Siluer: their Houses little Tents in the Fields, made of skins, at their pleasure remoued. On the high Hill called the Table may be seene an hundred miles about: some ascended and thence tooke obseruation of many Bayes and Riuers. Hee  thinkes these parts might be profitably planted with an English Colony.
One saythAnonim. M.S. Voyage, 1614. of this people, that they are idle, not so much as hauing a Canow, nor knowing to take eyther fowle orThey will strike fish with their darts and then goe into the Sea for them. Cap. Saris. Nic. Withington addeth, they are Negros woolly pated, flat nosed. fish, whereof they haue store; theeuish and swiftly running away with that which they haue stolne. By trading with the Dutch and English, their prices of things are raysed, as you here see, to some more Copper or Iron, then at the first Discoueries. Their Beasts are large, their Sheepe smooth and short haired (not woolly) like a young Calfe, wi^^ long and broad eares, hanged like Hounds; their hornes short and tender, easily broken; their tayles greater then any part of a mans legge, some weighing 40. pounds. Their Beeues are large, and most of them leane. The men haue but one stone, the other being cut away when they are young; the reason seemes to bee some reasonlesse Superstition towards  the Sunne, which they point vnto being demanded thereof. The Hector brought thence one of these Saluages, called Cory, which wasMartin Pring. Ben. Bay. carryed againe, and there landed by the Newyeeres gift, Iune 21. 1614. in his Copper Armour, but returned not to them whiles
 the Ships continued in the Road, but at their returnes in March was twelue-moneth after, he came, and was ready to any seruice, in helping them with Beeues and Sheepe. The wilde beasts are dangerous in the night, as Lions, Antilopes and others, some of which in one night, carried away twelue pieces of meate, laid in the Riuer to water, couered with a stone of two hundred weight, which was remooued also a very great distance. The Pengwins in the Iland neere to Soldania, haue stumps in stead of wings, and with their feet swimme fast. There are Seales a thousand sleeping in an Heard, on the Rockes: Myce, and Rats, and Snakes innumerable. The weather in the midst of Winter is there temperate. PenguinM. Downton. Iland is North Northwest and an halfe West, three leagues from Soldania: and this fourteene leagues North Northeast from Cape Bona Speranza, and ten leagues North by West from Cape Falso, which  is Eastwards from the former. The habitation of the Soldanians seemes moueable, and following the best pastures. There are fallow Deere, Porcupines, Land Tortoyses, Snakes, Adders, wild Geese, Duckes, Pellicans, Crowes with a white band about their necks, Pengwins, Guls, Pintados, Alcatrasses, Cormorants, Whales, Seales, etc.


HONDIVS his Map of Congo.
map of Congo, West Africa
CONGI REGNU^






CHAP. IX. Of the Kingdome of Congo, and the other Kingdomes and Nations adioyning.

@. I.  Of Angola.
THe KingdomeMaginui. Gi. Boter. Ben. part. 1. Marmol. l. 9. c 24. and 25. of Congo (vnderstanding so much by the name, as in times past hath beene subiect thereto) hath on the West, the Ocean; on the South, the Caphars, and mountaynes of the Moone; on the East, those Hills from which the Riuers issue and runne into the Fountaynes of Nilus; and on the North, the Kingdome of Benin. Of these Countries, Pigafetta,Od. Lop. per Pigafet. translated by A.H. P. du Iarric. Hist. Ind. Orien. l. 3. c. 1. and s. from the Relation of Odoardo Lopez, a Portugall, hath written two bookes, out of whom P. du Iarric, Botero, and others, haue taken most of their reports.
And in this we will begin with the most Southerly parts; in which wee first come into  the Kingdome of Matama (this is the Kings proper name) who being a Gentile, ruleth ouer diuers Prouinces, named Quimbebe. This is a KingdomeOd. Lopez. lib. 1. cap. 7. great and mightie, extending from Brauagal to Bagamid^i: the ayre thereof is wholsome, the earth outwardly furnished with store of fruits, inwardly with mines of Crystall, and other metalls. The Signiories toward the Sea-coast are very meane, and want Hauens.
Angola sometime a Prouince of the Kingdome of Congo, is now a great Kingdome it selfe and very populous. They speake the same language (with small difference of dialect) that is vsed in Congo, whose yoake they cast off since the Congois became Christians. DiegoBarr. Dec. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. Od. Lopez, ibid. Can first discouered these parts for the Portugals An. 1486. And the Portugals vsed to trade quietly with the Angolans: but some of them trading as high into the Countrey as Cabazza,  the Royall Citie, which is an hundred and fiftie miles from the Ocean, were there by order from the King put to the sword, vnder pretence of intended treason. This was done 1578. Paulo Dias (to whom the King Sebastian had giuen the gouernment of these parts: with licence to conquer three and thirtie leagues alongst the Coast to him and his heires) to reuenge himselfe for this despight done to his people, armed such Portugals as hee had, and with two Gallies and other Vessels, which he kept in the Riuer Coanza, hee went on both sides the Riuer, conquering and subduing many Lords vnto him. The King of Angola raysed a mightie Armie of a million of men,P. T^iaz (as some report) sent a present to Spaine of two Butts of Negros noses, which were slaine. A. B. Iarric. hath 1200000. as is supposed. For they vse to leaue none at home that is fit to carrie a weapon: and make no preparation for victuall, but such as haue any, carrie it vpon the shoulders of their seruants, and therefore no maruell if their foode being  soone consumed, their camps be soone dissolued. Small likewise is their prouision of armour for offence, and for defence much lesse. Diaz sent to the King of Congo for aide, who sent him sixtie thousand men: with which, and his owne Nation, he made his partie good, against the confused rabbles of the Angolans. The trade of Angola is yet continued, and from thence the Portugals buy and carry to Brasil and other parts yeerly, a world of slaues which are bought within the Land, and are captiues taken in their warres. Paulo Diaz at his death bequeathed to the Iesuites as much as might maintayne fiue hundred of that Societie in these parts. Master ThomasThom. Turner. Turuer, one that had liued a long time in Brasil, and had also beene at Angola, reported to me, that it was supposed eight and twentie thousand slaues (a number almost incredible, yet such as the Portugals told him) were yeerly shipped from Angola  and Congo, at the Hauen of Loanda. He named to me a rich Portugall in Brasil, which had ten thousand of his owne, working in his Ingenios, (of which he had eighteene) and in his other imployments. His name was Iohn du Paui, exiled from Portugall, and thus inriched in Brasil. A thousand of his slaues at one time, entred into conspiracie with nine thousand other slaues in the Countrey, and Barricadoed themselues for their best defence against their Masters, who had much adoe to reduce some of them into their former seruitude.
To returne to Angola, we may adde the report of another of our Countrey-men,Andrew Battell was taken by the Portugals on the coast of Brasil, and shipped ouer to Congo, where (and in the Countries adiacent) hee liued v^ry many yeeres, and was Sergeant of a B^nd, etc. Andrew Battell (my neere neighbour, dwelling at Leigh in Essex) who serued vnder Manuel Siluera Perera, Gouernour vnder the King of Spaine, at his Citie of Saint Paul: and with him went farre into the Countrey of Angola, their Armie being eight hundred Portugals, and  fiftie thousand Naturals. This Andrew Battell telleth, that they are all Heathens in Angola. They had their Idolls of wood in the midst of their townes, fashioned like a Negro, and at the foot thereof was a great heape of El^phants teeth, contayning three or foure tuns of them:
 these were piled in the earth, and vpon them were set the sculls of dead men, which they had slaine in the warres, in monument of their victorie. The Idoll they call Mokisso, and some of them haue houses built ouer them. If any be sicke, he accounteth it Mokisso's hand, and sendeth to appease his angrie god, with powring wine (which they haue of the palme-tree) at his feet. They haue proper names of distinction for their Mokisso's, as Kissungo, Kalikete, etc. and vse to sweare by them, Kissungowy, that is, by Kissungo. They haue another more solemne oath, in triall of Controuersies:This ^riall is called Motamba. for which purpose they lay a kinde of Hatchet, which they haue, in the fire, and the Ganga-Mokisso, or Mokisso's Priest taketh the same red hot, and draweth it neere to the skinne of the accused partie; and if there bee two, hee causeth their legges to bee set neere together, and draweth this hot Iron without  touching betweene them; if it burnes, that partie is condemned as guiltie, otherwise hee is freed.
For the ceremonies about the dead, they first wash him, then paint him, thirdly apparell him in new clothes, and then bring him to his graue, which is made like a vault, after it is digged a little way downe, vndermined, and made spacious within, and there set him on a seate of earth, with his beades (which they vse in chaines and bracelets for ornament) and the most part of his goods, with him in his lasting home. They kill Goats, and shed the blood in the graues, and powre wine there, in memoriall of the dead.
They are much giuenOd. Lopez. to diuination by birds. If a bird flie on their left hand, or crie in some manner which they interprete ominous and vnluckie, they will cease from the enterprises  which they haue in hand. Their Priests areGi. Bot. Ben. part. 1. l. 3. called Gange, and so highly reputed, that the people thinke it in their power to send plentie or scarcitie, life or death. They are skilfull in medicinall herbes and in poysons; and by familiaritie with the Deuill foretell things to come.
In Angola euery man taketh as many wiues as he will. There are mines of siluer, and of most excellent copper. They haue many Kine, but loue dogs better then any other flesh, and fat them to the shambles. Andrew Battell saith, that the dogs in those Countries are all of one sort, prick ^ared Curres of a meane bignesse, which they vse also to hunt with, but they open not; (for they cannot barke) and therefore they hang clappers made of little boords about their necks. Hee hath seene a M^stiffe sold for three slaues. Lopez affirmeth,  that a great dogge was exchanged for two and twentie slaues; which might happen vpon some extraordinarie occasion. The money in Angola is glasse-beades, which they vse also, as is said, for ornament. The King of Angola hath seemed willing to become Christian, and hath sent to the King of Congo for that purpose, but could not obtayne any Priests in that scarcitie to instruct him.
Andrew Battell.This Kingdome ha^h many Lordships subiect thereto, as farre on the Sea-coast as Cape Negro. Towards a Lake called Aquelunda, lyeth a Countrey called Quizama, the Inhabitants whereof being gouerned after the manner of a Common-wealth, haue shewed themselues friendly to the Portugals, and helped them in their warres against Angola. The houses in Angola are made in fashion like a Bee-hiue. The women at the first sight of the newe  Moone, turne vp their Bummes, in despight, as offended with their menstruous courses, which they ascribe vnto her. The men sometimes in a valorous resolution, will deuote themselues vnto some haughtie attempt in the warres: and taking leaue of the King, will vow neuer to returne, till they bring him a horse-head, or some other thing very dangerous in the enterprise, and will either doe it, or die. Horse tayles are great jewells, and two slaues will bee giuen for one tayle, which commonly they bring from the Riuer of Plate, where horses are exceedingly increased and growne wilde. They will by firing the grasse round about, hemme the horses about with a fierie circle, the fire still streightning and approching neerer, till they haue aduantage enough to kill them: Thus haue the Europaean Cattell, of horse and kine, so increased in that other World, as they spare not to kill the one for their  hides, and the other for their tayles.


@. II. Of Congo.
NExt to Angola Northwards,Od. Lopez. is the Kingdome of Congo, the westerne Line whereof Lopez extendeth three hundred threescore and fifteen miles, the Northern fiue hundred and fortie; the Eastern, fiue hundred; and the Southern three hundred and threescore. The breadth thereof from the mouth of Zaire, crossing ouer the  Mountaynes of the Sunne, and the Mountaynes of Crystal, is six hundred miles: And yet is it much streightned of the ancient bounds, only the title except, which stil holdeth the old stile;
 Don ALVARO King of Congo, and of Abundos, and of Matama, and of Quizama, and of Angola, and of Cacongo, and of the seuen Kingdomes of Congere Amolaza, and of the Langelungos, and Lord of the Riuer Zaire, and of the Anziquos, and Anziquana, and of Loango. The present Kingdome is diuided into sixe Prouinces, Bamba, Songo, Sundi, Pango, Batta, Pemba. Bamba is the chiefe for greatnesse and riches, then gouerned by Don Sebastian Mani-Bamba: the word Mani is a title of honour, and signifieth a Prince or Lord: when need requireth, the Mani-Bamba may haue in campe foure hundred thousand men of warre. Therein are mines of siluer: and on the Sea-coast a kinde of shells which they vse for money; for siluer and gold is not vsed for money amongst them. In this Prouince are yeerely bought by  the Portugals about fiue thousand Negros. There are among them very mightie men that will cleaue a slaue in the middle, or cut off a Bulls head at one blow. Yea, one of them did beare on his arme a vessell of wine, contayning the fourth part of a Butt, and might weigh three hundred and fiue and twentie pound, vntill it was cleane emptied. There are certaine creatures as bigge as Rammes, and haue wings like Dragons, with long tayles and chaps, and diuers rowes of teeth, and feede vpon raw flesh. Their colour is blue and greene, their skinne be-painted like scales, and they haue but two feet. These the Pagan Negros doe worship for gods, and at this day many of them are kept for a miracle. And because they are very rare, the chiefe Lords doe curiously preserue them, and suffer the people to worship them, in regard of the profit which accrueth to them, by the offerings which the people make vnto  them. Other creatures of these parts are mentioned in the first Chapter of the former Booke. Peacocks are not common, and are very deare, their feathers being vsed for Royall Ensignes. The King of Angola bringeth vp some in an inclosed wood, and suffereth none to keepe them but himselfe. To speake at large of the other fiue Prouinces, would bee tedious to the Reader, and MasterHistorie of Congo translated by Abraham Hartwell. Hartwell hath taught Lopez to speake English, of whom such as are desirous, may be further satisfied. Ouer-against the Ile Loanda, where the shell-money is gathered, is vpon the Continent, the Towne of Saint Paul, inhabited with Portugals and their wiues.
The Riuers of Congo are many, Bengo, Coanza, Dande, Lembe, Ozone, Loze, Ambriz, and the greatest of all, Zaire: all which haue some, either affinitie in mutuall marriages of  their streames, or consanguinitie in the Fountaynes from whence they flow, which are certayne Lakes, one of which is Zembre, the other Aquelunda. In all these Riuers are common the rarities of Nilus, the ouer-flowing of the waters, Riuer-horses, Crocodiles, and such like. Andrew Battell told mee of a huge Crocodile, which was reported to haue eaten a whole Alibamba, that is, a companie of eight or nine slaues chayned together, and at last payed for his greedinesse; the chaine holding him slaue, as before it had the Negroes, and by his vndigestible nature deuouring the Deuourer; remayning in the belly of him after he was found, in testimonie of this victorie. Hee hath seene them watch and take their prey, haling a Gennet, Man, or other Creature into the waters. A Souldier thus drawne in by a Crocodile, in shallower waters, with his knife wounded him in the belly, and slue him. In  their Summer it rayneth not, and then the places in their Winter (the time of the Sunnes neerest presence, attended with daily raynes) couered with water, doe grow thicke, and matted with abundance of little trees, herbes and plants, which the fatned wombe of that moist soile conceiueth by the directer beames of the Sunne, and the ouer-flowing waters in the Winter carry away, as it were smallThey call these patches of ground thus carryed in Zaire, Balsa's. The Riuer Zaire. Ilands; lifting them vp together with the rootes and soile, the young Trees and Deere standing and growing thereon, carried captiue vnto Neptunes eternall prisons. In Bengo and Coanza they are forced to set vp, for a time, houses vpon cratches, their other houses being taken vp for the Riuers lodgings. Zaire is of such force, that no ship can get in against the Current, but neere to the shore: yea it preuailes against the Oceans saltnesse threescore, and as some say, fourescore miles, within the Sea, before  his proud waues yeeld their full homage, and receiue that salt temper in token of subiection. Such is the haughtie spirit of that streame, which ouer-running the low Countries as it passeth, and swollen with conceit of daily Conquests, and daily Supplies, which in Armies of showres are by the clouds sent to his succour, runnes now in a furious rage, thinking euen to swallow the Ocean, which before he neuer saw, with his mouth wide gaping, eight and twentie miles, as Lopez affirmeth, in the opening; but meeting with a more Giant like enemie, which lyes lurking vnder the cliffes to receiue his assault, is presently swallowed in that wider wombe; yet so, as alwayes being conquered, hee neuer giues ouer; but in an eternall quarrell, with deepe indented frownes in his angrie face, foaming with disdayne, and filling the ayre with noyse (with fresh helpe) supplies those forces which the Salt-Sea  hath consumed. In this Riuer is a fish called Ambize Angulo, or Hog-fish, that hath, as it were, two hands, and a tayle like a target, which eateth like a Porke, and whereof they make Lard, and hath not the sauour or taste of fish. It feedeth on the grasse that groweth
 on the bankes of the Riuer, and neuer goeth out: it hath a mouth like the moozell of an Oxe: there are of them that weigh fiue hundred pound a piece. Obseruing where it feedes, with weapons in their boats, they hinder it from taking water, and hauing taken it, present it to the King (it is vpon perill of life) they smoke it as wee doe Bacon, and reserue it for dainties.
About the yeere 1490. Iohn the second, King of Portugall, sent Consaluo di Sosa, with three ships, and Priests in them, to bring the King and people of Congo to Christian Religion,Of the conuersion of Congo, reade Io. di. Barros. Dot. 3. l. 3. cap. 10. and Osorius de reb. Emanueli., lib. 3. and Maffaeus Hist. Ind. lib. 1. and Lopez, l. 2. and Got. Arthus Hist. Ind. Orientalis, cap 14, 15, 16, 17. Iarric. etc. which was effected: and although hence arose ciuill warres amongst them, yet the matter was at last ended to the aduancement of the Christian Religion (such as the Portugals taught, and no doubt, infinitely better then their Pagan superstition, howsoeuer spotted  with many Romish staines) and from that time to this, now an hundred and twentie yeeres, hath Congo continued Christian, vnder Iohn, Alfonso, Piedro, and the rest of their Kings.
When the first Bishop of Saint Thomas went into Congo, to take possession of his Pastorall charge there (for the Kingdome of Congo was annexed to the Bishoprick of Saint Thomas) from the Sea-side to the Citie, which is an hundred and fiftie miles, King Piedro caused the wayes to bee made smooth and trim, and couered ouer with mats, that the Bishop should not set his feet vpon any part of the ground, not adorned: all the wayes, trees, and higher places swarming with people, offering Lambes, Kids, Chickins, Partridges, Venison, Fish, and other necessaries, to testifie their zeale. And at last arriuing at the Citie of  Saint Sauiours (before called Banza, which signifieth a Court, and is commonly attributed to all the chiefe Cities, where the King of any of those Countries holdeth his residence) hee was there receiued by the King and his Nobles, and ordayned the Church there to bee the Cathedrall Church of his See, which had belonging to it eight and twentie Canons, with other Officers, and Ornaments vsuall.


@. III. Of their Heathenish rites: Also of their strange Trees, and of  the Ile Loanda.
AFter Don Piedro succeeded Francisco, and after him, Diego: who being dead, his sonne and two other Competitors of the Kingdome were slaine, and Henrico brother to Diego, was made King, and after his death, Aluaro, whom the Giacchi draue out of his Kingdome, till King Sebastian sent Francisco di Geuea to expell them.
The greatest, and most zealous Prince for Christian Religion, was Alphonso, who, on paine of death, forbade to all his subiects the hauing, or worshipping of Idols, which he commanded should be all brought, and deliuered to the Lieutenants of the Countrie, together with  their Characters and Witcheries. For before eueryLopez. man adored that which best liked him: some, those Dragons before spoken of: others, Serpents, which they nourished with their daintiest prouisions. Some worshipped the greatest Goats they could get; some, Tigres; and the more vncouth and deformed any beasts were, the more in their beastly and deformed superstition were they obserued. Bats, Owles, and Scritch-owles, birds of darknesse, were the obiects of their darkned deuotions: Snakes and Adders enuenomed their soules, with a more deadly poyson, then they could doe their bodies. Beasts, Birds, Herbes, Trees, Characters, and the formes of those things painted and grauen, yea the skinnes of them, being dead, stuffed with straw, had their shares in this diffused varietie, and confused masse of irreligious religion. The ceremonies they vsed to them, were, kneeling on their knees, casting  themselues grouelling on the earth, defiling their faces with dust, verball prayers, reall offerings. They had their Witches, which made the people beleeue that their Idols could speake: and if any man had recouered of any sicknesse, after hee had recommended himselfe to them, they would affirme that the angrie Idoll was now appeased. All these Idols King Alphonso caused to be burned in one heape, in stead whereof, the Portugals gaue them Images of Saints and Crucifixes to worship. This may seeme an exchange rather, then a ceasing from superstition, were not some fundamentall substance of Truth communicated (besides those blinde shadowes) wherewith, no doubt, God draweth some out of darknesse (this darknesse notwithstanding) in a true and sauing, though a dim and shadowed light; wherewith as farre going before vs in affection, as we before them in knowledge; I dare not but in the hope of  saluation of some, thanke God for this glimpse of heauenly light, rather then rashly to censure and sentence them to a totall and hellish darknesse.

EmanuelMaff hist. Ind. l 3 and. 15. since sent supplies of religious persons, to confirme them in their Christianitie, and his sonne, Iohn the third sent also Iesuites to that purpose, who erected Schooles among them: and they also send their sonnes into Portugall to learne the Sciences and knowledge of Europe. God Almighty grant that those Fountaines may be clensed of all Popish mire, that thence more wholesome waters may flow, to the watering of this Ethiopian Vineyard.
They vse in CongoAr. hus^ 25. Linschot. lib. 2. Andrew Bat^ell fa^th, That the tree which thus strangely multiplye^h it selfe, is called the Manga tree. to make cloathes of the Enzanda tree, of which some write the same things that are reported of the Indian Fig-tree, that it sends forth a hairy substance from the branches, which no sooner touch t^e ground, but they take root and grow vp, in such sort, that one tree would multiply it selfe into a wood (if Nature set not some obstacle.) The innermost  barke of the Inzanda, by beating, is made excellent cloth. Other trees there are, which the Tides couer, and are discouered by the Ebs, laden at the root with Oisters. But more admirable is that huge tree called Alicande, of which my friend AndrewAndr. Battell, Battell supposeth some are as bigge (besides their wonderfull tallnesse) as twelue men can fathome. It spreds like an Oake. Some of them are hollow, and the liberall clouds into those naturall Caskes disperse such plenty of wa er, that one time three or foure thousand of them, in that hote R^gion, continued foure and twenty houres at one of those trees, which yeelded them all drinke of her watery store, and was not emptied. Their Negros climed vp with pegs (for the tree is smooth, and therefore not otherwise to be climbed, and so soft, that it easily receiued pegs of a harder wood, driuen into her yeelding substance with a stone) and dipped the  water, as it had been, out of a Well. He supposed that there is forty tunne of water in some one of them. It yeeldeth them good opportunitie for honey, to which end the Countrey-people make a kinde of Chest, with one hole into the same, and hang it vpon one of these trees; which they take downe once a yeere, and with fire or smoke chasing or killing the Bees, take thence a large quantitie of honey. Neither is it liberall alone to the hungry and thirstie appeti^e, but very bountifully it cloathes their backs, with the barke thereof, which being taken from the yonger Alicundes and beaten, one fathome which they cut out of the tree, will by this meanes extend it selfe into twenty, and presently is cloth fit forLinschot. l. ^. Lopez. These boats, sai^h Andrew Battell, are made of another tree, for the Alicunde is of too spungie a substa^ce for that purpose. wearing; though not so fine as that which the Inzanda tree yeeldeth. It serues them also for boats, one of which cut out in proportion of a State, will hold hundreths of men.
 Of their Palme-trees, which they keepe with watering and cutting euery yeere, they make Veluets, Sattens, Taffatas, Damasks, Sarcenets, and such like, out of the clensed and and purged leaues hereof, drawing long and euen threds for that purpose.
And for their Palme-wines, which they draw out of the top of a kind of Palme, which at first is strong and inebriating wine, and in time declineth to a sowre and holesome vineger: of the stone of the fruit, which is like an Almond, they also make bread, of the shale of the fruit, Oyle, which also serueth them for Butter: Lopez distinguisheth this tree from the Coco tree, which is there also growing: and another Palme that beareth Dates: others that beare Cola, like a Pine-apple, excellent for the stomacke, and for the Liuer most admirable: it being supposed that the Liuer of a Hen or other Bird, putrified, sprinkled with this matter,  recouereth the former freshnesse and soundnesse. Other sorts of Palmes yeeld other fruits, and of their leaues they make Mats, wherewith they couer their houses. Lopez saw a Pomecitron, the kernell whereof left within the rinde, yeelded a pretty tall sprigge in foure dayes.
Of stones they haue such store to build with, that in some places they may cut out a Church of one piece. There are whole Mountaines of Porphorie, of Iaspar, of white Marble, and other Marbles: one especiall, that yeeldeth faire Iacinths, that are good Iewels, straked like as it were with naturall veines.
The Port and Ile of Loanda lying ouer against the Portugall Towne of Saint Paul, (about twenty miles in circuit) famous for many things, deserueth especiall mention for  this, that it yeeldeth, in lesse then halfe a yard digging, Waters very sweet: but of so contrarie a Nature to the Sea, her mighty neighbour, that when the Sea ebbeth, the water is Salt, and when it floweth, the same is sweet and fresh: as if the Sea imparted that which it selfe hath not, or rather enuied that which he hath, and therefore alway at his comming, re-demandeth that saltnesse from those springs to attend vpon their Ocean-mother. So doe wee see the Siluer Lampes of Heauen in the Sunnes absence to lighten the World, which yet want light, when it is most plentifull, to shew themselues.Monopo^^^. Euen Nature sealeth and confirmeth Monopolies to her principall Courtiers, alway as prouided, that it thereby better serueth for the Common good, and therefore no precedent to such Dropsie and spleen-like Monopolies, Mony-pollings, with which some exorbitant members burthen themselues, and make others by lighting, heauy, worthily therefore by the Sun of our  Great Britaine, at the first rising of his morning brightnesse, dispersed from our Horizon. But how farre is Loanda from Britaine? And yet our scope is to bring Loanda and all the
 World else into our Britaine; that our Britaines might see the in and outside of the same. Loando is reported (as some affirme of Egypt and Nilus to bee the issue of the Oceans sand, and Coanzo's mire, which in processe of time brought forth in their disagreeing agreement, this Iland.
In Congo the King is Lord Supreme: and none hath power to bequeath his goods to his kindred, but the King is heire generall to all men.



CHAP. X. Of Loango, the Anzichi, Giachi, and the great Lakes in those parts of the World.

@. I. Of Loango.
IT followeth in the course of our Discouerie, to set you on shore in Loango, the  Northerly neighbour of Congo, right vnder the Line,Lopez. l. 1. c. 5. whose Countrie stretched two hundred miles within Land. The people are called Bramas, the King, Mani Loango; sometimes, as report goeth, subiect to the King of Congo. They are Circumcised after the maner of the Hebrews, like as also the rest of the Nations of those Countries vse to be. They haue aboundance of Elephants, and weare cloathes of Palme. AndrewAndrew Bat. Battell liued amongst them two yeares and a halfe. They are, saith he, Heathens, and obserue many Superstitions. They haue their Mokisso's or Images, to which they offer according to the proportion of their sorts and suits: The Fisher offereth fish, when he sueth for his helpe in his fishing; the Countrey-man, Wheat; the Weauer, Alibungo's, pieces of cloth: other bring bottles of wine: all wanting that they would haue, and bringing what they want, furnishing their Mokisso, with those things,  whereof they complaine themselues to be dis-furnished.
Their Ceremonies for the dead are diuers. They bring Goats and let them bleed at the Mokisso's foot, which they after consume in a Feasting memoriall of the deceased party: which is continued foure or fiue dayes together, and that foure or fiue seuerall times in the yeere, by all of his friends and kindred. The dayes are knowne, and though they dwell twenty miles thende, yet they will resort to these memoriall-Exequies, and beginning in the night will sing dolefull and funerall songs till day, and then kill, as aforesaid, and make merry. The hope of this, maketh such as haue store of friends, to contemne death; and the want of friends to bewayle him, makes a man conceiue a more dreadfull apprehension of Death.  
Their conceit is so rauished with superstition, that many dye of none other death. Kin is the name of vnlawfull and prohibited meat, which according to each kindreds deuotion, to some Family is some kinde of Fish; to another, a Hen; to another, a Buffe; and so of the rest: in which, they obserue their vowed abstinence so strictly, that if any should (though at vnawares) eate of this Kin, he would dye of conceit, alway presenting to his accusing conscience the breach of his vow, and the anger of Mokisso. Hee hath knowne diuers thus to haue died, and sometimes would, when some of them had (eaten with him, make them beleeue, that they had eaten of their Kin, till hauing sported himselfe with their superstitious agony, he would affirme the contrary. They vse to set in their Fields and places where Corne or Fruits grow, a Basket with Goats-hornes, Parrats feathers, and other  trash: This is the Mokisso's Ensigne, or token that it is commended to his custodie; and therefore the people very much addicted to theft, dare not meddle, or take any thing. Likewise, if a man, wearied with his burthen, lay it downe in the high-way, and knit a knot of grasse, and lay thereon; or leaue any other note (knowne to them) to testifie, that hee hath left it there in the name of his Idol, it is secured from the lime-fingers of any passenger. Conceit would kill the man that should transgresse in this kinde.
In the Banza, or chiefe Citie, the chiefe Idol is named Chekoke. Euery day they haue there Market, and the Chekoke is brought forth by the Ganga, or Priest, to keep good rule, and is set in the Market-place, to preuent stealing. Moreouer, the King hath a BellRecouerie of stolne goods., the strokes whereof sound such terrour into the heart of the fearfull thiefe, that none dare keepe any  stolne goods after the sound of that Bell. Our Author inhabited in a little Reed-house, after
 the Loango manner, and had hanging by the wals, in a Cloth-case, his Piece, wherewith hee vsed to shoot Fowles for the King, which, more for loue of the Cloth then for the Peece, was stolne. Vpon complaint, this Bell (in forme like a Cowbell) was carried about and rung, with proclamation to make restitution; and he had his Peece the next morning set at his doore. The like another found, in a bagge of Beads of a hundred pound weight, stolne from him, and recouered by the sound of this Bell.
They haue a dreadfull and deadly kind of tryall in Controuersies, after this manner:Tryall of suspected p^rsons. There is a little Tree, or Shrub, with a small Root (is called Imbunda) about the bignesse of ones thumbe, halfe a foot long, like a white Carrot. Now when any listeth to accuse a Man, or  Family, or whole Street, of the death of any of his friends, saying, That such a man bewitched him, the Ganga assembleth the accused parties, and scrapes that Root, the scrapings wherof he mixeth with water, which makes it as bitter as gall (hee tasted of it:) one Root will serue for the tryall of a hundred men. The Ganga brewes the same together in Gourds, and with Plantine stalkes hitteth euery one, after they had drunke, with certaine words. Those that haue receiued the drinke, walke by, till they can make Vrine, and then they are thereby freed. Others abide till either Vrine trees them, or dizzinesse takes them: which the people no sooner perceiue, but they cry Vndoke, Vndoke, that is, naughty Witch: and hee is no sooner fallen by his dizzinesse, but they knocke him on the head, and dragging him away, hurle him ouer the Cliffe. In euery Liberty they haue such Tryals, which they make in cases  of Theft, and death of any person. Euery weeke it fals out that some or other vndergoes this tryall, which consumeth multitudes of people.
There be certaine persons called Dunda, which are borne of Negro-Parents, and yet are, by some vnknowne cause, white. They are very rare, and when such happen to be born, they are brought to the King, and become great Witches: They are his Councellors and aduise him of lucky and vnlucky dayes for execution of his enterprises. When the King goes any whither, the Dundas goe with him, and beat the ground round about with certaine Exorcismes, before the King sits downe, and then sit downe by him. They will take any thing in the Market, not daring to contradict them.
Kenga is the landing place of Loango. They haue there an Idol called Gumbiri, and a holy  House, called Munsa Gumbiri, kept and inhabited by an old woman; where once a yeere is a solemne Feast, which they celebrate with Drummes, Daunces, and Palme-wines: and then they say hee speaketh vnder the ground. The people call him Mokissa Cola, or a strong Mokisso, and say, That he comes to stay with Chekoke, the Idol of Banza. That Chekoke is a Negro-Imoge, made, sitting on a stoole: a little house is there made him: They annoint him Ticcola, which is a red colour made of a certaine WoodThis seemeth to be Red Sanders. A Bat, saith it is Logwood. ground on a stone, and mixed with water, wherewith they dayly paint themselues, from the waste vpwards, esteeming it great beauty: otherwise they account not themselues ready. It is for like purpose carried from hence to Angola. Sometimes it fals out, that some Man or Boy is taken with some sudden Enthusiasme, or rauishment, becomming mad, and making a whooping, and great clamours.
 They call them Mokisso-Moquat, that is, taken of the Mokisso. They cloath them very handsome, and whatsoeuer they bid in that fit (for it lasteth not very long) they execute as the Mokissos charge.
Morumba is thirty leagues Northwards from hence, in the Mani Loango's Dominion; where he liued nine moneths. There is a House, and in it a great Basket, proportioned like to a Hiue, wherein is an Image called Morumba, whose Religion extendeth far. They are sworne to this Religion at ten or twelue yeares old: but for probation are first put in a House, where they haue hard diet, and must be mute for nine or ten dayes, any prouocation to speake notwithstanding. Then doe they bring him before Morumba and prescribe him his Kin, or perpetuall abstinence from some certaine meat. They make a cut in his shoulder  like to an halfe Moone, and sprinkle the bloud at Morumbas feet, and sweare him to that Religion. In the wound they put a certaine white powder, in token of his late admission; which so long as it continueth, doth priuiledge him to take his meat and drinke with whomsoeuer he pleaseth, none denying him the same, at free cost. They also haue their fatall Tryals before this Image, where the accused partie kneeling downe, and clasping the Hiue, saith Mene quesa cabamba Morumba, signifying: That he comes thither to make tryall of his innocence; and if he be guiltie, he fals downe dead; being free, he is freed. Andrew Battell saith, hee knew sixe or seuen, in his being there, that made this tryall.




@. II. Of the Anzigues.
BEyond the Countrey of Loango are the AnziguesOd. Lopez. l. 1. cap. 5., the cruellest Canibals which the Sunne looketh on. For inother places they eate their enemies, or their dead; but here they take and eate their kinsfolkes and Country-folkes. They keepe Shambles of mans flesh, as with vs of Beefe and Muttons. They eate their enemies: Their slaues (if cut out, they will yeeld them more in the seuerall Ioynts, or Pieces, then to bee sold aliue) they kill, though it be but to saue a halfe-peny. Some, of them for wearinesse of life,  and some (oh crueltie of vaine-glory) euen for valour of courage, in contempt of Death, and esteeming it an honorable proofe of their fidelitie and manhood, will offer themselues to the Butcherie, as faithfull subiects vnto their Princes, of them to bee consumed and eaten, that with their death, and after their death, they may doe them seruice.
These Anzichi stretch from Zaire to Nubia. They haue many Mines of Copper, and great quantitie of Sanders, red and gray; wherewith (mixed with the Oyle of Palme-tree) they anoint themselues. The Portugals temper it with Vineger, for the healing of the French Pocks: by the smoke thereof they driue away the head-ache. It is incredible, or at least would so seeme to vs, which Lopez reporteth, that they carrying their arrowes (which are short and sl^nder, of very hard Wood) in the Bowe-hand, will shoot off eight and twenty, (so  many they hold at once) before the first of them fall to ground; and with a short Hatchet, with a sudden whirling themselues about, breake the force of the enemies Arrowes, and then hanging this Hatchet on their shoulder, discharge their owne Arrowes. They are of great simplicitie, loyaltie, and fidelitie, and the Portugals more trust them then any other slaues. They are yet sauage and beastly, and there is no conuersing with them: but they bring slaues of their own Nation, and out of Nubia to Congo to sell; for which they recarrie Salt, and Shels, which they vse for Money; Silkes. Linnen, Glasses, and such like.
TheyAll the Heathen N^tions in these parts of Africa are circumcised. circumcise themselues, and besides that, both men and women, of the Nobility and and Comminaltie, from their childhood marke their faces with sundry slashes made with a knife. I asked (saithCap 10. Lopez) of their Religion, and it was told mee that they were Gentiles; which was all I could learne of them. They worship the Sunne for the greatest God,  as though it were a man; and the Moon next, as though it were a woman. Otherwise euery man chuseth to himselfe his owne Idol; and worships it after his own pleasure. The Anzich^G. Bot Ben. part. 1. l. 3. haue one King principall, which hath many Princes vnder him.
Of Ambus and Medera. Northerne Regions, little besides the names is knowne. Biafar is inhabited with people much addicted to Enchantments, Witchcrafts, and all abominable Sorceries.


@. III.  Of the Giacchi or Iagges.
OF the Giacchi we haue made often mention, and of their incursions into Congo. These, in their owne Language, are called Agag, as LopezLopez l. 1. 13. and l. 2. c. 9. testifieth, and liue on both side of Nilus, in the borders of the Empire of Mohenhe-Muge. They vse to marke themselues about the lip, and vpon their cheekes, with certaine lines which they make with iron instruments, and with fire. Moreouer, they haue a custome to turne their eye-lids backwards, so that their blacke skins, white eyes, and cauterized markes seeme to conspire a dreadfull and gastly deformitie in their faces. They hold warre with the d supposed Amazones;These Amazones are (as we haue obserued (doubted of in other places: and And. Battel, which trauelled neere to those parts, denyeth this report o^ Lopez as vntrue. and of late yeeres haue inuaded the neighbour-Nations. Their weapons are Darts, their food humane flesh, without all humanity deuoured.
Thus Lopez reporteth by reports. Andrew Battel liued (by occasion of the Portugals treachery) with the Iagges a longer time then euer any Christian, or White Man had done: namely, sixteene moneths: and serued them with the Musket in their warres: neither could Lopez (saith he) haue true intelligence whence they came. For the Christians at that time had but vncertaine coniectures of them: neither, after had the Portugals any conuersing, but by way of commerce: but he being betrayed, fled to them for his life, and after by stealth escascaped from them: the onely European that euer liued in their Campe.
He saith; they are called Iagges by the Portugal, by themselues Imbangolas (which name argues them to be of the Imbij and Galae before mentioned) and came from Sierra Liona: That they are exceeding deuourers of mans flesh, for which, they refuse Beefe and Goats, whereof
 they take plenty. They haue no setled habitation, but wander in an vnsetled course. They rise in Haruest, and inuading some Country, there stay as long as they find the Palmes, or other sufficient meanes of mayntenance, and then seeke new aduenture. For they neyther plane or sowe, nor breed vp Cattle: and which is more strange, they nourish vp none of their owne children, although they haue ten or twenty wiues a man, of the properest and comeliest slaues they can take. But when they they are in trauell, they digge a hole in the Earth, which presently receiueth in that darke prison of death, the new borne Creature, not yet made happy with the light of life. Their reason is, that they will not bee troubled with education, nor in their flitting wanderings be troubled with such cumbersome burthens.
 Once, a secret Prouidence both punisheth the Fathers wickednesse, and preuenteth a viperous Generation, if that may bee a preuention where there is a succession without Generation: and as PliniePlin. l. 5. c 17. saith of the Esseni, Gene aeterna est in qua nemo nascitur. For of the conquered Nations they preserue the Boyes from ten to twenty yeeres of age, and bring them vp, a^ the hope of their succession, like Negro Azimogli,Azimogli are the children of Christians taken from the Parents by the Turke, the spawne of their Ianizaries. with education fitting their designes. These weare a Collar about their necke, in token of slauery, vntill they bring an Enemies head slaine in battaile, and then they are vncollared, freed, and dignified with the title of Souldiers. If one of them runnes away, he is killed and eaten. So that hemmed in betwixt hope and feare, they grow very resolute and aduentrous, their Collars breeding shame, disdaine, and desperate fury, till they redeeme their freedome, as you haue heard. Elembe  the great Iagge brought with him twelue thousand of these cruell Monsters from Sierra Liona, and after much mischiefe and spoyle settled himselfe in Benguele, twelue degrees from the Line Southwards, and there breedeth and groweth into a Nation.The Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Iagges. But Kelandula, somtime his Page, proceeds in that beastly life before mentioned, and the people of Elembe by great troupes runne to him, and follow his Campe in hope of spoyle. They haue no Fetisso's, or Idols. The great Iagge or Prince, is Master of all their Ceremonies, and is a great Witch. I haue seene this Kelandula, (sayth our Author) continue a Sacrifice from Sun to Sun; the rites whereof are these: Himselfe sat on a stoole in great pompe, with a Cap adorned with Peacockes feathers (which fowles in one Countrey called Shelambanza, are found wild, and in one place empaled, about the graue of the King, are fifty kept and fed by an old woman, and  are called Iugilla Mokisso, that is, Birds of Mokisso.) Now, about him thus set, attended forty or fifty women, each of them weauing continually a Zebras tayle in their hands. There were also certaine Gangas Priests or Witches. Behind them were many with Drummes and Pipes, and Pungas (certaine Instruments made of Elephants teeth, made hollow a yard and halfe, and with a hole like a Flute, which yeeld a lowd and harsh sound, that may bee heard a myle off.) These strike, and sound, and sing, and the women weaue (as is said) till the Sunne be almost downe. Then they bring forth a pot, which is set on the fire with leaues and roots, and the water therein: and with a kind of white powder, the Witches or Gangas, spot themselues, one on the one cheeke, the other on the other; and likewise their foreheads, temples, brests, shoulders, and bellies, vsing many inchanting tearmes, which are holden  to be Prayers for Victory. At Sun-set a Ganga brings his Kissengula, or War-hatchet, to the Prince (this weapon they vse to weare at their girdles) and putting the same in his hand, bids him be strong, their God goes with him, and he shall haue victory. After this they bring him foure or fiue Negros, of which, with a terrible countenance, the great Iagge with his Hatchet kils two, and other two are killed without the Fort. Likewise, fiue Kine are slaine within, and other fiue without the Fort; and as many Goats, and as many Dogs, after the same manner. This is their Sacrifice, at the end whereof all the flesh is in a Feast consumed. Andrew Battle was commanded to depart when the slaughter began; for their Deuill, or Mokisso (as they said) would then appeare and speake to them. This Sacrifice is called Kissembula; which they solemnize when they attempt any great enterprize. There  were few left of the naturall Iagges, but of this vnnaturall brood the present succession was raysed.


@. IIII. Of the Lakes and Riuers in these parts of Africa.
NOw, that we haue thus discoursed of these former Nations, let vs take view of the more in-land and Easterly borders, which abut on Congo: where wee shall finde  the great Lake Aquilunda, which, with her many Riuers aforesaid, watereth all that great Countrey assisted therein by a farre greater Lake, called Zembre, great Mother, and chiefe Ladie of the Waters in Africa. As for the Moun^aynes of the Moone,
 now called Toroa, there is a Lake called Gale, of no great quantity, whence issueth a Riuer named Comissa, and by the Portugals, the sweet Riuer disemb^quing at the False Cape, an arme whereof had before entred the Sea (in 32. degrees 40. minutes) of InfanteIo. di Barros Dec 1 l. 3. c. 4. Od Lopez. l. 2. c. 8. Pigafella. one of Dias his companions, in the first Discouery of those parts, called Infanto, because hee there went first on Land. But from those Hils of the Moone, the Lake whence Nilus springeth hath no helpe. Neyther are there two Lakes, East and West, distant from each other about foure hundred and fifty miles, as Ptolemey describeth; for then the one should be in the Confines of Congo and Angola, the other about Sofala and Monomotapa: where is found but one Lake (for Aquilunde is no tributary to Nilus.) This Lake is betweene Angola and Monomotapa, and contayneth in Diameter 195. miles. There is indeed another Lake, which Nilus maketh  in his course, but standeth Northward from the first Lake Zembre, and not in East or West parallel. Neyther doth Nilus (as some affirme) hide it selfe vnder the ground, and after rise againe, butI auerre not this, but set downe Lopez his opinion. runneth through monstrous and Desart Valleyes, without any setled channell, and where no pleople inhabited, from whence that fabulous opinion did grow. This Lake is situate in twelue degrees of Southerly Latitude, and is compassed about like a Vault with exceeding high Mountaynes, the greatest whereof are called Cafates, vpon the East; and the Hils of Sal-Nitrum, and the Hils of Siluer on another side, and on the other side with diuers other Mountaynes. The Riuer Nilus runneth Northwards many hundred miles, and then entreth into another great Lake which the Inhabitants doe call a Sea. It is much bigger then the first, and contayneth in breadth two hundred and twenty miles, right vnder the  Equinoctiall Line. Of this second Lake, the Anzichi giue certaine and perfect intelligence: for they traffique into those parts. And they report, That in this second Lake there is a people that sayleth in great ships, and can write, and vseth number, weight and measure, which they haue not in the parts of Congo; that they build their Houses with Lime and Stone, and for their fashions and qualities may be compared with the Portugals. This seemeth to be in Goiame, where the Abassine entitleth himselfe King, and in his title (asCap. 3. before you haue read) cals it the Fountayne of Nilus: which AluaresF. Aluares, c. 135. also mentioneth, that Peter Couilia^ saw. He affirmeth, That there are Iewes about those parts, which, perhaps are the people that the Anzichi speake of.
From this second Lake in Goiame, the Riuer which is there called Gihon passeth through  the Pretes Dominion to Meroe, and so to Egypt, as elsewhere is shewed. In these two great Lakes are diuers Ilands, that we speake not of the Tritons, and other I know not what Monsters, there reported to be found. The Lake Zembre yeeldeth not Nilus alone, but Zaire, a farre more spacious Riuer in widenesse, and more violent in force then Nilus, or any other Riuer in Africa, Europe, or Asia, of which wee lately related. And, besides her Northerne and Westerne Tributes carried by those two Riuers to the Mediterranean and Ocean Seas, shee sendeth her great streames of Magnice, Coaua, and Cuama, into the inner or Easterne Ocean.
MagniceOd. Lopez. l. 2 cap. 9. springing out of Zembre, receiueth in his Voyage to the Sea three other Riuers; Nagoa, called Saint Christophers; and Margues, which both spring out of the Mountaynes  of the Moone, by the people there called Toroa; the third is Arroe, which, besides his waters, payeth to Neptune, which neyther needs nor heeds it, a great quantity of Gold, which it washeth from the Mountaynes of Monomotapa (a Countrey extending it selfe betweene Magnice and Cuama) whose seuen mouthes seeke to swallow vp many Ilands,G. Bot. Ben. part. 1. lib. 3. which they hold in their jawes, but through greedinesse lose that which greedinesse makes them seeke, not able to swallow so great morsels, which therefore remayne and are inhabited with Pagans. Boterus sayth, That this Riuer runs out of that Lake, a great space in one Channell, and then is diuided into two; the one called Spirito Sancto, running into the Sea, vnder the Cape Couenti; the other Cuama, receiueth the Riuers Panami, Luangua, Arruia, Mangiono, Inadire, Ruin^, and is sayled more then seuen hundred miles.  
Coaua is also a great Riuer The Inhabitants within Land, about these Riuers, are (as you haue heard) Pagans and rude people. Let me now haue leaue to conuey my selfe downe this Riuer Coaua into the Ocean, and there take view of the many Ilands with which Nature hath adorned this African World, as with many Brooches and Iewels set and hanged about the fringes of her garments: and first, learning what we can of the Ilands in and from the Red Sea hither, we will in some Portugall Carricke sayle round about the African Coast, and acquaint you with what we shall find worthiest obseruation: and then not willing as yet to set foot in Lisbone, as we meete with the Fleet of Spaine sayling to the New-found World; will passe with them for further Discoueries. For, to goe into the Mediterranean to discouer the African Ilands there, will scarce be worth the while. To heare a little of those ^ew,  may content vs.
Thus Authors haue written of the Riuers, which they n^uer saw: but Iohn des Santos, a
 Portugall Frier which liued many yeeres in those parts, hath giuen a fuller description of the Riuers and Coasts in those Easterne shores of Afrike. By whose narration it appeareth that Cuama and Nilus come not out of one and the same Lake: for Cuama ouerfloweth in March and Apill (not as Nilus in Iuly and August) and makes the Countrey at that time sickly, and driueth the wild beasts to the higher parts, where Lions, Tygres, Elephants, Merus (a kind of horned Asses) Ounces, Rhinocerotes, Buffals, wilde Kine, and Swine, and Horses and Dogs, Zeuras and other creatures of those parts are assembled in a peaceable Parliament by the Riuers forceable summons, which so aweth them that (as somtime in Noahs Arke) they forget their preying nature, and quietly expect their dismission with that of the waters. Riuer  horses there abound and Crocodiles: other strange Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Wormes they haue with Manna and other naturall rarities, touching which I referre the Reader to the second part of my Pilgrimes, where the Relations of Santos and Iobson, will entertayne him frankly.
Santos also will there acquaint you with the description of the Riuers, Countrey, Mynes and people of those parts: their Kingdomes, Warres, Customes Politike, Oeconomike and Religious: the Portugall Forts of Sofala, Sena, Tete, and the Marts of Massapa, Luanze, Manzono: the strange Rites of the Kings of Monomotapa, Quiteue, Sedanda and their Neighbours. The Quiteue is King of Sofala, and on that side of Cuama, and hath about 100. women, amongst which his Ants, Sisters, Daughters whom he carnally vseth (which incest to a  subiect were death) and when he dyeth, the Successor is he to whom those women giue peaceable and quiet possession of the Kings House and themselues. No force is made nor subiection yeelded vpon forced possession. The King thus by them receiued is not only admitted of the rest, but adored: yea, they aske of him raine, seasonable Haruest and all things they need, not without great Presents. He hath his Oracle-consultations with the Deuill, and euery yeere on the Obit day of the former King, the Deuill then entring into some one of the Assembly and giuing answers. Euery New Moone is a holy day, and the Musimos or Feast dayes which the Quiteue appoints by Proclamation, which they obserue without working. They otherwise worship no God, nor haue any Idoll, Image, or Temple, Priest or Sacrifice. They call the Quiteue by prodigious titles, Lord of the Sunne and Moone, and especially entitle him in  all things Great, as great Thiefe, great Witch (none else are permitted to bee Witches) great Lion, etc. good or bad, so as Great be the Epithet. The name Quiteue is common to all their Kings successiuely in that Countrey and to the Countrey it selfe. Their Oathes by Poyson, licking of hote Iron, etc. and other strange customes you shall find in the place aforesaid.



CHAP. XI. Of the Seas and Ilands about Africa: the Ancient and  Moderne Obseruations, Nauigations, and Discoueries.

@. I. Of the Red Sea, and why it is so called.
AFter this long and tedious journey ouer Land, where the steepe and snowie  Mountaynes, the myrie and vnwholesome Vallies, the vnpassable Wildernesses, swift Riuers, still Lakes, thicke Woods, and varietie of the Continent-obseruations, haue thus long whiled vs; let vs now by a swifter course take view of the African Seas, and those Ilands which they hold alway besieged, but neuer conquer. In the first place presents it selfe to our Discouery, that Sea which separateth (after the Moderne reckoning) Africa and Asia asunder. This is called the Red Sea; which name (saythPlin. l. 6. c. 23 Plinie) the Graecians call Erythraeum (this word signifieth Red, and is ascribed by some to a King named Erythras (whom PostellusPost. Orig. and some others thinke to be Esau or Edom, which, the like signification of his name signifying Red, and habitation not very farre distant, make enough probable) by others to the repercussion of the Sunne-beames;  by others, to the colour of the Sand and Earth (in the bottome;) and by others to the nature of the Water it selfe. SolinusSolin c. 41. affirmeth, it is called Erythraeum, of King Erythrus, the Sonne of Perseus and Andromade, and not only of the colour, alledgingM. Varr^. Varro, that learned
 Romane, for his Authour: who also mentioneth a Fountayne on the shoare thereof, which changeth the colour of the Sheepes fleeces which drinke thereof, into a duskish and darker colour. StraboStrabo l. 16. citeth the testimony of Nearchus and Orthagoras, concerning the Ile Tyrina, two thousand furlongs from Carmania, in which the Sepulchre of Erythras is shewed, being a great Hill, planted with trees: and that he raigned in those parts, and left his name thereunto: which they learned of Mithropastes, who flying from Darius, had liued in that Iland. BarriusJo. di Barros. Dec ^ l 8 c. 1. Al. Alboquerke. writeth, That Alfonso Dalboquerque (that victorious Portugall, who subdued so many Ilands, Seas, and Kingdomes to that Crowne) in a Letter to King Emanuel affirmeth, That it may be called the Red Sea, of certayne red spots or staines which are seene therein: and when he entred into the Streits, he encountred a great veine of red water, extending  it selfe from Aden as farre as they could see from the ships tops. These red veines of water the Moores ascribed to the ebbing and flowing of that Sea. Iohn di CastroIo. di Castro. (afterwards Viceroy of India) sayled to the bottome of Streit, as farre as Suez; and much laboured to find the cause, why it should be called theThe Scripture often mentioneth this Sea: but cals it, as Tremel and Iun. translat^ ma^e algosum, or after Vatablus, Carectosum; of the weeds plentifully growing therein Ex. 10.18. etc. Red Sea: there knowne only by the name of the Sea of Mecca: and they maruelled much at our name Red. He, or Gaspar Aloisius which writ the Booke of this Voyage, which my friend Master Hakluyt communicated to mee, sayth, that the colour of this Sea is as of other Seas, neyther is there red dust blowne in by the winds: but the Land generally on both sides is browne and very darke, as if it were scorched in some places blacke, and in some white: the Sands are of ordinary colour; onely, in three places were certaine Mountaynes with veines of red, which were hard Rocke. In many  places the waues seeme very red by accident: but taking vp the water in a Vessell, out of the Sea, it seemed cleerer and more Crystalline then that without the Straits. Hee caused also some to diue, which did bring him out of the sandy bottome a red matter, branched like Corall. In other places where were greene spots in the Sea, were taken out greene branches: and where the Sea was white, the sand there vnder was very white: and though the depth in some places amounted to twenty fathome, yet the purity of the Chrystalline waters caused this transparent colour. Neere to Suachen he found most of those spots, and from thence to Alcocer, the space of one hundred thirty sixe leagues. The Sea in this space hath many shelues, the ground whereof is Coral-stone, of which one sort is red, the other very white. The white Sands in the bottome make it seeme white, the Ooze greene, that Corally substance  red, which in that space was the most of the three.
But neerer the bottome, towards Suez, in a great space hee saw none. Further without the Strait, he saw such redSee of this Luys de Vrreta. hist. Aethiop. l. 1. c. 11. and Marmol. l. 10. c. 10. spots or veines of water at Cape Fartach, as if Oxen had beene slaine there, yet, the water taken vp in a Vessell seemed cleere; and hee supposed that this rednesse proceeded of the Whales bringing forth their young. Barrius misliketh that coniecture, and those other of Antiquity, in searching the cause of this name of Red, and is of opinion, That the violent currents of the Tydes, assisted with some tempestuous winds, rayse vp from the bottome that red floore, whereof we haue spoken, and cause, by the motion of the same vnder the water, that rednesse in the vpper face thereof: which is in more spacious quantity neere the S^raits, where there is greatest force of the Tydes; and the threeds or  straines of this rednesse are lesse in the greater and more spacious Sea-roome. The Portugall Pilots first thought, that the winds brought out red dust from the dry soyle of Arabia, which no mans experience hath confirmed. AndreaA. Corsali. let. 2. Corsali, which sayled and warred vnder the Portugals in these Seas, Anno 1516. sayth, hee knowes not why it should be called red, for the water is coloured as in other Seas: which seemeth to crosse the former reports: and may eyther bee construed of the water generally not discoloured, or perhaps while hee was there, the Tydes and Winds did not conspire so boysterously, as at some other times they doe, against the yeelding and weaker soyle in the bottome thereof.
Our English Pilots haue giuen later and better light in their Trade at Moha and other places, as in the first and second parts of our Bookes of Voyages is euident. But the most  Learned Pilot for the Erythraean Antiquities is Master Fuller, who in the last Chapiter of his fourth Booke examineth the Graecian Fables of Ayatharchides, Ctesias, Ourainus, Pausanias, of Boxus also, Mela, Plinie and the rest, and at last concludeth that of Esaus name Edom, the Countrey was called Edumaea, (farre larger then that of Ptolomey, besides it contayning a great part of Petraea, and all Nabathea) and of that Countrey coasting so great a part of that Sea (as appeares by Salomons and Iehoshaphats Ophyrian Nauies built at Ezion-Geber in Edumaea their owne Countrey) the Sea adioyning was called Edumaean, or in Greeke interpretation Erythraean, that is, Rubrum or Red: as Cephas the name properly by Christ giuen to the first of the Apostles, is commonly in a Greeke interpretation called Peter.
Howeuer it be for this rednesse, many deceiue themselues in streitning this name to the  Arabian Gulfe, which the AncientsLiu. l. 45. Plin. l. 6. c. 24. gaue vnto all the Seas from Aegypt to India: and reckon the Persian and Arabian Gulfes, armes of the Red Sea. Yea, Arrianus (not hee that
 writArrian de reb. Alex. l. 8. Alexanders life, who yet in the report of Nearchus his voyage from Indus, to the Riuer Tigris, calls it the Red Sea: but another of that name) in hisArrian Perip. Ortelius. Tepidum Rubenti Tygrim immiscet freto. Senec. Troas. Periplus of the Erythrae^^ Sea; (translated and illustrated with a large Commentarie by Stucke^s, and set forth by Ortelius in a peculiar Map thereof) comprehendeth in the title of the Red Sea, all from Arsia^e and Egypt, to Malacca, or the Chersonesus Aurea. Hauing now troubled you with the name, why, and how farre the name extendeth: wee may view the Ilands therein situate: which if any would more fully know, let him reade Arrianus and Barrius, and the voyage of Solyman Bassa, 1538. vnto Diu, written byDam. a Goes. op. Dionsis. Vtaggio di vn. Venet. Comito alla Cit di Diu. Ramus. part. 1. Damianus in Latine, and by a Venetian in Ramusius, who was present in the action. I must but touch the principall.



@. II. Of the chiefe Townes and Ilands in the Red Sea.
SVes is neere the beginning of the Sea, which some suppose to bee that which the Ancients call Arsinoe, after others Her^um: here is the place where the Turke hath his Arsenal and Gallies, for those Seas, the matter whereof is brought out of Caramania, by Sea, by Nilus, and by Camels ouer Land the rest of the way, at incredible charges. Here in old times was a Channell which conueyed the waters of Nilus to this  place, where they had Cisternes to receiue it; all destroyed by the Mahumetans: and now the Inhabitants fetch the water, which they vse, six miles off. Some thinke that Pharaoh was here drowned: which passage others set downe at Tor, where the Sea is straitned, and is not aboue nine miles ouer. It seemeth that the prints of the Chariot-whe^les, which OrosiusOros. l. 1. c. 10. affirmeth, still remayned as testimonies of Pharaohs ouerwhelming vnder those waues, and could not by any industrie of man be done out, but by the mightie hand of God, were soone restored in the same forme, are not now there to bee found: for they would soone end the controuersie.
Asion Gaber1. Reg. 9.26. was a Port hereabouts, whence Salomon sent his Nauie to Ophir, and after him Iehoshaphat1. Reg. 22.48., but not with like successe: which (IosephusIos. Antiq. l. 8. saith) was Berenice, not  farre from Elana. Hierome calls it Essia. Doctor Dee writes that Ezion Geber was neere Eloth, or Elana, or Iltor, the East end of the Bay: the other which some call Suez, is higher.
BerniceAdrich. p. 118 was the Port of the Red Sea, where the Indian drugs, and spices in the time of the Roman Empire were vnladen and landed, to be carried thence to Alexandria, the whole course whereof PlinieLib. 6. c. 33. describeth. AgatharchidesPhot. 250. R. Bret. etiam edidit. reckoning diuers Etymologies of the Erythraean title, liketh best of that which ascribes it to one Erythras, who first built a ship to saile in those Seas, altogether disallowing that it should be so called of the colour. Hee hath written strange things of the people adioyning. Hee nameth foure sorts of Ethiopians, according to their dwelling neere the Riuers, or Lakes, or Sea-coast, or wandring. Those on the Sea-coast, he saith, liue altogether on fish, which the Tide brings vp, and leaues on the  hollow places or plashes neere the shore: which they cast vpon hot Rocks, which cause the fishie substance to fall from the bones; this they treade with their feet, mixing the seede of Paliurus, and then make cakes thereof, which they drie in the Sunne, and eate all in common: and on the fift day goe to drinke, laying their mouthes to the water like Oxen, and sup in as much as their skins will hold, not able scarce to breathe, nor eating any thing one day after. Some of those Ichthyophagi or Fish-eaters, which haue store of this prouision, content themselues with the moysture of their diet, and drinke not at all. Some of them seeme subiect to an Apathie, not of Stoikes, but of stocks, not shunning or complayning for blowes or wrongs. But mee thinkes I see my Reader haue sense, and (not without reason) make complaint of wrong done him in these Relations: and therefore will referre them that  will, to our Authour himselfe.
Don Iohn di Castro can better acquaint vs with the later,Jo. di Cast. then Agatharchides with the ancient state. Hee ascribeth to Toro, which he maketh the same with Elana 28. 1/^. degrees. They are Christians, and haue a Grecian Monasterie. He reporteth the Moores tradition, that Moses smote the sea twelue times, and thereby opened twelue paths for the Israelites. 600000. Egyptians were drowned: the Iewes arriued where Toro now is. At Bohalel Xame they found a Towne, within a house like a Chappell, where was hanging a Banner of silke, and many Arrowes or Darts round about the graue: at the head of the graue was a table with an Epitaph, testifying that there lay buried one of Mahomets kindred: and great indulgence was granted to such deuout Pilgrimes as to that place resorted. But the Portugals burnt it.
Hieronymo da Sancto Stephano, relateth his voyage from Cairo in fifteene dayes to Cariz,M. St. ap. Ramus, and a good Port called Cane, finding many buildings and Temples ruined by the way: seuen dayes iourney they went from hence by land to Cosir a Hauen of the Red Sea. Procopius
 saith,Pr^cop. de bell. Perf. that this Sea is boisterous and rough in the day time, and calme in the night: that Iotabis one thousand furlongs from Aila, was an Iland of Iewes: of which hee mentions among the Homerite Arabians (as doe Nicephorus, Tudelensis, and Vertomannus also) which hee extendeth alongst the Sea: and addeth to them many other Nations and Man-eating Saracens. What the Portugals haue done in these Seas, Barrius, Marmolius, Osorius, Maffaeus, relate. Nonius Cugna in his Letter to the King,Non. Cug. ap. Refond. declares, that Anno 1530. they tooke Surrate, other peeces of Cambaya, and many Indian ships, and chased away the Turkes Nauie which besieged Aden, and brought the King of Aden to pay yeerly tribute ten thousand Serassins. But the Turkes after obtayned it.
The length of this Arabian GulfeG. B. B. Botero reckons 1200. miles, in breadth 100. for the  most part.Comito. Venet. Ramus. part. 1. fol. 274. Comito Venetiano in Ramusius, saith, it accounteth 1400. in length, in breadth 200. and in some places more; so full of sholds, that if they keepe not the Channell in the middest, there is no sayling but by day light. Outwards bound, they keepe the middle, and haue Pilots for that purpose; homewards they haue other Pilots which direct the ship within the shallowes: and are taken in at Babelmandel, called byPtol. lib. 4. cap. 1. Ptolemey, Insula Diodori, an Ile in the entrie or strait of the Gulfe, which Strabo saith, the ancient Kings of Egypt chayned to keepe the passage. Zidem is twelue leagues from Mecca, where the ships haue vsed to vnlade their Spiceries, as before at Berenice: without this Towne is a Moschee, which the Moores say is the Sepulchre of Eua. Their water is raine-water, reserued in Cisternes.
Passing by the Ile Mehun, the Ile Camaran is famous by the diuers spoiles there made by  the Portugals: it is in fiftie degrees. This Iland (saith Corsali) is the hottest place that euer I saw: not one of vs, but had our secret parts chafed and flayed with heate: and many of our companie dyed. Dalaqua is an Iland where they gather Pearles, 125. leagues long, twelue broad: it is the name also of the Metropolitan Citie. Betweene it and Abex (saith Aloisius in the Relation of Castros voyage) are fiue Ilands, one of which is called Xamoa, the land of which is red, the King a Moore. Suachen is the best harbour in all the Gulfe, which the Turkes haue taken from the Abassine: it stands in nineteene degrees, and a third. Mazzua is an Iland which makes Ercocco a good Hauen. But of the Hauen and Ports on both sides the Gulfe, BarriusBar. Dec. 2. lib 8. relateth more largely. Of the Iles Achafas and Tuicce wee haue but names: likewise of others; whereof PtolemeyPtol. l. 4. c. 8. doth number a great multitude. The  people of these parts are Mahumetans, and many Baduini, hereticall and theeuish Moores. Many Iewes are in Aden, the chiefe Towne of merchandize in these parts: the King whereof (after much kinde gratulation) Salyman Bassa hung vp at the yards arme: and at his returne dealt the like dole to the King of Zibit, subiecting their States vnder treacherous pretences to his Great Master. ScaligerIos. Scalig. Can. Is. Post. de Orig. tells of Samaritans dwelling in an Iland of the Red Sea, which, when any man landed there, would religiously forbid to touch them: but wee haue before mentioned both them and their Letters, supposed the most ancient in the world, howsoeuer Postellus calleth the present Hebrew letters eternall, and faith, that the Law was written in them: but that they were sacred, and not publikely knowne till the time of Ezra, who excommunicated the Samaritans and their Letters, first publishing (not inuenting)  those which now are in vse.
The AscensionR. Couert. ascended into the Red Sea, Anno 1608. to Moha, which is a Citie of great Trade. And Anno 1612. diuersW. Hawkins. English ships were together in the same Sea, where they somewhat auenged themselues for such wrongs as by the Turkes and Mogolls, or Mogors, had beene formerly offered to Sir Henrie Middleton, and other English men, as you haue read beforeLib. c. 14. @. 3. in our first Booke: as likewise of their finding the good Road of Assab on the Abassine shoare, and of the King of Rehita, which came riding to them on a Cow with a Turbant, and a Cuttle shell on his forehead, was drunken with Aqua-vita, but kinde to the English: and also of the strong Currents, and strange shining in the night by Cuttle-fish, not meete to bee repeated.  


@. III. Of Socotora, Madagascar, and other Ilands on the Easterne coast of Africa.
IN the Ocean without the Strait, neere to the African shore, are not many Ilands mentioned by the Ancients. Arrianus in his Periplus speaks of seuen Ilands, called Pyrala^n: and of another great Iland neere to them, called Menuthesias, or Menuthias, now called Madagascar, and Saint Laurence: some take it for the Iland of Iambolus,  whereof DiodorusDio. Sic. lib. 3. cap. 13. hath largely related, and RamusiusRamus. part. 1. by Ortelius Map of Arrianus Periplus Iamboli Insula seemeth Iaua maier. hath discoursed thereon: other seeke for that Iland in Somatra. That Iambolus was a Merchant, which trading in Arabia for spices,
 was taken by theeues, and made a shepheard: after carried away by Ethiopians, who tooke these forrainers according to their Rites, to expiate their Countrey. For they were enioyned by Oracle to make such expiation once in six hundred yeeres, with two men that were forrainers. For the fulfilling whereof they were put in a Boat, fit for two men, with six moneths victuall: and commanded to saile southwards, and they should came to a happy Iland, where the men liued a blessed life. And if they came safe thither, their Countrie should enioy prosperitie six hundred yeers: if they turned back, they should bring vpon them much trouble. The Ethiopians meanewhile kept holy-dayes, and offered sacrifices for their good voyage, which in foure moneths they atchieued: and were exceeding courteously vsed and entertayned  of the Ilanders. These were foure cubits higher then other men, very nimble and strong. The reports of this his voyage sauour more of anSir Thomas Mores Vtopia, fayning a Countrey and Commonwealth, in maner too good to bee true. Vtopia, and Plato'sPlat. de repub. L. Sanut. lib. 12. common-wealth, then of true Historie. Yet is it thought (as Ramusius discourseth) not altogether fabulous, but that he was indeed in some remote Iland, to which he applyed such fancies, as Diodorus reporteth. To leaue there the certaine fictions and vncertaine coniectures of Antiquitie: and come to more certaine Relations; the onely Iland of name without the Streit is, Socotora, in thirteene degrees; of which we haue spoken largely alreadie, speaking of the Ilands of Asia; yet if any will suffer vs to remember it againe amongst these of Africa (for it lies betweene both) we may here mention what others, and somewhat otherwise, haue related. Sanutus calls it Zacotora, and affirmeth that the Sands on the tops of the high Hills therein  haue no exemption from the windes: that the people are Nestorian Christians, which obserue the Crosse with much deuotion, otherwise wanting Christian both Baptisme and Doctrine, and are circumcised: that the Moores say it belonged to the Amazons, in testimonie whereof the women still weare the breeches, and gouerne amongst them. CorsaliA. Corsali, let. 2. was at Soquotera. Anno 1516. Non. Cugna. thinkes it vnknowne to Ptolemey (which others suppose to be his Insula Dioscoridis) hee saith that it was inhabited of Christian shepheards, which liued on milke and butter: their bread was of Dates: like to the people of Prester Iohn, but their haire was longer, clothed with one onely peece of cloth about their priuities: the Land barren, as in all Arabia foelix, and the Sea-coasts gouerned by the Arabians. Hence commeth, and is named the Aloe SocotrinaMaginus.. They are Iacobites, and haue Churches with Altars, and obserue the Crosse with great reuerence:  they enter not their Churches, but stand in the Church-yard or Porch. Their Abuna, or Priest, ruleth them. Other Gouernour they haue none of their owne. The Portugals haue two Townes there, Coro and Benin. TheyPory before Leo, cap. de Insuli^. hold opinion that Saint Thomas here suffered shipwrack: and that of his ship was built an ancient Church, which is yet to be seene, walled about with three partitions, and three doores. They liue for the most part in cabbins of boughs, or in caues: their women are as good Souldiers as the men. They are much addicted to magick, and bring to passe matters incredible, although the Bishop excommunicate such as vse it. They will with contrarie winde hinder men that indamage them, from sayling away. Conceited they are exceedingly of their owne excellence. The English haue often traded in this Iland. Master Downton writes, that Mully Amore Bensaide hath long gouerned  there, as Vice-roy to his father the King of Fartac in Arabia, not farre from Aden.Of these Ilands see my first part of Voyages in Sir Tho. Roe, Master Payton, Master Finch their Relations, and Master Terry in the second Part. His strength consists in his Arabs, the rest being slaues, which haue beene banished people. In August they make their Aloes Socotriua of an herbe like Semper viua in Spaine, but bigger, about a tun in a yeere. Their bread is Dates. This Iland, saith Beniamin Day, is in twelue degrees, barren, all rocks and stones, almost no greene thing in the whole Iland, but Date-trees, and some few shrubs and small trees, and Aloes. Out of the barke of a small tree being cut, issueth a red gum, called Sanguis Draconis. The people the most obedient that euer he saw: all the profits of the Iland is the Kings. Hee seemes kinde to the English, but no great trust (if we trust Captaine Saris) to be reposed in him, as falsifying both word and weight. They bought Goats there, which they found after to bee abused by the buggering-beastly people.  They bought Aloes 2720. pounds, as Master Pring reporteth, at thirtie Rials of eight their hundreth, which makes of ours but 97. pounds. This was An. 1614. This Iland, hee saith, is twentie leagues long: their Kine at ten Rials of eight: their Goats, Sheepe, Hens, all very leane. The Inhabitants of a Mulla to colour, and some Negros, apparelled with a peece of Calico about their wastes, and Turbants on their heads. The King in Turkish habit. He had fiue Camels, and fiue Horses, which were all in the Iland. Tamarin and Delisha are harbours and places of Trade there. Abadalenry is an Iland, fourteene leagues from Zacotora, from whence it is fifteen leagues to Cape Guardafu. At Tamarind they had no raine in two yeers together. Two small Iles lie to the North of Socotera, called the two Sisters: the Inhabitants of an oliue colour, without Law among themselues, or commerce with others. ThereM. Polo, lib. 3. cap. 33, 34. Sanut.  are also those two Iles, the one of men, the other of women, which wee mentioned in our fift booke,Cap. 13. pag. 438. a matter, how true I know not, but very strange. They are Christians, subiect to the Bishop of Socotera, and he to the Zatoia in Baldach.

Many other Ilands there bee of no great name in that Sea, called Sinus Barbaricus: as of Don Garcia; the three and the seuen brethren of Saint Brandon; Saint Francis, Mascarenna; Do Natal, Comor^, and many other: besides those of Quiloa, Mosambique, and some other for their vicinitie to the Land before handled. The IleMaginus. of Saint Laurence (so called by the Portugals, by themselues, Madagascar) is meetest in all those parts, to entertayne the Readers obseruation, as being one of the greatest Ilands of the world. It contayneth in breadth foure hundred and fourescore miles, in length a thousand and two hundred. M. PoloM. Polo, lib. 3. cap. 35. saith, the Inhabitants were Saracens, and were gouerned vnder foure Lords, eate Camels flesh, vs^ merchandize or artes. Thus farre did the Great Can stretch his Tartarian Dominion: and sent hither to spie the Land. That which Polo saith he heard of a bird in this Iland, called  Ruch, so bigge as it could take vp an Elephant, hath no likelihood of truth. He calls it Magascar. It is situate from seuenteene to six and twentie @, of SoutherlyMaffaeus hist. Ind. lib. 3. latitude. Onely vpon the coast they are Mahumetans: within Land Idolaters, black, and like the Cafres: th^ soile yeeldeth Cloues, Ginger, and Siluer. It deserueth to haue better Inhabitants, if LinschotenLinschot lib. 1. cap. 3. and l. 2. Paludanus. iudge rightly, hauing many faire and fresh Riuers, safe Harbours, plentie of fruits and cattell: therein are foure gouernments, each fighting against other. They vse not themselues to trade with others, nor suffer others to traffique with them. The Portugals haue some trade with them, but goe not on land. In the first discouerie of them byOsor. lib. 4. the Portugals, 1506. they shewed themselues in hospitall and trecherous, rewarding receiued kindnesse, in their Canoas or Boats, made of the body of a tree, with shot. TherePh. Pig^fetta. Congo. lib. 2. c. 9. are said to bee  some white people, supposed to be of Chinian off-spring.
Of the people of Madagascar the HollandersDe Bry. part. 3. Ind. Or. report, that they are of colour blacke, strong, and well made: they couer their priuities with cotton: they haue large holes in their eares, in which they weare round sticks. They acknowledge one Creator, and obserue Circumcision, but know nothing of praying or keeping festiuals. They haue no proper names, whereby to distinguish one day from another: neither doe they number weekes, moneths, or yeeres. Nor doe they number aboue ten. They are exceedingly afraid of the deuill (whom they call Taiuuadde^) because he vseth often to afflict them. They liue most-what on fishing. They marrie but one wife: their time of marriage is, for the men at twelue; the women at ten yeeres of age. Adulterie and Theft are punished with death. The men vse to hunt abroad,  the women spin their Cottons at home, whereof they haue trees yeelding plentie. If any man kill any of his Kine, all his neighbours may challenge part. Cornelius Houtman saith, they are sweet-spoken men. They haue a kinde of Beanes or Lobos growing on trees, the cod whereof is two foot long. They haue a kind of seed, whereof a little makes foolish, a greater quantitie kils: herewith they betrayed and killed threescore and eight Hollanders, with their Captaine. The English haue had some knowledge of this Iland to their cost, as those of the Vnion before mentioned. But not trusting them too farre, they here finde good refreshing. Captaine Downton arriued there in the Bay of Saint Augustine, Aug. 10. 1614. and bought of them diuers Beeues at a reasonable rate. The people are tall and swart, their haire smooth and finely plaited: their weapons are darts, neatly headed with Iron. Their  cattell fairer then anyMart. Pring. I haue seene, hauing on their fore-shoulders a lumpe of fat like the pomell of a saddle. Here were Tamarin trees, with greene fruit vpon them, the pulpe whereof boyled, cured our men of the Scorbute. They haue store of cotton, whereof they make striped cloth of diuers colours. Another, then in companieBen. Day, and alius Anon., reports them to bee a strong actiue people, not fearefull of gunnes or other weapons, ciuill, honest, and vnderstanding; their weapons small Lances, Bowes, Arrowes, and Darts: their Kine sold at three, foure, or fiue shillings a peece, as sweet and fat as ours. That bunch on the shoulder is very sweet in taste.Nic. Downton. And (as one reporteth, he had seene) the skin that compassed one of them, contayned six or eight gallons. Here are many Crocodiles. The Vnion comming to Gungomar, in the North-west corner of Madagascar, was assaulted by a Nauie of an hundred Canoes by water,  arranged in order of a halfe moone; the King trecherously assaulting them out of the woods, and tooke Captaine Michelborne with other Merchants.
In Saint Marie, an Iland by Madagascar, they met with the King, which was obserued of his subiects with great reuerence. Here they buried one of their dead men, the Ilanders being present, who signified by signes, that his soule was gone to heauen: and would haue had them to cut off his legs by the knees. The Ile of Cerne, they called Maurice Iland. They found excellent Ebon trees there, the wood whereof is as black as pitch, and as smooth as Iuorie, inclosed with a thick barke. They found of the same kinde some red, some yellow. There were Palme-trees like the Cocos. They found store of birds, whereof they might take some in their nests with their hands.S. Ed. Mich. There were no people inhabiting. In the Ile of Bata our men  killed a Bat as great as a Hare, in shape like a Squirrill, with two flaps of skin, which hee spred forth when he leaped from tree to tree, which they can doe nimbly, often holding only by their tailes.

The Hollanders in the Bay of Anton Gil Southwards from Madagascar in sixteene degrees, saw the King, blacke or hue, wearing two hornes on his head,Holl. Nau. 1595. and many chaines or bracelets of Brasse on his armes. This place is fertile, the people valiant.
In the channell betweene the firme land and Madagascar, are many Ilands,G. Bot. Ben. del Hole. great and small, all inhabited by Mahumetans, the chiefe of which is S. Christopher: more Northwards ^^^inst Mombaza, and Melinde, are three Ilands, Momsid, Zanzibar, and Pemba: inhabited with Mahumetans of white colour. In the time of M.M. Polo l. 3. cap. 36. Polo, Zenzibar was Heathenish. The inhabitants, he saith, very grosse and deformed, and likewise the women. Neere the Cape of Good Hope are the Isles of Don Aluares, and Tristan d' Acunuha: but, of no great note. The  deepenesse of these Seas, make them vncapable of many Islands.



CHAP. XII. Of the Islands of Africa, from the Cape hitherwards.

@. I.  Of Saint Helena, Thomee, Cape de Verd, and diuers others betwixt them, and of the weeds and calmes of those Seas.
ON this side the CapeLinsc. l. ^. c. 4. hist. of China, part. 3. c. vlt. is the Iland of S. Helena, in 16 degrees and one quarter of Southerly latitude. It is very high and hilly: the name was giuen of the Saint, on whose day it was discouered. It hath in it store of goats, hogs, hens, and other creatures, which the Portugals haue there left to multiply; for before there was none of them: there also they haue planted. Figs, Oranges, Limons, and such like, whereof the Vallies are full; that it seemeth an earthly  Paradise, the Fruit growing all the yeere long. They haue great store of Fish, of which with crooked nayles they take great plenty: the Rocks yeeld salt for the furthering of their prouision. It seemes God hath planted it in conuenient place, for the long and dangerous Indian Nauigations. There the Portugals leaue their sicke, which stay till other ships come the next yeere to take them. It was neuer inhabited: onely an Hermite dwelt there, who vnder pretence of mortifying his flesh by penance, butchered the flesh of the Goats and Bucks so fast for their skins, that the King sent for him home, and will suffer none to dwell there. Abraham Kendall put in there about the yeere 1591. and left on shore, one Segar, a sicke man, whomEdm. Barker. Hak. to. 2. par. 2. Edmund Parker eighteene moneths after found in good plight, but their vnexpected comming, as it seemeth, so rauished his weake spirits with ioy, that it distracted him, and being otherwise of bodily constitution very wel, he dyed eight dayes after. The like I haue read  of a Portugall in the same place. In IuneS. Castl^ton. 1613. the Dutch set vpon two Carricks in this roade, but with ill successe, one of their ships with nine and forty men being casually blown vp. North-west from hence are the Iles of Ascension, not inhabited. Of Loanda, nigh to, or rather a piece of Congo, is already spoken. Ouer against the Cape of Lopo Gonsalues, is the Ile of Nobon: and not farre from thenceNauigations all. Is^la di S. Thome Ramus. pag. 1. fol. 116. Saint Thomas: an hundred and fourescore miles from the shore, and so much also in compasse, right vnder the Line. At the first discouerie it was a Wood: Now inhabited by Portugals and Negro's. These liue an hundred and ten yeeres: but few borne in Europe exceed fifty. It is vnwholsome, through exceeding heat, vnto Europaeans especially, which in December, Ianuary, and FebruaryThe windes which at other times refresh them, are then by Nature imprisoned in (...) hom^^., can scarcely walk vp and downe  for faintnesse. In the middest is a wooddy Mountaine, continually ouershadowed with a thicke cloud, which so moisten^ the Trees that grow in great abundance thereon, that from hence droppeth water sufficient for the watering of all their fields of Sugar-Canes. They haue threescore and ten Ingenios or Sugar-houses, each of which hath two or three hundred ^laues belonging thereto.
They grind the Canes, and boyle the iuice to make it into Sugar; but by no meanes can they make it so white heere, as in Madera and other places. The refuse of their Canes they giue to their Hogs, which are heere very many, fat, and delicate as the flesh of a Hen. They are some yeeres exceedingly plagued with Ants, and also with Rats, White men which liue there, are visited two houres in euery eight or ten dayes with an Ague, but strangers haue  more shrewd entertainment, and scarcely in twenty dayes, with great care, can shake off this Shaker. The chiefe Citie, is Pouoason, an Episcopall Sea. The Negro's worke sixe dayes for their Masters, and the seuenth day for themselues in setting and planting their seeds, fruits,
 and prouision. Wheat heer^ sowne, becommeth all blade, without ripening any corne. No fruit which hath a stone in it will heere prosper. The town which hath about seuen hundred Families, and the Castle was taken by the Hollanders, 1599.
The Ile Del PrincipeHoll. Nauig., was so called, because the reuenues thereof were in times past allowed to the Prince of Portugall. It standeth in three degrees of Northerly Latitude. Iulian Gl^rehag^^ tooke the same, An. 1598. The IlesVid. Sanut. vbi supra. of S. Matthew, Santa Cruz, S. Paul, and Conception, yeeld small matter of History. Next to Cape Verde stand seuen Islands, full of Birds, empty of Inhabitants called Barbacene. But those that are called the Iles of Cape Verde are nine, situate betweene the Greene and White Capes: Linschoten reckons ten. They were first discouered by Antoni di Nolli, a Genoway, An. 1440. None of them are inhabited,  but the Isles of Iago, and Del Fogo: both which were taken, An. 1596. by Sir Anth.Sir Ant. Sher. Hak tom. 3. pag. 600. Sherley, who had one nights showre of Ashes from that Island of Fogo or Fuego, or of Fire, so called, because it continually burneth, which fell so thicke on their ship, that you might write your name with your finger vpon the vpper decke. Saint Iago was taken and burnt by Sir FrancisSir Francis D^ake. Drake, An. 1585. Braua and Bueua Vista, haue brauer and goodlier names then Nature. Maio yeeld^ salt in a Lake of two leagues long, th^ Sun congealing and turning the waters into Salt. From thence is passed into the Sea, called SargassoLinschot. l. 1. cap. 9^. Sam. Castleton. They meet with it in sayling to Bermuda^, ^s Master Barkly told me, and to the Indies also both East and West., because it is couered with herbs, like to the herbe Sargass^ in the Portugall Wels, not vnlike to Samper, yellow of colour, with empty Berries like Goose-berries, but lesse: which beginneth at twenty degrees, and continueth till thirty foure, farre off in the Sea: for the ships in their going to India, keeping neere the shore, meet not with any. The Sea seemeth as a greene field, so thicke  that a man cannot see the water, and hindereth the ships passage, except they haue a strong winde. Ralph Wilson hath told vs of a new Iland, discouered by the Salomon in 19. 34. to the South, Anno 1612.
The Coast of Africa is foure-hundred miles distant, neither is any Iland neere: saue that these weeds seeme to make many Ilands. Thus doe men in ships behold the wonders of the Lord in the deepe, no Land being nigh, nor no ground to be found, although it is thought to come from the ground. SomePat. Copland. thinke it growes on the Rocks, and is thence beaten off by the Sea* And indeed, all those Seas are full of wonders, as they passe along the Coast toward the Indies. ThomasTho. Steuens. Hak. tom. 2. p. 2. Steuens complaineth of the continuall Thunders, Lightnings, and vnwholsome Rainos which there they met: the raine-water, if it stand a little, conuerting presently  to Wormes, and filling the meat, hanged vp, with Wormes. An herbe also swamme vpon the face of the waters like a Cocks Combe, so venemous, that it can scarce bee touched without perill: Fishes, called Sharkes, most rauenous deuourers, which had other sixe or seuen smaller fishes, garded with blue and greene, attending like Seruing-men. Fishes also (as big as a Herring) with wings which doe not so much helpe them by flying to escape another greater fish th^t pursueth them by Sea, as endanger them to a Sea-Fowle, which waits that opportunitie. Neither can it fly high or farre, or longer then the wings are wet: nor swimme fast, hauing exchanged finnes for wings. So haue I seene men thri^^ worse that haue two Trades, than such as haue been skilfull and thriftie in one. L^riusLerij na. in Brasil. c. 3. addeth the like wonder of certaine Birds, so tame that they would light vpon the h^tches, and suffer themselues to bee taken.  These are the same Birds which pursue those flying fishes, wiser to hunt them, then to saue themselues: as bigge as Crowes in feathers, in flesh little bigger than a Sparrow, and farre lesse then the fish which they take and deuoure.
These Seas are also subiect to great and tedious calmes, which not onely hinder the Voyages, but end the liues of many. Giouanni d^ E^^pol^ saith, in his returne out of India, they were heere detained foure and fifty dayes, in which they scarce sailed aboue sixe leagues; and in thirty fiue dayes they cast ouer-boord threescore and sixteene of their company, very few suruiuing in their ship: which likewise happened to other ships, their Consorts, so that they had vtterly despaired, had not God s^nt a Portugall ship, that way bound, to relieue them. And would God the like examples many might not be produced amongst our own.  BetweenePat. Copland. 17. and 32 degrees of Northerly Latitude, men are subiect to gripings, and haue need to keepe themselues warme.
To returne to our discouerie from Iago wh^re we left: ^here the Negro'sNau. al^ Is^di S. Thome. were wont to bring slaues to s^ll to the Portugals for Bead^, and other trifles, and Cottons with other base commodities: and them not such alone as they tooke in warr^, but their fathers and mothers, thinking they did them a benefit, to caus^ them thus to be conueyed into better countries: they brought them naked. The Iles of Arguin are sixe or seuen, inhabited by the Azanhagi, where the King of Spaine hath a Fortresse: concerning the trade whereof you may reade the letter of MelchiorMel. Peton. Hak. part. 2. Peton^y.  



@. II. Of the Canaries, Madera, and Port-Santo.
FVrther into the Sea are the CanariesThis name i^ supposed vulgarly to haue arisen from the small p^ick-eared dogges.: which are commonly reckoned seuen: Canari^, Teneriff, Palma, Gomera, Hi^rr^, Lansarrott^, and Fuerte Ventura* Thaue^Theuet c. 5. Sanuto 12. addes three, others, more: Lob^s, Roc^, Gratiosa, S. Clara, Alegranca and Infierno. The Inhabitants were so grosse before they were discouered, that they knew  not the vse of fire. They beleeued in one Creator of the World, who punisheth the euill, and rewarded the good: herein they all consented, in other things disagreed: their weapons were stones and staues. They shaued their heads with sharpe stones like flints. Iron they had not. Gold they respected not. The women nursed not their children, but commonly committed that office to their Goats. They as much delighted in dancing, as the birdsCanary Bir^s., which beare their name, in singing. They were vnknowne from the times of the Romane Empire,G. Bot. Ben. part. 1 Vol 2. Bar. Dec. 1. l. 1. at which time they were called Fortunatae, till either an English or French ship by mis-fortune lighted on them. An, 1405. Io. Bentacor conquered them, and after him, Anno 1444. Henry, the Infanta of Portugal, that Day-starre, which by his industry made way to the present Sun-shine of Discoueries whereby the World in her last dayes hath fullest view  of her selfe. GaluanoA. Galuano. Discoue^ies. Luys Orda, Anno 1334. assailed Gomera, but in vaine. And 13^3. the Spaniards committed great ^poiles in this Iland. Descrip Canar. ap Caluetonem. calleth that Frenchmen Io. Betancourt, and saith, hee was sent by Iohn the second of Castile, An. 1417. who being slaine in the action, his sonne sold them to Peter Barba a Spaniard, and hee to Don Henry. Hee saith, the people were Idolaters, and did eate their flesh raw for want of fire. They tilled their ground with Oxe and Goats-horns, They had many wiues, but deliuered them to their Superiours to haue the first vse of them, before they lay with them. Don Henry conquered the rest which Betancourt had not possessed. Their former gouernment was by an hundred and ninety persons, which ruled also in matters of Religion, prescribing to the people their faith, and worship. They had in highest name of authoritie a King, and a Duke. To slay a beast was esteemed the basest office in the world, and therefore committed to their prisoners: they which did this, liued separate from the people:  Thus was it in the Gran Canaria. In GomeraCadamo^^o. they vsed for hospitality to let their friends lye with their wiues, and receiuing theirs in like courtesie: and therefore, as in India, the Sisters Sonne inherited.
In Tenarife they had two Kings, one dead and another aliue: when a new King was crowned; some man, to honour his entrance, offered himselfe to voluntary death: when the King was buried, the noblest men caried him on their shoulders, and putting him into the graue, said, D^part in peace, O blessed soule. Th^uetA Theuet New-found-World,, c. 5. affirmeth, that the Canaries are so called of the Canes and Reeds that grow there: that they worshipped the Sun, Moone, and Planets. Of these Ilands, Thomas NicholsTho. Nichols an Englishman, hath composed a Treatise extant, in Mr Hakluyts Voyages. Tom. 2. Part. 2. He saith they dwelt in Caues, supposed to descend of such as t^e Romans in Africa had exiled, and out their tongues out for blasphemie against thiir gods.  The Pike or high Hill of Tenarife, is after Theuets measure foure and fifty miles. Tho. Byam;Tho. Byam. Some say it may be seene an hundred and fiftie. Descrip. Ca^. Caluet. Sanuto addes that it casts fire, and is in the ascent 60. miles. a friend of mine told me, that he had seene it eight and forty leagues into the Sea, in cleere weather. One of our Nation hath written a Tractate of his obseruations of these Ilands. Heere before the conquest were seuen Kings, which with their people dwelt in Caues. Their buriall was, to be set vpon their feet naked in a Caue, propped against the wall: and if hee were a man of authoritie, he had a staffe in his hand, and a vessell of milke standing by him. I haue seene (saith Nichols) three hundred of these corpses together, the flesh dryed vp, the body light as parchment. I my selfe saw two of those bodies in London.
Canaria, Tenerife, and Palma, haue one Bishop, who hath twelue thousand Ducats Reuenue:  which place was not long since possessed by MelchiorM. Canus Loc Th^ol. l 12. Canus a great Writer in defence of the falling Babylon. They pay to tht King fiftie thousand Ducats. Hierro, or the Iland of Iron, is by a multitude of AuthoursBenzo Sanuto Ouiedo, etc. affirmed to haue it in no fresh water, but what falleth from the leaues of a certaine Tree, which is alwayes greene, and couered with clouds, and vnderneath the same is a Cisterne to receiue the water, for the vse both of men and beasts throughout that Iland. A whole wood of such Trees wee mentioned in Saint Thomas Iland, which yeeld from their dropping leaues Rilles of water downe all sides of the Hill, where they grow. In this Iland heere is but one: and that very ancient, differing in this (if we beleeue Sanutus) from those of St Thomas, they alwayes, this onely afternoone, being couered with that cloud, which continueth till two houres before day, and then the bodie,  boughs and leaues of the tree sweat out that liquor till two houres after Sun-rising, it is in 27. degrees. Lewis Iackson saith that he saw this tree being in this Iland, Anno* 1618. that it is as bigge as an Oake, the barke like hard beame, six or seuen yards high, with ragged
 boughs, with the leafe like that of the Bay-tree, white on the bottome, greene on the other side. It beareth nor flower nor fruit: situate in the dectiuitie of a Hill, withered in the day, dropping in the night (a cloud hanging thereon) yeelding water sufficient for the whole Iland, which (he saith, if report deceiued him not; Sir Edward Skory heard of many fewer) 8000 soules, and aboue 100000 beasts. It fals into a Pond made of Bricke floored thicke with stone, by pipes of lead conuayed from the tree thither, and thence diuided into di^ers Ponds thorow the Iland; fetched vp hill by barrels. The Pond holds 20000 tunnes, and is filled in a night. Thus he related to me. Hierro, and Gomera; and Lancarato, are in the hands of priuate men.
Madera standeth in two and thirty degrees: it is the greatest of all the Atlantike Iles.A Galuano. See Sanuto of thes^ and many other Iles. It  was discouered by one M^^ham an English man, who arriued there by tempest, Anno. 1344 together with a Woman, whom he there buried, and on her Tombe did write his comming and the cause thereof, with his and her names, and was occasion to the King of Spaine to discouer that and the Canaries. It was called Madera, of the wildernesses o^ Trees there growing. Heere is a Citie called Fouchal. The Ile containeth in compass^ a hundred and forty miles. The woodsA. Cadamos^o. which gaue name to the Iland were fiered, and burnt so furiously, that the people for a time were forced to go som^ space into the Sea from the violent heat, which caused such fatnesse to the soyle, that at first it yeelded threescore fold: since, halfe so much. The excellent Wines were of Vines, first brought from G^ndie. They bring foorth more grapes (saith he) than leaues, and Clusters of two, three, and fourePalmi. spans long. At first, the  Pigeons suffered themselues to be taken, not knowing, and therefore not fearing a man.
Forty miles from the Ile of MaderaSanut. l. 3. is the Ile of Puerto, or Porto Santo, called of all Saints day, in which it was first discouered, Anno 1428. It was taken by Sir AmiasSir Am. Preston, Hak. Preston, 1596. Heere are such store of Conies, bred of one shee-Cony brought hither great with yong, that the Ilanders were out of hope almost to withstand and amend their damages by them sustained. A little Iland, neere to this, breedeth nothing else. And now we can accompany ou^ Portugals no further. But before I left these Ilands, I thought fit to feast you, with some obseruations of an eye-witnesse (elegant spectator) and learned Gentleman Sir Edmund Scory.


@. III.  Extracts taken out of the Obseruations of the Right Worshipfull Sir Edmund Scory, Knight of the Pike of Tenariffe, and other rarities which hee obserued there.
TEneriffe is the pleasantest of the Canary Ilands. This Iland hath beene called Niuaria, by reason of the Snow which like a Collar enuironeth the necke of the Pike of Teyda. The name of Tenariffe was imposed by the inhabitants of the Palme Iland, for Tener in the Palmesian language signifies Snow, and Iffe an Hill. It is situate  in the A^lanticke Ocean fourescore leagues from the Coast of Affricke. It is in forme triangular, extending it selfe into three Capes, and stands within eight and twenty degrees of the equinoctiall. The great mountaine of Teyda, commonly called the Pike of Tenariffe, is a Mountaine which begets I know not whether a greater attention, when you come to it, or when you behold from a farre off: but in both very great. The Base of it beginneth at the Port-towne of Gara-chico,Iourney vp tho Pike, and description thereof. from whence it is two dayes iourney and a halfe to the top of it. The point of which, though it seeme as sharpe as a Sugar-loafe (which figure, of all other it doth most resemble) yet is there a flat of an acre in breadth on the top of it: and in the midst of that flat a gulph, out of which great stones are with like noise fire and smoke many times cast forth.A Vulcan. Seuen leagues off this way, may bee trauelled vpon Asses or Mules; the rest on  foot, and with great difficultie. All the Countries lying about the ascent of the Hill, for ten miles vpwards are ouer-growne, or rather adorned with the goodliest trees in the world of diuers sorts;Goodly Country. by reason of the multitude of Springs which intermingling one with another, and with the addition of the violent winter, Raines descend in huge torrents downe into the Sea.A cold ascent and hote top and bottome. In the midst of this hill is the cold intolerable; in the top the heat, and so likewise in the bottome. Through all the cold Region, you must cast your iourny to trauel on the South side, and in the day time; through all the hot Region (which is within two leagues of the top) on the North side, and in the night time. Euery man carrieth his owne portion of victuals, and Borrachocs of Wine. Your time of approach to the top must bee about Midsommer (for the auoiding of the torrents caused by the snowes, and about two of the clocke  in the morning, and so you may abide there vntill sun-rising, but no longer.

The Sun being exalted aboue the Horizon of the Ocean seemeth far lesse, then when you are on the lower ground, and seemes to whirle it selfe about in manner of a Gyre.Rarity of the Sunne. Hote breath. The streame that commeth out of the East a little before his rising can be compared to nothing more properly then to the breath of an hot Ouen, and so commeth on his course through an vnclouded Heauen being of a pure blue Christalline colour without the least spot in it. When you are on the top of this Hill all the Iland lyeth subiected like a plaine and leuell plot of ground vnder you, although there are in this Iland not so few as twenty thousand sharpe deformed and vneuen Rockes,Clouds beneath them. No wind not raine. and all the edges of that plaine ground seemeth to bee lifted or fringed with Snow. which indeed is nothing el^e but the white Cloudes which are many  furlongs below you. Neere the top of this Mountayne it neuer reigneth, neyther was there euer any wind stirring thereupon. The same is reported of the Hill Olympus.
All the vpper part of this Mountayne is afflicted with barrennesse, wanting the generatiue benefit of the lower and middle Regions of the Aire: for no manner of tree,Bald and barren. shrub or leafe beautifieth the head thereof, but it resteth disgraced with an vnseemely baldnesse: out of which towards the South side doe the veines of Brimstone issue downe into the necke thereof, where the Region of Snow is, among which the Brimstone is interueined in diuers places. In the Summer time the firesFires. doe oft^r breake forth from out the hole in the top of this Hill, into which if you throwe a great stone it soundeth a^ if a great weight had falne vpon infinite store of hollow Brasse. The Spaniards merrily cal it the Deuils Caldron,Deuils Caldron. wherein  the whole prouision of Hell is boyled. But the naturals (the Guanches themselues) do say that it was hell, and that the soules of their wicked Ancestors went thither to be tormented:Conceit of Hell. and that those who were good and valiant men went downe into the pleasant Valley where the great City di LagunaLaguna. now standeth: then which and the Towns adioyning to it, there is not in any place of the World a more delicater temperature of Ayre, nor a goodlier Obiect for the eye to make a Royall Landskip of, as to stand in the Centre of this Plaine, and to behold how nature hath delineated all earthly beauty in the great. On the North side of the Iland are many fresh waters with falling downe from the top of exceeding high Mountaynes refresh the Plaines and City di Laguna; and are afterwards by the greatnesse of their torrent carried into the Ocean. The Iland is parted in the midst with a ridge of Mountaynes like the roofe of a  Church; hauing in the midst of it (like a steeple) the Pyke of Teyda,Rockes. if you diuide the Iland into twelue parts, ten of them are taken vp in impassable Rocky Hils in Woods and in Vineyards; and yet in this small remaynder of arrable ground, there was gathered as I saw vpon their account in the yeere of our Lord 1582. 200. and 5000. Hannacks of Wheat,Fertilitie. besides infinite store of Rie and Barley. One of our English quarters make foure and a halfe of their Hannacks. The soyle is delicately temperate, and would produce all the most excellent things the earth beareth, if the Spaniards woul^ seeke and labour them. The VineyardsVineyards* of account are in Buena Vista, in Dante, in Oratana, in Tigueste, and in the Ramble which place yeeldeth the most excellent Wine of all other. There are two sorts of WinesWines. in this Iland Vidonia and Muluesia. Vidonia is drawne out of a long Grape, and yeeldeth a dull Wine.  The Maluesia out of a great round Grape, and this is the only Wine which passeth all the Seas of the World ouer, and both the Poles without sowring or decaying; whereas all other wines turne to Vineger, or freeze into Ice as they approch the Southerne or Northerne Pole. There are no where to be found fairer or better Mellons, Pomegranates, Pomecitrons, Figs,Fruits. Orenges, Limons, Almonds and Dates, Honey, and consequently Waxe and Silke though not in great quantity yet excellent good, and if they would plant there store of Mulberry trees, the ground would in goodnesse and for quantity equall (if not exceed) eyther Florence or Naples in that commodity. The North side of this Iland aboundeth aswell with wood as with water. There grow the Cedar, Cypresse and Bay tree, the wild Oliue, Masticke and Sauine;Tree^. goodly procerous Palme and Pine-trees which shoot vp into a beautifull streight talnese. In  the passage betwixt Oratana and Garachiro, you ride through a whole Forrest of them, the strong sauour of which perfumeth all the Aire thereabouts, of these there are such abundance all the Iland ouer, that all their Wine Vessels and woodden Vtensils are made of them. There are of these Pine-trees two sorts, the strait Pine, and the other growing after the manner of our spreading Okes in England, which wood the Inhabitants call the Immortall tree,Immortal tree. for that it rotteth neyther aboue nor below the ground, nor in the water. It is neere as red as Brasill* and as hard but nothing so vnctuous as the other kind of Pine. Of these they haue such great ones, that the Spaniards doe faithfully report that the wood of one Pine-tree alone couered the Church of los Remedios in the City of Laguna, which is 80. foote in length, and 48. foote in breadth. And that one other Pine-tree couered the Church of S. Benito in the same City,  which is 100. foot in length, and 35. in breadth. The noblest and strangest tree of all the Iland is the tree called Draco: his body riseth into an exceeding height and greatnesse.Draco tree. The barke is like the scales of a Dragon, and from thence I suppose it had his name. On the very top of the tree doe all his armes cling and interfold together by two and by two like the
 Mandragoras: they they are fashioned euen like the arme of a man round and smooth, and a^ out of their fingers ends groweth the leafe about two foote in length, in fashion like to our greene wild water seggs. This tree hath not wood within its barke, but only a light spongious pith, and they commonly make Bee-hiues of the bodies of them. Towards the full of the Moone it sweateth forth a cleane Vermilion Gummme which they call Sangre de Draco, more excellent and astringeth by farre, then that Sanguis Draconis, which wee haue from Goa, and from other parts of the East Indies by reason the Iewes are the only Druggists of those parts, and to make mony they falsifie and multiply it with other trash foure pound waight for one. The first that were knowne to inhabit this Iland are called Guanches: but how they came thither it is hard to know, because they were and are people meerely barbarous and voyd  of Letters.Ancient Inhabitants. The language of the old Guanches (which remayneth to this day among them in this Iland in their Towne of Candelaria) alludeth much to that of the Moores in Barbary. When Betanchor (the first Christian Discouerer of these parts) came thither, he found them to be no other then meere Gentiles ignorant of God. Notwithstanding, I doe not find that they had any manner of commerce with the Deuill, a thing not vsuall among the Indian Gentiles.Their religion. They held there was a power which they called by diuers names as Achuhurahan, Achuhucanar, Achguayaxerax signifying the greatest, the highest, and the mayntayner of all. If they wanted raine or had too much, or any thing went ill with them, they brought their sheepe and their Goats into a certaine place, and seuered, the young ones from the Dams, and with this bleating on both sides, they thought the wrath of the Supreme Power  was appeased; and that he would prouide them of what they wanted. They had some notion of the immortality and punishment of Soules, for they thought there was a Hell, and that it was in the Pike of Teyda, and they call Hell Echeyde, and the Deuill Guayotta. In ciuill affaires they were somewhat Regular as in acknowledging a King, and confessing vassalage in contracting Matrimony, reiecting of Bastards, succession of Kings, making of Lawes, and subiecting themselues to them. When any childe was borne, they called vnto them a certaine woman,Baptisme. and shee did with certaine words powre water vpon the childes head, and euer after this woman was assumed into the number of that kindred, and with her it was not lawfull euer after for any of that race to marrie or vse copulation. The exercises which the young men vsed were leaping or running, shooting the Dart, casting of the stone, and dauncing,  in which, to this houre, they do both exceedingly glorie and delight. And so full of naturall vertue and honest simplicitie were thes^ Barbarians, that it was an inuiolable law amongst them, that if their Souldiers did in any place publicke or priuate, offer any licentious or iniurious behauiour to a woman, he was assuredly put to death. The people of this countrie were of a goodly stature, well formed and of a good complexion. There were among them GiantsGiants. of an incredible greatnesse: t^e skull of one of them is remaining, in which there are eightie teeth, and his bodie (which was found buried in the Sepulchre of the Kings of Guymur, of which race he was) measured fifteene foot. The people that dwell on the South-side of the Iland, were of the colour of an Oliue, but those that dwelt on the Northside were faire, especially their women, hauing bright and smooth haire. Their common apparellApparell.  was a certaine garment made of Lambes skins like a short coate, without pleate or collor or sleeues fastned together, with straps of the same leather. The ordinarie garment for men and women of the common sort was called Tomarco, onely the women for modesties sake had another couering vnder their Tomarco, which was a side coate downe to the knees made of skins which reached downe to the ground, for they held it an vnseemely thing in a woman to haue her breasts or her feete vncouered. In this garment they liued, and in this they dyed, and in this they were commonly buried. For their dyetDyet. they sowed Barly and Beanes: Wheate was vtterly vnknowne to them. They toasted their Barly by the fire, then did grinde it in certaine hand mils, (such as are now in Spaine. The floure so made they called Giffio, wetting it with water, milk or butter. It serued instead of bread also, and was  their greatest and most Generall sustenance. They eat the flesh of Sheepe, of Goats, and Pork, but not commonly, for they haue certaine assemblies, like our festiuall Wake-dayes in England, at which times the King in person with his owne hands did giue to euery twentie of them three Goates, and a proportion of their Giffio. After which Feast, euery companie came before the King, shewing their agilitie in leaping, running, wrastling, darting, dancing, and other sports. They haue a certaine kind of hony out of a fruit, called Mozan, of the greatnesse and bignesse of a pease. Before they are ripe, they are very greene, when they beginne to ripe they are red, and when they are ripe are blacke, nothing vnlike our blackberries,Mozans their Physicke. saue in their taste which is exceeding pleasant. They eat no more but the iuyce of them which they call Yoya, and the Hony which they make of them they call Chacerquem. They  gather these Mozans very ripe, and do put them into the Sun for a weeke, then they breake them in pieces, and put them into water to bee boyled vntil they come to a sirrope, and this is their Physick for the fluxe, and the grieuings in the backe: and for both these diseases they
 did also let bloud in the armes, head, and forehead with a flintstone. At their time of sowing, the King hauing appointed to euery man his portion of ground that was to bee sowne,Seed how sowne. they digged vp the earth with Goats hornes, and with certaine words threw their seed into the ground. All other works appertained vnto, and were performed by their women. The King did make his habitation in naturall caues or hollow rocks, of which there are infinite store remayning to this day. When there was any Feast made in any Kingdome, their FeastsFeasts. had the priuiledge that men might with immunity passe to and fro through the enemies Countrey: yea, and many times the enemies would feast one with another. In their MarriagesMarriages. the men vsed to aske the consent of the Widdowes or Maids parents (if there were any) which being  granted they were married with little or no ceremony that I could learne. And the marriage was not ^o soone made, but it might be as quickly broken: for if the husband or wife were disposed to be separated they might be so, and both of them marry again with others at their pleasures. Notwithstanding all the children of the separated begotten afterwards were esteemed as bastards, the King only for successions sake exempted from this custome, and to whom for that r^spect it was lawfull to marry with his own sister. For many yeeres this Iland was subiect to one only King whom they called Adexe, who being growne old, his Sons (which were nine in number) conspiring against him, parted the Iland into nine seuerall Kingdomes. All their war was to steale cattle one from another, and especially the spotted Goats, which amongst them are in great and religious estimation;The gouernment. there is very little difference betwixt the  body, colour and smothnesse of our English fallow Deere and their Goat. The ancient Guanches of this Iland had an appointed Officer or Embalmer answerable to the sex (man or woman) who washing the dead corps did put into its body certaine Confections made of Goats Butter melted, the powder of Furzes, and of a kind of ruffe stones, the rindes of Pine-trees and other herbs, and did stuffe the body with this euery day for 15. dayes together, putting the body against the Sun, now on the one side, now on the other,Funerals. vntill it were stiffe and dry. All this space their friends bewayled their death. At the end of 15. dayes they wrapped their body in Goats skins so cunningly sowed together that it was maruellous, and so they carried the body to a deepe caue where none might haue accesse. There are of these bodies remayning yet which haue been buried these 1000. yeeres. The neerest port towne to the City  called Cidade de Laguna, is Santa Cruz,Sancta Cruz. from thence you ascend vp the steepe Mountaynes to the City, which you shall find^ to bee most miraculously seated in the midst of a flat of ten miles in compasse, as if nature had prepared that place for man to build a City vpon, and being walled about with hils of wonderful height on al sides sauing to the Northwest (from whence there being a leuel tract of land euen to the Seaside which is seuen leagues distant) there doth continually arise from the Sea a vapour, which being circulated among so many and intricate Mountaines groweth to be a wind, and taketh his passage through those channels of Mountaynes to the City, to its great refreshing,Refreshing wind. and in this great Plaine (like Enuy) for want of opposition dieth. And let the wind blow full Southeast at Sea, yet shall you alwayes haue the wind full Northwest at the City like a true friend when you must need him from twelue a  clocke in the day vntill night. The extreame dew which falleth doth sufficiently coole the night. Their buildings are all of an open rough stone nothing faire: they are very plaine in their buildings, two or three stories high and no more, and commonly but one story high in the remoter parts of the City. It is not walled, they haue no chimneyes, no not so much as in their kitchins. They make only a flat hearth against a wall, and there they toaste their meate rather then roast it. The decency of their streets in commendable, for when you are in the centre of the City, your eye reacheth almost to the extreamest parts thereof. They haue no want of water. The City hath its name from a great standing Lake at the West end of it, vpon which there are co^monly diuers sorts of fresh water-fowles. The haggard Falcons doe euery euening flye vpon this Lake, and the Negros with slings beate them, which is the  noblest sport of that kind in the world for the stoopings are many, and at one time,Sport with Hawkes. and the Hawkes the strongest and best mettalled of all other; of a greater kind then the Barbary Falcons. The Viceroy being one euening to see this naturall sport, and he demanding of me what I thought thereof, and I iustly commending the strength and mettall of the Hawkes, assured me vpon his honour, that a Falcon bred in that Iland (which hee had formerly sent to the Duke of Lermo) did a^ one flight (except she rested vpon ships by the way) passe from Andaluzia to Tenariff (which is 250. Spanish leagues) and was there taken vp halfe dead with the Dukes Varuels on. And the time from her going out to her being taken vp,Strange flight of a Hawke, etc exceeded not sixteene houres, etc.

But I dare not dwell any longer with this industrious Gentleman in these Canaries, and had need  borrow the wings of one of these Hawkes to make a swift flight to some other African Ilands, where next you shall find vs within the Mediterranean.




@. IIII. Of Malta and the Nauigations about Africa.
WIthin the Straits are no great Ilands belonging to Africa, Pennon, or the Rock against Velles de Gumera, the Ile of Gerbi, and some others. Malta is the most famous, where in old time was the Temple of Iuno, spoyled byCic. in Ver. 6. Verres, supposed to be that Melita,Melita so called of the store o^ Hony. where Paul sufferedActs 28 1. shipwrack: although there be another Melita in the Adriatike Sea, neere to Dalmatia: PolybiusPo^yb^us. calleth it M^lytusa, as VolaterranusVolaterran. writeth. Ptolomie and Cicero name Melita, now called Malt^, in this Ile of Malta. This Malta is distant from Sicilia 60. miles, from Africa, 190. It hath bin sometime subiect to the Carthaginians,  as may appeare by diuers Monuments with Inscriptions of Carthaginian Letters: and the Ilanders (i^ our AuthourDescrit. di Malta. say truely) can vnderstand that Scene in Plautu^ before mentioned. Eloi, Effetcha, Cumi, words vsed in Scripture, are likewise vsed in the Maltese. Their manner of life is Sicilian. But we may not dwell here. SomeOrtel. in Thesaur. ascribe Pauls shipwracke to Melita in the Adriatike, neere to Dalmatia, whom BezaBeza Annot. Aret. in Acta. learnedly confuteth* and prooueth it to bee that Malta, which now the Knights hold against the Turke: whose valour and successe, in resisting that mighty Turkish Aduer^ary,Curio Bellum Melit^nse. Viperanus. Knols p. 7^6. Curio, and Io. Antonius Viperanus in their Bookes of that Argument, Knolles in his Turkish History, Ri. Carr^, and others relate at large. It was An. 1565. That which deceiueth those Men in Malta, is the name of the Adriatike Sea, which now is giuen to the gulfe of Venice, but then, as Beza and Aretiu^ shew out of Strabo l. 3. was  giuen to the Ionian Sea also, and further Southwards, where Mal a standeth: and Ortelius out orOuid. Fast. 4. Scribentem gelidis Adria vidit aquis.So Statius to Metius going from the T^rrhene to Egypt Quo^tibi curren^ praeceps ferat Adriamores? Ouid, and others, proueth the same, as doth also that Epitome of all Learning Io. Scaliger.
That learned Gentleman M. Sandy^ in the fourth Book of his Iournall hath largely related of this Iland. It contayneth after his description sixty miles in circuit; a Countrey altogether champaine, being no other then a Rock couered ouer with earth, but two foot where deepest; hauing few trees but such as beare fruit, whereof all sorts plentifully: so that their wood they haue from Sicilia. Yet there is a great Thistle which together with Cow-dung serues the Countrey people for fewell, the lesse needfull by the immoderate heate, there exceeding far any other seated in the same parallel, yet sometimes tempered by the winds to which it lies open. Riuers here are non^, but sundry Fountaynes. The soyle produceth no graine but  Barley: bread made of it and Oliues is the Villagers ordinary dyet, and with the straw they sustayne their Cattle, Commin-seed, Annis-seed, and Hony, they haue here in abundance, and an indifferent quantity of the best Cotton Wooll. The Inhabitants dye more by Age then Diseases, and heretofore were reputed fortunate for their excellency in Arts and curious weauing. This Iland was giuen by Charles the Fift to the Knights Hospitalers after their losse of Rhodes; whose first seat was the Hospitall of S. Iohn in Ierusalem, built by one Gerard, at such time as the Holy Land became famous by the successeful expeditions of the Christians, whose rites are recorded by many Authors, but by vs to be reserued for another taske. There are sixty Villages in the Iland vnder the command of ten Captaines, and foure Cities. Old Malta (supposed the worke of the Phoenicians) is seated on a Hill in the mids of the Iland, kept with a  Garrison though of small importance. In it is a Grot of great veneration, because they suppose that Paul lay there after his shipwracke. The other three Cities (if they may so bee termed) are about eight miles distant, and not much without a Musket shot each of other, neere the East end and on the North side of the Iland; where there is a double Hauen, diuided by a tongue of a Rock. On the top of this tongue stands the Castle of S. Hermes, after 20000. shot and the losse of 10000. liues taken by the Turks. But so could they not that of S. Angelo, which onely and Burgo escaped their fury in that their siege. After their departure, when the Knights had thought to haue abandoned the Iland, by the helps of the Pope, Florentine, and especially the Spaniard, they were furnished with prouisions for new fortifications; and added a new strong Ci^y, called Valetta, in honour of him that then was their Great Master, Iohn de Valetta.  The Great Masters Palace is a princely structure, the market place spacious, the Church of S. Paul magnificent, as that also of S. Iohn; the houses vniforme of free stone, two stories, flat roofed. S. Iohns Hospitall giues entertaynment to all that fall sick, the attendants many, the beds ouer-spred with faire Canopies, euery fortnight hauing change of linnen, serued by the Iunior Knights in siluer, and euery Friday by the Great Master accompanied with the great Crosses, a seruice whereto they are obliged, as their name of Hospitular Knights also importeth. It is victualled for three yeeres; supplied from Sicilia. The Iland hath not of liuing soules aboue 20000. Their expeditions are vsually but for booties. The people almost as tawny as Moores: the heat makes them sleep at noone These Votaries haue store of Curtizans for the most part Greeks, which sit playing in their doores on Instruments, by their eyes bewitching vnstable  soules, their vow rather prohibiting (if the practice interpret) Mariage then incontinencie. Their markets are on Sundayes. The Knights come hither exceeding yong, the sooner to attaine
 Commendams at home, which goe by Senioritie. There are resident about fiue hundred, and as many abroad to repaire vpon summons. Sixteene of them are Counsellors of State, called Great Crosses. There are seuen Albergs or Seminaries, one of which was of England, till in the generall Deluge vnder Henrie the eight, Saint Iohns without Smithfield, sometime the Mansion of the Grand Prior of England, was hooked into that crooked streame, though still that Title continue, an Irish man now enioying it. Euery Nation feed by themselues in their seuerall Alberges, and sit at table like Friars. But how doe I pre-occupate my Christian Relations, and fall into a Lethargie, hauing opportunitie of such an Hospitall and such Hospitulars?
 Now a word of the ancient Nauigations about Africa. Hanno his voyage, set forth by the Carthaginians, seemed fabulous, but Ramusius sheweth euery place by him mentioned, to agree with the later Discoueries of the Portugals, and thinketh (guided by a Portugall Pilot, skilfull of those Seas, which skanned this Nauigation of Hanno) that hee went as farre as Saint Thome. Long before this, Homer reporteth of Menelaus compassing the Ethiopians from Egypt, which some interprete of sayling by the Cape of Good Hope, as the Portugals. Of this minde Strabo citeth Aristonichus. Of Salomon and Iehoshaphat is said before. Herodotus affirmeth the Phoenicians sayling in the Red Sea in Cambyses time: but this was vsuall and yeerly, as Plinie sheweth lib. 6. cap. 23. The same Plinie alledgeth out of Cornelius Nepos, the sayling of Eudoxus out of the Red Sea, round about Africa to Cales, which Strabo  relateth otherwise and refuteth.
The like may be shewed in some other instances, of which reade Master Hakluyt his Epistle Dedicatorie, Tom. 1. Ramusius part. 1. pag. 111. and Galuanus in his Discoueries of the World. Which I mention, not to disparage or weaken the Portugals praises, but to giue Antiquitie their due; which, I thinke,See Pancirol^ to. 2. c. 1. and ad eum Salmath. Causaub. ad Athen* l. 3. 7. (...), figura est, (...). could not ordinarily (if at all) compasse so long a Nauigation for want of the Compasse: yet we should iniurie our Authors, if wee should not beleeue somewhat: although not so much as they report. And this agreeth with the Greeke prouerbe of Hanno's Discoueries, and Iubas Historie: that hee which findeth sweetnesse in the one, may swallow the other, and as well entertayne Bauius as Mauius: the Periplus of the one, and Libyke Histories of the other not obtayning full credit, nor wholly meet to  be reiected.
And thus much of this African part of the World, the Regions and Religions thereof: the one most subiect to the burning beames of the heauenly Sunne, the other least enlightning by the comfortable warmth of the Sunne of Righteousnesse; blacke in body, but more darkned and deformed spiritually, as hauing onely some parts of Habassia entirely possessed with Christians, besides what in Congo hath of later yeeres beene effected by the Portugals, and that little which is subiect to them and Spaine: all the rest being Pagan, or Mahumetan. And would God this were the case of Africa alone; seeing that if we diuide the knowne Regions of the world into thirtie equall parts (it is Master BrerewoodsBrerewoods Enquiry, C. 14. Computation.) The Christians part (vnderstand it in all Sects and Professions bearing that name) is as fiue, the  Mahumetans as sixe, and the Idolaters as nineteene; besides that huge heathenous Tract of the vnknowne South Continent, which by probable reasons is by him coniectured to bee no lesse then Europe, Africa, and Asia, together. So farre is it from truth, which oneDoctor Hils Reason, 5. of our Country-men hath lustily bragged on behalfe of his Romish Mother, That the Catholike Roman Religion hath had, and hath yet a farre greater sway in the world, then any other Religion euer had or hath: whereas this our Africa hath more MahumetansCairo* Fesie, Marocco. in two or three Cities, then Romish Catholikes perhaps in her whole compasse. And for Asia, how pitifully doth he tumble together some names of a few Townes or little Ilands (it seemeth vnknowne to himselfe) as monuments of Romish Conquests? What their American ConuersionsLib. 9. c. vlt. are, is touched elsewhere. Yea, euen in our Europe, where this mysticall Babylon is situate (the mother  of the whoredomes and abominations of the Earth) the number of ProtestantsSee the Preface to Brerewoods Booke. is not much inferiour vnto them. But his reasons haue beene alreadie proued vnreasonable, by him, whose Pen then, and Prelacie since, wee with all dutie acknowledge a pillar to the Truth, and Ornament to our Church and State. For my part, I am sorrie his assertion is no truer, as one seeing, (...), betweene Catholike and Roman, a great gulfe,Luke 16.36. not easily (without many prouisoes) passable: but betweene Heathen and Heauen, a bottomlesse depth, the way impassable, and life impossible. Let vs pray to him which is the Way, the Truth, the Lif^, to make and be the Way, by reuelation of his Truth, vnto euerlasting Life, to these poore Africans, that as they are almost wholly (in all professions, Christian Iewish, Morish, Ethnike) circumcised in the flesh, so they may receiue that Circumcision of the Spirit, not made  with hands, which may cut away this superfluitie of superstitions (wherein they seeme more deuout then any part of the World) and make them with meeknesse to receiue that Word, which being grafted in them, is able to saue their soules. Amen, Lord Iesus.






 RELATIONS OF THE DISCOVERIES, REGIONS, AND RELIGIONS, OF THE NEW WORLD.  OF NEW FRANCE, VIRGINIA, FLORIDA; NEW SPAINE, WITH OTHER REGIONS OF AMERICA, MEXICANA, AND OF THEIR RELIGIONS. THE EIGHTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of the New World, and why it is named AMERICA: and the West Indies: with certaine generall discourses of the Heauens, Ayre, Water, and Earth, in those parts.

@. I.  Of the names giuen to this part of the World, and diuers opinions of the Ancients concerning the Torrid Zone.
NOw are wee shipped for the New World, and the New Discoueries. But seeing this Inkie Sea, through which I vnder-take a Pilots office to conduct my Reader^, is more peaceable then That, which on the back-side of this American World, was called theMare Pacificum, and del Su^. Ortel. Theat. Peaceable, by Magellane the first Discouerer: it yeeldeth v^ the fitter opportunitie to  contemplation and discours^, in such Philosophicall subiect^, asNomen quasi nouimen Fest. the best Authors haue thought worthy the first place in their Histories of these parts. Yet, before we prie into Natures mysteries, the better to know our intended voyage, let vs enquire somewhat of the Names,Ioseph. Acosta. de procuranda Indoram salut^, and hist Indiae, lib 1. and 2. Boter. Relationi, part. 1. lib 4. Gomara hist. gen. etc, if any notice may thence arise, of the places thereby knowne.
The New World, is the fittest name which can be giuen to this vast and huge Tract; iustly called New, for the late Discouerie by Columbus. An. Dom. 1492. and World, for the huge intention thereof; (asHak. tom. 3. Epist. Dedicat. Maginus. Ger. Mer. de fabrica mundi. Master Hakluyt hath obserued.) A new World it may bee also called, for that World of new and vnknowne Creatures, which the old World neuer heard of,  and here onely are produced: the conceit whereof moued Mercator to thinke (which I dare not thinke with him) that the great Deluge in the dayes of Noah, drowned not these parts, because men had not here inhabited, who with a deluge of sinne, might procure that deluge of waters.

AMERICA is a more common then fitting name, seeing Americus Vespucius the Florentine, from whom this name is deriued, was not the first Finder, nor Author of that Discouerie: Columbus will challenge that, and more iustly, withMunst Cosm. lib. 5. whom, and vnder whom Americus made his first voyage, howsoeuer after that, hee coasted a great part of the Continent which Columbus had not seene, at the charges of the Castilian and PortugallAm. Vesp. Nau. Maff. hist. Ind. l^b 2. Kings. But so it might more rightly be termed Cabotia, or Sebastiana, of Sebastian Cabot a Venetian, which discouered more of the Continent then they both, about the same time; first employed byHakl. tom. 3. pag. 7. King Henri^ the seuenth of England, and after by the Catholike King.
Columbus yet, as the first Discouerer, deserueth the name, both of the Countrey, for the first finding, and of modestie, for not naming it by himselfe, seeking rather effects, then  names of his exploits. But leaue we th^^e Italian Triu^vir^, the Genuois, Venetian, and Florentine, to decide this question among themselues. And why now is it called the West Indies? To thisAc^st. histor. Ind. lib. 1. c. 14. Acosta's exposition of the word Indies, that thereby wee m^ane all those rich Countries, which are farre off, and strange, is too generall an answere, and giueth not the true cause of the name. Gomara saith, that a certaine Pilot, of whom Columbus receiued his first instructions, tooke it to bee India: or else Columbus himselfe, thinking by the West to finde a neerer passage vnto the East, by reason of the Earths roundnesse, sought for Cipango, or Iapan, and Cathay, when he first discouered the Ilands of the New World. And this opinion is probable,Pet. Mart. Dec. 1. lib 1. both because hee named Hispaniola, Ophir, whence Salomon fetched his gold: and Sebastian Cabot in the first voyage, which he made at the charges of King Henrie  the seuenth, intended (as himselfeHakluyt, vbi sup. confesseth) to finde no other Land but Cathay, and from thence to turne towards India: and the opinions of AristotleArist. de coelo and mundo. and Seneca, that India was not farre from Spaine, confirmed themMaginus saith it was called India, because it was discouer^d ^t the same time that India was found by the Portugals, or else for the likenes of manners in the Indians. therein.
Now that we may descend from the Name, to the Nature of this New World: a World it is to see how Nature doth deflect and swarne from those grounds and principles, which the NaturalistsPtol. Strabo, Plutarch, and some other^ mention the Ethiopians beyond the Tropike of Cancer: and Taprobana, Agisimba, etc. It seemeth that their meaning was, it was very scarcely inhabited of few and small Nations. Experience hath found no place more peopled. and Philosophers, her forwardest Schollers, haue set downe for Rules and Axiomes of Natures working. For, if we regard the ancient Poets, Philosophers, and Fathers, we shall see them deceiued, and that not in few opinions, which they seemed to haue learned in Natures Sanctuaries and in most Closets. In the Heauens, they supposed a burning Zone; in the Earth, a Plage, plagued with scortching heates.  

Vtque duae dextra Coelum, totidemque sinistra
Parte secant Zonae, quinta est ardentior illis,
Sic--
--Totidemque plaga tellure premuntur
Quarum quae mediae est non est habitabilis astu
Nix tegit alta duas, totidem inter vtramque locauit:
Temperiemque dedit.

AndVirg. (Cui Aras statuit in suo Hypercritico. Scalig. Georg. lib. 1. a greater then Ouid:

Quinque tenent Coelum Zonae; quarum vna corusco,  
Semper sole rubens etc.

The sense whereof is, that those parts of the World next the Arctike or Antarctike Poles are not habitable, by reason of extreme cold; nor the middle part, by reason of vnreasonable heate: the two other parts temperate, and habitable.
The Philosophers accounted this no Poeme, or rather were more Poeticall themselues: For that which those accounted a Torrid and scortched earth, theseCicer. somn. Scipionis. Macrob. insom. made to bee a spacious and vnpassable Ocean, where the Starres, hot with their continuall motions, and the Sunnes thirstie Steedes, wearied with their daily iourney, might finde moysture to refresh and nourish their fierie constitutions. And therefore they diuided the Earth into  two habitable Ilands, compassed about, and seuered in the midst with a huge Ocean: On this side whereof wee are situated, and beyond, the Antipodes. Some PhilosophersVid. Plutar. de plac. Ph los. indeede held otherwise, but with greater errors, as Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, Anaximander, which multiplyed Worlds according to their fancie. Rawe and vncertaine were the coniectures of theArist. 2. Meta. cap. 5. Plin l 2 c. 68. best. Yea those whom wee reuerence, as better then the best Philosophers, had no lesse errour in this point. The Golden-mouthedChrysost. hom. 14. and 17. in Heb. Theod. Doctor had a Leaden conceit, that the Heauens were not round, whom Theodoret is said to follow. TheophilactTheophilact. in cap. 8. ad Heb. alleageth Basil for this his assertion, Nec mobile esse coelum, nec circulare, That heauen is neither moueable nor round. How firmly, and confidently doth FirmianusLact. l. 3. c. 24. Institutionum. Lactantius both denie and deride the opinion, that there are Antipodes: But easier it was for him with a Rhetoricall  flourish (wherein, I thinke, of all latine Fathers,Christianorum omnium facundis^. est Lactant. Viues de trad. dis. lib. 3. he deserueth highest prize and praise)
 to dash this opinion out of countenance, then to confute the Arguments and Allegations, which he there citeth in the Aduersaries name. But hee that surpassed Lactantius no lesse in knowledge of truth, then he was surpassed by him in smoothnesse of Stile, herein holdeth equpage, and draweth in the same yoke of errour. I meane him, whose venerable name no words are worthy and sufficient to Vsher in, Saint Augustine: who, though somewhereAug to. 1 decem Categoriae. he affirmeth the Antipodes, yet elsewhereAug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 16. c. 11. pressed with an Argument, how men should passe from these parts in which Adam and Noah liued, to the Antipodes, through the vnmeasurable Ocean, he thought it easiest to deny, that, which certain experience at that time could not so easily proue: althoughViues in eundem. euen then some reports (but obscure and vncertaine) had  been spread abroad of sailing about Africa, asLib. 7. c. vlt. a little before is shewed; which must enforce that which Augustine denied.
More hot and forcible were the Arguments of our more zealous then learned Countrey-man, Boniface,Aventinus Annal. Boi. l. 3. Archbishop of Mentz, and of Pope Zacharie, who pursued this opinion of the Antipodes, so eagerly against Virgil Bishop of the Iuuanenses in Boiaria, about the yeere 743. That vpon Boniface his complaint, the Pope writeth to him to cast out this Virgil the Philosopher (so doth that (...) call him) out of the Temple and Church of God, and to depriue him for this peruerse Doctrine (that there were Antipodes) of his Bishopricke: and Virgil must packe to Rome to giue account of this Philosophy to the Pope. Minerua sui. Let the Reader here iudge betweene the Philosophy of the one, and the Foole-asse-O-phy of the other: and let  our Catholike Parasites tell vs, whether their not-erring Father pronounced this sentence of errour as a Pope, or as a priuate Doctor. But what doth this Doter in my way?
SomeAcost and Si^^ Senens. Bibliot. lib. 5. annot. 3. also alleadge Nazianzen, Hierome, and Procopius, for this or the like opinion. But Poets, Philosophers, Fathers, (in other things worthy our loue, for their delightfull Poems; our admiration, for their profound Science; our awfull respect and reuerence, for their holy learning: and learned holinesse) herein we bid you farewell: magis amica veritas; our America, subiect to that supposed burning Zone, with clouds and armies of witnesses in her wel-p^opled Regions, can auerre, that the parts betwixt the Tropikes are both habitable and inhabited: and for the Perioeci,Perioeci are those which dwell in the same paralels, but contrarie Meridians. Anticthones, which dwell in the opposite Zone or plage of the world. The Perioeci haue Summer and Winter, but not day and night alike: The Antaeci haue day and night alike, but not the seasons of the yeere. The Antipodes differ in both. Antoeci, Anticthones, and Antipodes, the worlds roundnesse, and other things of like nature, this America yeelds, and is sufficient proofe: and the yeerely  compassing the world (which the Spaniards and Portugals diuide betwixt them) makes more then euident. And let those two English Ships, the onely two of one Nation which euer haue sailed, and that with admirable successe and fortune, about the Globe of the earth, ^ell Lactantius ghost, whether they dropped into the clouds (as hee feared) there to become new constellations, which Antiquitie would easily haue attributed to them. The Golden Hi^de (which trauersed the world round, and returned a Golden Hind indeed, with her belly full of Gold and Siluer) is yet at Debtford, there resting after her long iourney, offering vp her selfe to Time, her deeds to eternitie. The causes of the Temperature and habitablenesse of those parts. That which beguiled the Ancients, was the neerenesse of the Sunne, his direct beames, and the swift motion of the heauens, which they coniectured, did chase away cold, and moisture out of all those parts. And hardly could reason otherwise ghesse, till experienceThat all the world is habitable, see the Discourse of George Best, in a Preface to the Northwest Discoueries of M. Frobisher, and inserted Hak. Voyag. to. 3. page 48. Raines fall about, and afternoone euery day, whe^ the Sun is ouer th^ir heads. Causes of temperature betwixt the Tropikes. Similitud^^.  shewed the contrary. For neuer is it moister in those parts betweene the Tropikes, then when the Sunne is neerest, causing terrible stormes and showers euery day: as if hauing drunken too much in his long and hote iourney ouer the Ocean, hee did there vomit it vp againe. Once, the people of those parts reckon it Winter, when the Astronomer would call it Summer: because of this tedious weather which euery day happening cannot but coole the Ayre and Earth, with a maruellous temper: and on the other side, they call the time of the Sunnes absence, Summer, because of the perpetuall clearenesse, which continueth those sixe moneths; the Sunne then exhaling no more vapours then his hote stomacke can digest, which with his directer beames being drawne vp, surcharge him with abundance;  and in the middle Region of the Aire, by the then stronger Antip^ristasis are thickened into raines, and (attended with Thunder and Lightnings) proclaime dayly defiance to the earth: threatning harme, but doing good: cooling the same, after the morning Sun hath heated it, the showres then falling, when the Sunne threatens his hottest fury and violence.
These Raines make the like inundations and ouerflowings of Riuers in America, (as before wee haue obserued in Nilus, Niger, and Zaire in Africa (which breaking their bounds, and driuing the Inhabitants, sometimes to dwell on trees growing, sometimes in their carkass^s framed into Boats or Canoes, therein to retire themselues, till the waters are retired, cause a cooling and refreshing to the Earth, which they couer and shield by their inundations from the Sunnes angry arrowes. As in a Limbeck, a strong fire causeth abundance  of vapours to be extracted out of herbes, or other matter, which being pressed, and finding no issue, turn into water: and if the fire be smal, it exhausteth the vapors, as fast as it raiseth them: So the Sun (in his greatest strength) exhaleth these plentifull vapours and distilleth them,
 in showers, which in lesse heat are of lesse quantitie, and more easily consumed. Without the Tropikes it is contrary: for the Summer is dry, the Winter moist; the cause being the Suns weaknesse, not able to concoct and disperse the vapours, by the moist earth then easily yeelded: which in his greater force in the Summer season wee see effected: the like wee see in greene wood and dry on the fire.
It is no lesse worthy note, that no part of the World hath so many, so great Lakes, and Riuers: the vapours and exhalations whereof, cannot but coole and moisten the neighbouring Elements of the Ayre and the Earth. Againe, the equall length of the Dayes and Nights perpetually sharing the time in equall portions, causethQuodque die Solis violento inanduit aestu: Humida Nox reficit, paribusque refrigerathoris. Honterus. that the heat is not so vnequall as the Ancients dreamed. The great Dewes also in the night, which are greater them  wee would thinke, and comparable for wetting to pretty showers, encrease the freshnesse and coolenesse.
Wee may adde hereunto the neighbour-hood of so huge an Ocean, the proprietie of the Windes, which in most places betweene the Tropikes are set, and certaine, no lesse then the Sunne and Tides, and bring with them much refreshing. Further, the situation of the Land doth further the cold not a little, in those hot R^gions; Contrariwise, neere the Poles, the continuance of the Sunne, and long dayes make it hotter then in parts neerer the Sunne; as in RussiaD. Fletcher, Description of Russia., then in England. Yea the high ridges and tops of some Mountaines in the burning Zone, are vnsufferable for cold, alwayes hauing on them, snow, hayle, and frozen waters, the grasse withered, and the men and beasts which do passe along that way (for heere is no conuenient  dwelling) benummed with the extremity of cold.
-- Paries cum proximus alget.
When the Mountaines are subiect to this degree of cold, it cannot but temper the Neighbour Regions, with some coolenesse at least. Now to all these Reasons of the Temperature, vnder the Line, and betweene the Tropikes some adde the influence of some vnknowne Constellations. Onely let this be remembred, that the former hold not equally in all parts of the Torride Zone, seeing that Nature hath diuersified her selfe in diuers places, and by naturall exceptions hath bounded and limited those generall Rules.
In some places, vnder the Line, it raineth not at all: in other some, those cooling Windes  are wanting: neither hath euery Region, Lakes, Riuers, or Mountaines to refresh them. But of these particulars, we shall take better view in their peculiar places. In the same space the Windes are most-what Easterly, and without the Tropikes Westerly: so that the Mariners vse not to goe and returne the same way, but obseruing the generall Windes, seeke to make vse thereof accordingly. The reason of this Easterly Winde vnder the Zodiake,Acosta l. 3. c. 6. is ascribed to the motion of the Heauens: the first Moueable drawing (saith Acosta) with his owne motion the inferiour Orbes, yea, euen those Elementarie of the Fire, Ayre, and (where it findes no other obstacle, of the Water also, asPet. Martyr Dec. 3. lib. 6. Sir Humf Gilbert Discou. Master George Best. some suppose. But for the Ayre (whereof wee now speciall speake) the motion of the Comets, circularly carried in the Ayre, (where also their motion is diuers, as is obserued in the Planets) doth sufficiently prooue. Without  the Tropikes from seuen and twentie to seuen and thirtie Degrees, the Windes are said to be for the most part Westerly, mooued, as some thinke, by the repercussion of the Ayre, heere preuailing against that force of the Heauens, which mastereth it within the Tropikes: euen as wee see Waters, being encountered with more force, returne with an Eddie in a manner backe. This of the Easterly Winds is to be vnderstood of the Sea: for at Land, though winds bee (as before is said) certaine and set, yet that which is the generall Winde of one Country, is not generall to all: yea, in the same Countrey they haue a set Winde in some places for the day, and another quite contrary bloweth in the night.Linschot. lib. 1. Also, neere vnto the Coasts they are more subiect to calmes in this burning Zone, than further off in the Sea, the grosser vapours which arise out of the Earth, and the diuers situation thereof being the cause of these  differences.
Such is the force of this naturall situation, that in some places it is strange what effects it produceth. There is in Peru an high mountaine called Pariacaca, whereupon IosephIos. Acostae Natur. and Moral History of the Indies, lib. 3. cap. 6. Acosta saith, he ascended as well prouided as he could, being fore-warned and fore-armed by men expert. But in the ascent he and all the rest were surprised with so sudden pangs of straining and casting, and some also of scowring, that the Sea-sicknes is not comparable hereunto. He cast vp Meat, Flegme, Choler, and Blood, and thought hee should haue cast out his heart too. Some thinking to dye therewith, demanded Confession: and some are said to haue lost their liues with this accident. The best is, it lasteth but for a time, neither leaueth any great harme behinde. And thus it fareth in all the ridge of that Mountaine, which runnes aboue a thousand  and fiue hundred miles, although not in all places alike. In foure different passages
 thereof, hee found the like difference and distemper, but not so grieuous as at Pariacaca. Hee ascribeth it to the subtiltie of the Aire in those high Hils, which he thinketh are the highest in the world: the Alpes and Pirenees, being, in respect hereof, as ordinarie houses, compared to high Towers. It is Desart, the grasse often burnt and blacke, for the space of fiue hundred Leagues in length, and fiue and twenty or thirty in breadth. There are other Desarts in Peru, called Punas, where the Aire cutteth off mans life without feeling: a small breath, not violent, and yet depriuing men sometimes of their liues, or else of their feet and hands, which fall off as a rotten Apple from a Tree, without any paine. This seemeth to be done by the force of cold, which in the Northerne, and Northeasterne parts of Europe worketh  like effects: someThis Master George Barkley, a Merchant, which liued long in Liuonia told me of his owne sight. being found dead suddenly in those sleds in which they came to market, sitting therein as if they were aliue, and some losing their ioynts by the like cause. But this maketh vp the strangenesse of these mortall accidents, that this piercing cold Ayre both killeth and preserueth the same bodie, depriuing it of life, and yet freeing it from putrifaction. A certaine Dominike passing that way, fortified himselfe against the cold winds, by heaping vp the dead bodies which here hee found, and reposing himselfe vnder this shelter; by these dead helpes saued his life. The cause is, Putrefaction cannot be procreated, where her Parents, Heate and moisture, are confined, and haue little or no force. The Seas which compasse this Westerne India, besides the Magellane Streits, and the Northerne vnknowne, (for the knowledge whereof our Countrey-men,See infra. c. 3. Frobisher, Dauis, Hudson, and others, haue  aduentured their liues and fortunes, and at last haue giuen vs more hope then euer of the discouerie) are the great and spacious Ocean, which on this side is called the North Sea, and on the other side of America, is named the South Sea. The qualities thereof will better appeare, when we come to speake of the Ilands therein.


@. III. Of the nature of metals in generall, of Gold, Siluer, Quick-siluer, and the plenty and Mines thereof in America.
 COncerning the Land of the New World, Acosta diuideth it into three parts, High, Low, and Meane: which hold almost the same proportion that Master LambertLambert. Peramb. of Kent. Wealth without health* Health without wealth. Health and wealth. obserueth of Kent, the first hauing some wealth, by reason of the Hauens, and Ports therein, and of the Vines that grow there, but are very vnholesome: the Hils are healthfull, but not fertile, except in the Siluer bowels, and Golden entralls thereof: the third is the most commodious habitation, where the soile yeeldeth Corne, Cattle, and Pasture, and the Ayre, health. The principall thing that hath brought this Westerne India into such request, is, the Mines and Metals therein. The Wisedome of GodAcosta l. 4. c. 2. Arist* Eth. l. 5. hath made Metals for Physicke, for defence, for ornament, and specially for instruments in the worke which God hath imposed vpon man, That in the sweat of his browes he should eate his bread.  The industry of man hath added another vse of Metals, by weight or stampe, conuerting it to money, which the PhilosopherPhil. de Gen. Mundi lib. 5. Euseb. de Praep. Euang. l. 8. c 9. calleth the measure of all things. And a fit measure might it haue beene, if the minde of man were not vnmeasurable, and vnsatiable in measuring his measure. Metals naturally grow (as someApoc. 3.18. Psal. 12.6. obserue) in land naturally most barren: Nature recompensing the want of other things with these hidden treasures: and the God of Nature enriching the Indians with this substance, otherwise barren of Humane and Diuine knowledge, that might as a rich Bride (but withered and deformed) make her finde many suters for loue of her Portion. And would God, they which reape heere these Temporall things, would sowe Spirituall, and giue themBart. de las Casas Hispan. Crudesit. Vrban. Calueto. Hier. Benzo. lib. 3. cap. 21. Gold tried in the fire, and that which is as Siluer  tried seuen times, I meane the Word of God sincerely preached, without the drosse of their owne superstitions. And would they gaue them not Iron for Gold, an Iron Age for a Golden, imposing a heauy yoke of seruitude,Aurea sunt vere nunc secula, etc. Ouid. Fi^st was an Age of Gold: then golden goodne^^e abounded: Last is an Age for gold: and now gold only triumpheth. Abr. France, Amin^^^. which hath consumed worlds of people in this New-World, and made the Name of Christ and Christian to stinke amongst them: yea they abhorre the Sea it selfe for bringing forth such monsters, as they thinke the Spaniards: whom for their execrable wickednesse, they esteemed, not to come of humane generation, but of the froth of the Sea, and therefore call them Viracochie, or Sea-froth. That which one saith of Religion, I may apply to this American World, Peperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit matrem. Shee brought forth rich metals, and the Daughter hath consumed the Mother: her Gold that should haue beene a price in her hand to buy Wisedome, hath to these importunate Chapmen  sold her freedome. It is i a Golden and Siluer Age indeed to the Spaniards, for the condition and state which hereby accrueth to them, not for the conditions and state of life which they obserue.

In the yeare 1587. when Acosta came to Peru, eleuen millions were transported in the two Fleets of Peru and Mexico, almost one halfe thereof for the King. In the time when Pollo was Gouernour of Charcas in Peru, from the Mines of Potozi alone were drawne and customed euery day thirty thousand Pezos of Siluer, euery Pezo amounting to 13. Rials, and a fourth part: and yet it is thought the one halfe was not customed: or as OuiedoOuiedo, lib. 6. ca^. 8. reckoneth, one fourth part more then a Spanish Ducket. Hee writeth, that Anno 1535. three or foure ships came to Siuil, laden with none other commodities but Gold and Siluer. Miles Philips recordeth, that when he returned out of the Indies, 1581. there were seuen and thirty ^ayle, and in euery of them, one with another, thirtie pipes of siluer, besides great store of Gold, Cochinile, Sugars, Hides, etc. And at this day, saithAcosta. l. 4 c. 7. Ga c de la V^ga speakes o^ 25. millions o^ Pezos, only out of Peru in one Fleet: and that Paulo de Laguna President of the Councell of the Indies affirm^d that all the Kings of Spaine from Pelagius hitherto, had not so much money a^ Philip the second alone. And de solo vn cerro de los del Peru bantraydo a Espanna hasta and Anno 1602. 200. millions of Pezos regist^ed, and aboue a hundred not registred, lib. 1. cap. 7. part. 2. Acosta, the Mines of Potozi yeeld  the King a million of Siluer, for his fift yeerely, besides the wealth that groweth by Quicke-siluer, and other Prerogatiues. In the yeere 1574. were entred threescore and sixteene millions. That which is wrought in the Countrey is not entred, besides priuy conueyances. How much differeth Potozi from the Mine Bebello in Spain, one thousand and fiue hundred paces deepe, admired, and that iustly, byPlin l. 23. c. 6. Antiquitie, for yeelding three hundred pounds weight of Siluer a day to Hannibal, but with much more charges, by reason of the intolerable paines in drawing out the waters, which therein flowed, and in Potozi are wanting: But what will not this vnlouely loue of money doe? Hereby Man encountreth the vast Ocean, passeth the farthest and most contrarie climates, drowneth Bootes and all his Teame, buryeth himselfe in the bowels of the Earth, raiseth new Heauens, and seeketh his heauen where he cannot see heauen or light, neere the bottomlesse bottomes of Hell: remoueth Fountaines  and Mountaines, reduceth a new Chaos, in the confusion of Elements; the Earths intrals being towred in the Ayre, and sacrificed to his hotter brother in Fiery purgations; the Aire filing the darke hollowes and hels which it cannot see; the Waters forced out of those possessions wherein they challenged succession and inheritance after the decease and remouing of the Earth: all filled with Darknesse, to bring to light those metals, which possessing the possesso^s, depriue them of the highest Light, and brand them for the lowest Darknesse. Precious perils,Pretiosa pericula fodit. Boet. de Consol. Speciosa supplicia. Cipr. where so many bodies are pined, so many soules endangered, so much Good lost for goods; and Man, for price, setteth himselfe at the worst and basest price of all that hee hath. How happy and golden was the outward state of these Indians, before they accounted gold any part of their happinesse, and found it the cause of their ruine?
Of meals, Gold is esteemed most precious, as most enduring both Age and Fire, and least  subiect to rust: according to those Verses,
-- vni quoniam nil deperit AuroIgne, velut solum consumit nulla vetustas,Ac neque rubigo aut arugo conficit vlla.
Their GoldAcosta. Ouiedo, Herrera, etc. is found either in Graines, which they call Pippins, because they are like the Pippins, or Seeds of Melons; which is pure, and hath no need of melting: or in powder, which is found in Riuers, mixed with the soyle and sands, for which Tagus, Pactolus,  and Ganges haue been famous; or else in stone, being a veine that groweth and ingendereth, intermixing it selfe with the stones. Those Pippins, or pieces of pure Gold, found among the Rocks or Hils, are sometimes very great. Peter MartyrPet. Mart. Dec. 1. lib. 10. tels of one that weighed three thousand three hundred and ten Pezos, and was with much people and treasure drowned, in the ship called Boadilla, being therewith surcharged, in the returne homewards: A fit Embleme for Christians, which when they willAbac. 2.6. lade themselues with this thicke clay,1. Tim. 6.3. drowne the soule in perdition and destruction.Hist. Gen. Ind. l. 6. c. 8. Ouiedo (who a long time held the Office of Proueditor for the Mines) saith, that hee saw two Graines of Gold, one of which weighed seuen pounds, and was in value 700. Castilians or Pezos, the other fiue pounds, and was worth fiue hundred; and many other of one, two or three hundred. Yet are not these Graines so  welcome to the Miners, as that in powder, because this continueth (and therfore in fine containeth) more then the former. He obserueth, that Gold hath a farre brighter lustre in the naturall virginitie, then when it hath passed the fire and mans industry: and that coles are often found very fresh, where they find Gold, which place he thinkes was sometimes the face of the Earth, and by Time (which conserueth coles as well as gold vnder the earth without corruption) couered through showres, bringing the earth from the higher places, whereby hee supposeth it came to passe, that in a virgin-Mine fifteene foot vnder the earth, he once found two rings of the Indian fashion: he addeth, that the gold in stone will runne as small as a pin or threed, and meeting with a hollow place, filleth it, and so guideth the Miner by thick and thin, but alway pliant and flexible like liquid waxe, till the first sight of our aire breathes  (as from the couetous hard hearts of men) this naturall hardnesse, which it presenteth to vs.
 The wild Indians had the Art of gilding their works with such dexterity, that they seemed pure gold: which mystery they performed with certayne herbs, but would neuer teach it any Europaean. The IndiansOuid. l. 5. c. 3. in Hispaniola obserued a kinde of Religion in gathering their Gold (as the Arabians in their Frankincense) fasted, and for twenty dayes space came not at their wiues, otherwise thinking they should find none. Columbus imitating the like superstition, would suffer none to seeke this golden Idoll, without those gilded Ceremonies of Confession, and their Sacrament before receiued. The greatest quantity is drawne at the Indies in the powder-gold. The gold in stone is drawne out of the Mynes or Pits, with great difficulty. They refine powdred Gold in Basons,See hereof Ouiedo vbi sup. washing it in many waters, vntill the sand  fall from it, and the Gold, as more heauy, remayneth in the bottome. They haue other meanes of refining it with Quick-siluer and strong Waters. In the fleet 1585. the declaration of the firme land was twelue Cassons or Chests, which was so many hundreth weights of Gold: besides one thousand fifty and sixe Mares from New Spaine, which was for the King only, not mentioning that which came for Merchants and priuate men.
For the Siluer: the second place is giuen to it among metals, because next to Gold it is the most durable, and least endammaged by the fire, and in the sound and colour passeth the Gold. The Mynes thereof are commonly in Mountaynes and Rocks, seldome in plaines, and Champaines. Sometimes they find find itPliny sayth (but not truly) that siluer is neuer found pure. straggling, in pieces, not holding any continuing Veine: sometimes it is fixed, and spreadeth it selfe in depth and length l^ke to great branches,  and armes of trees. Strange it i^ that in some places the fire, kindled with blowing of bellowes, will not serue to refine the Siluer, but they vse Furnaces called Guayras, set in such places, where the wind continually bloweth. Thus in Peru, the Mynes of Porco stoupe to artificiall fires, which those Potozi scorne and contemne. Potozi is a dry, cold, barren,I haue seene some in al proportion resembling Plants. with leaues spread, and diuided and a sta^k descending, as if it promised a flowre, much like the Ribwort.The like reporteth Munst. Cosmog. l. 1. c. 9. and vnpleasant soyle, if the rich Mynes did not more then supply all those defects, and make it a plentifull both habitation and Mart; not fearing the Heauens disasters, the cold Ayre, the frowning Earth, the fell Showres, so long as the Siluer hooke can be sufficient attractiue for forreine store. Hence it is, that they feele no want of store, and yet haue no store but of want, the Mynes excepted, which (I know not how) are both store and want according as mens minds in a second refining can digest and dispose them. They which worke in the Mynes,  see no Sunne nor light, by absence whereof they find both extreame cold, and dreadfull darknesse, and an Ayre so vnholesome, as makes them no lesse sicke, then men tossed at Sea. TheySee of these labours, Plin. l. 33. c. 6. and more in Acosta. l. 4. breake the Metall with Hammers, and split it by force, and then carry it vp on their shoulders, by Ladders made of Neats Leather twisted like pieces of wood, which are crossed with staues of wood: at the end of one Ladder begins another with seats of wood betweene, to rest them. They mount three and three. Hee that goes before, carries a Candle tyed to his Thumbe: they haue their metall tyed in a cloth like a Scrip, each man bearing about fiftie fifty pound weight, and that commonly aboue an hundred and fiftyA Stade is the height of a man. Stades in height, The most vsuall manner of refining in these times is by Quick-siluer, and therefore there are not now aboue two thousand Guayras in Potozi, which haue beene in times past six thousand:  a pleasant sight to such, whose darkned conceits make their Heauen vppon Earth, to see such a resemblance of the Starry Heauen, in the night, dispersing such a manifold light. The Siluer swimmes on the top, the other Metals vnder, and the drosse in the bottome.
The Quick-siluerAcosta l. 4. c. 10. is admired for his naturall properties, that being a metall, it is liquid (not by Art as other metals, or by expence; in which respect the other may no lesse be called Quick-siluer, but) by it owne nature, and being a liquor, is more heauie then those which haue a naturall subsistence; this subsisting and sinking to the bottome, when the other swim aboue it. God onely challengeth preheminence, if PlinyPlin. vbi sup. be beleeued. Nothing in this admirable liquor is more to bee admired, then the naturall loue, and sympathy which it hath to Gold: as appeareth in such, as for the French Disease vse Oyntments of this composition,Lemnius de occult is naturae miraculis lib. 3. cap. vlt.  if they weare a Gold-ring in their mouth, it attracteth this quicke and willing metall to it, from the veines and inward parts, into which it hath secretly and dangerously conueyed it selfe: the Ring plucked out of the mouth is of a Siluer complexion, which mutuall copulation nothing but fire can diuorce, or restore the same to the former colour. In their gildings of curious workes, it hath bin obserued, that the workmen which vse Quick-siluer to that purpose, to preuent the secret and venemous exhalations thereof, haue swallowed a double Ducat of Gold rolled vp, which drawes that fume of this liquor which enters in at the eares, Eyes, nose. and mouth, vnto it in the stomacke.Acosta saith, that if it meete with no solid body, where it may congeale, it ascends till the Ayre by cooling the fume causeth i^ to fall in Quick-siluer* And for this fume, Lemnius telleth, that the Gold-smiths hanging a cloth ouer the place where they gild, which receiueth the fume of the Quick-siluer, find that smoke in the cloth, recouering againe his former nature in drops  of that liquid metall. Venenum rerum omnium est, sayth Pliny, it is a venome to all things, and yet a greater venome is in the mouth of man. I meane not thatRom. 3.13. Psal. 140 3. poyson of Aspes vnder the lips of many, as the Prophet speaketh in a spirituall sense, but euen in naturall operation, the
 Spettle of man enuenometh, with a stronger poyson, this poyson of Quick-siluer; and eyther killeth it,Some thinke that Quick-siluer cannot quite be ki led. or at least depriueth it of the motion and quicknesse, and maketh it pliant to Medicines and Oyntments. Yea, someDe sal^u^ hominis mirabili eff^ctu vide Lemmium de occult. Nat. l. 2. c. 44. report that this Spettle of man, arising of secret vapors out of the body, as infectious exhalations out of vnwholsome Lakes, especially when a man is fasting, killeth Scorpions, and other venemous beasts, or at least doth much hurt them. Quick-siluer disdayneth other metals, only it is thus rauished with Gold, and not a little affected to Siluer, for the refining of which, it is principally in vse: it corrupteth, forceth, consumeth, and flyeth the rest, as much as may bee, and therefore they vse to keepe it in earthen Vessels, Bladders, Skins, Quils, and such vnctuous receptacles. It hath pierced and eaten thorow the bodies of men, and hath beene found in their graues. Quick-siluer is found in a  kind of stone, which doth likewise yeeld Vermillion. At Amador de Cabrera, is such a stone or Rocke, fourescore yards long, forty broad, interlaced with Quick-siluer, with many pits in it, threescore Stades deepe, and is able to receiue three hundred workmen: it is valued worth a Million of Gold. From the Mynes of Guancauilca, they draw yeerly eight thousand Quintals of Quick-siluer. As for the manner of refining Siluer by Quick-siluer, their Engines and Mils, with the tryall of their metall, I referre the Reader toAcost. l. 4. c. 12. 13. Acosta.
Atabaliba maruelled why the Europaeans hauing such Chrystaline and pure Glasses, would expose themselues to those dangers by Sea and Land, for those metals which he thought not comparable to the same. Well indeed might he^ haue wondred, if that Arte had remayned, whichVid. Ian. Dous. praecid. ad Arbit. l. 3. c. 9. Plin, l. 36 c 2^. Isid ^ ^6 c 15. Policrat. l. 4 c. 5. Pancirol. de perdit. (I know not how truly) Pliny, Petronius, Isidorus, and others report, to haue beene in  Tiberius his time; to whom one presented a faire Glasse, which being cast on the ground, was bowed, but not broken: and being taken vp by the same Artificer, was with his hammer brought to the former forme and beauty. His reward, besides the wonder and astonishment of the beholders, was that which precious things often procure their owners. For the Emperour asking whether any other knew this Mystery, this being denied, he caused his head (the only work house of this secret) to be smo^e off, lest Gold and Siluer should giue placeDio. hist. l. 57. in rela^ing this storie, giues ano^her reason of his death. to Arte. The Emeralds grow in stones like Chrystall, and there are many of them in the Indies. But of these and other Gemmes it would be too tedious to write.
Pedro Ordonnes a Spanish Priest hath written of the profits which the Spaniards reape of Peru and the Indies. He sayth, that the Kings Reuenue thence accrueth to twelue Millions,  which ariseth out of ten Springs, his fifths of the Gold and Siluer Mynes, great Meltings, Customes of Ports, Indian Tributes, Sale of Offices, the Cruzada, Tribute of Rents, Quick-siluer, Fines of Courts, and the ninth part of Ecclesiasticall Rents. Of these Rents and other things worthy knowledge: See himselfe in the s^uenth Booke of the last part of our Pilgrimes. Let vs now come to the Men, Beasts, Fowles and Plants of this New World, whereof wee will here promise a generall taste, and hereafter giue in the due places some other particular Relations.



CHAP. II. Of the first Knowledge, Habitation, and Discoueries of the New World, and the rare Creatures therein found, Beasts, Birds, Trees, Hearbes, and Seeds.

@. I.  Whether the Ancients had any knowledge of America, and whence the Inhabitants, first came.
See of the late peopling America, my Pilgri. l. 1. c 1. and 2.AFter these generall Discourses of the Americans, some other of like nature I hold not vnmeete to be handled, before wee come to the particular Regions: and first of the Men, whether the Ancients had any knowledge of them: how Men first came into these parts, and of the first Discoueries in the former Age. Concerning the first knowledge of these parts, it may iustly bee a question whether the Ancients euer heard thereof. For to say nothing of that opinion,  that the Torrid Zone was not habitable in the opinion of the most, as wee haue shewed in the form^r Chapter: the allegationsHumf. Gilbert Discou. Orte^. Theat. in Charta N Orbis Hak in Epist. Ded ^^. 1. and Io. 3 are not such as can force vs to beleeue that, whereto
 by great Authors they are alledged. Seneca's Prophesie is little to the purpose:Sen. Medea Act. 2. Panci^ol. and Sal de Inuent. New-worlds (sayth he) shall be in the last Ages discouered, andThule, is by Mercator and others interpreted Iland: by Ortelius Tile. marke in Norway. Thule shall not be any longer the furthest of Nations. But all that Chorus seemes to a diligent Reader to intend nothing else, then to describe the vsuall affects, and effects of Shipping and Nauigation, agreeing to that Argo-Argument of the Tragedie, wherein Iason in that famous Argo sayling to Colcos, had obtayned Medea's loue, which he vnkindly requited. And had the Poet intended these Westerne Discoueries, he would neuer haue said,
Nec sit terris Vltima Thule: butNec sit tellus Vltima Gades.
 as BoterusBotero par^. 1. lib. 4. obserueth. For the American Discoueries haue not beene by the way of Island, and Northward, but Southward: and this appeareth by the Verses before,
Nunc iam cessit Pontus and omnes,Patitur leges--Quaelibet altum cymb apererrat.Nil qua fuerat, sede, reliquitPeruius orbis, Indus gelidumPotat Araxem, Albin PersaeRhenumque bibunt; venient annis Secula seris, quibus OceanusVincularerum laxet.
As for Plato'sPlato's Discourse hereof in his Timaeus, is englished by R. Eden in the Preamble of the Decads. Vid. Ram. praef. ad vol. 3. Atlantis, and TertulliansTertul. de Pal. and in Apologe^. A^^st. l. 1. c. 22. Plut. de facie in orbe Lunae. Aeon borrowed of him, Acosta alledgeth diuers Platonikes, Proclus, Porphyrie and Origen, which interpret Plato after a mysticall sense: and prooueth by the words of Plato himselfe, that they can be no true History. The like allegations hath Marsilius Ficinus in his Commentaries vpon Timaus and Cricias, howsoeuer hee alledgeth Crantor, and some others which esteeme it a bare History: to which yet his thousands of yeeres before the Floud, deny truth and credit, although we interpret them of the yeeres of the Moone. Ficinus sheweth both their Allegoricall and his Anagogicall  interpretation. But the Discourse of Plato cannot agree, if it were a History, to America, both because it placeth Atlantis at the mouth or entry of the Straits by Hercules Pillars, whence this is by a huge Sea separated: and that is not said still to continue land, but by an Earth-quake to haue sunke and become Sea. That which is cited out of Aristotle his Admirandae auditiones, if any reade the place, may appeare to be some neerer Iland, and neyther Iland nor Continent of America. Neyther can I credit that whichOuied. Gen. hist. l. 2. c. 3. Ouiedo supposeth of the Hesperides Ilands, cited out of Pliny, Mela, Solinus, dawbed ouer with Morter, borrowed of fabulous B^r^sus, and the Poets, as if in those first Ages of the World they had beene Spanish Inheritance, and none other then Hispaniola, or some other of the Ilands or mayne land of this New World, the Histories whereof might perhaps mooue Columbus to these Discoueries.
 Out of Plutarch and other Histories of the Carthaginian, Phoenician, and Tyrthenian Nauigations they haue coniectures, but very vncertaine, and obscure: and those things, which Diodorus reports of that Iland, agree nothing to the New-World which had not attayned to that ciuility he there mentioneth, before the Spaniards arriuall. And by his discourse it seemes rather to be some of the Ilands of Africa, then America, if the History be true. Neyther couldOrtel. in Cha^tar. 6. such long Voyages so farre off from any land, be performed without the helpe of the Compasse, which was first found thirteene hundred yeeres after Christ, by Iohn Goia of Melfi, according to that Verse of Panormitan,Antonius Panorm. Prima dedit nantis vsum MagnetisAmalphis in Lucania in the Kingdome of Naples. Amalphis. GomaraF. Gom. hist. gen. cap. 9. citeth Blondus, and Maffaeus, Girardus, witnesses of this Melfian inuention, saue that hee  cals him not Iohn, as Ortelius doth, but Flauius di Malphi. And in the tempests, which happened among the Ancients,Acts 27.20* Virg. Aeneid. 1. Seneca vbi sup. it seemes that for want of this skill, they wandered very vn^^rtayne, but as the Sunne or Starres, by returne of their desired light, after the tempests ended, directed them.
Yet I will not say, but that in former-times, some ships might come sometime by casualty into those partsOf the supposed former Discoueries of th^ new world, read Ortel. Thea^. Charta. 6. but rather forced by weather, then directed by skill; and thus it is likely that some parts of America haue beene people. This I much doubt; whether their Science in Nauigation was such, as that they would voluntarily aduenture, and could happily effect this Voyage to and from the West Indies. The most probable Historie in this kind is (in my minde) that ofD. Powell history of Cambria, p. 127 A.D 1170. Madoc ap O^en Guyneth, who by reason of ciuill contentions, left his  Countrey of Wales, se^king aduentures by Sea, and leauing the Coast of Ireland North, came to a Land vnknowne, where he saw many strange things.
This by D. Powell, and Master Humfrey Lhuyd, is thought to be the Continent of the New
 World, confirmed herein by the speech of Mutezuma, professing his Progenitors to be strangers; and so were all the Mexicans to those parts, as the History in the eight Chapter following will shew: and by the vse of certaine Welch words, whichD^u. Ingram. Hak ^d^t. 1. to 3* Meredithan Rise and Guiyn^ Owen make mention of (...) thi^ Owens Nauig^tion. Se^ Hak. tom. 3. p. 1. Dauid Ingram obserued in his trauell through those parts. The History addeth that hee left certayne of his people there, and comming home for more people, returned thither with ten sayle. Howsoeuer; it is certayne* that the prints of Brittish Expedition are in manner worne out, and no signe thereof was found by the Spaniards: OnelyA. S. And^ews E^^n^enr Cumana, which Herera denieth A Crosse ten foot long, to which they prayed in Acusamil for raine Gomar. hist. of Cortes. part. 1. and gen. hist. part. 2. c. 82. they vsed a Crosse in Cumana: in the Iland of Acuzamill, the same was worshipped: but without any memory of Christ, or any thing sauouring that way: and might as well be there without any Christians erecting as those Crosses which in the sixt Booke we haue shewed, were in the Temple of Serapis, at Alexandria.  
Moreouer some Authours deny that any such Crosses were there found, and brand the report for a Fiction. As for Mutezuma being a stranger, it might be so, and yet his Progenitors of some other parts of America. And the words of Welsh areT^ree or foure words. very few, which, as it happens in any other Language, might by some chance come to passe. But if any be desirous to beleeue, that this Madoc peopled the Continent or Ilands of America, rather then the Terceras, or some of the African Ilands, I will not hinder, nor will I runne too much out of compasse, in pleading for the Compasse, as which onely can direct in such spacious Seas. Yet of this opinion is that Learned and iudicious Author, Iosephus Acosta, who diligently discussing this question, How men passed first to the Indies; largely, and learnedly contendeth, that they came not thither purposely, if they came by Sea, but by distresse of weather; and  yet finds no lesse difficulty (that way) in the transporting beasts; especially wilde, and vnprofitable beasts, which is not like any would take into the ship with them, much lesse conuey them ouer so huge an Ocean. At last hee concludeth, that although some might arriue there by shipwrack, and tempest of weather, yet is it most likely that the first Inhabitants (descended of Adam and Noah, of which oneActs 17.27. Ortelius in his Map of Ma^e-Pacificum, affi^meth that the people of America in likelihood were peopled from Europe by Groe^land, Isl^nd* Frisland, etc. bloud God hath made all Mankind, to dwell on all the face of the Earth, and hath assigned the bounds of their habitation) passed thither by some place where the Continent of our World ioyneth with America: or where the Ilands thereof are found fit Mediatours for this passage, being not farre distant from the Land. And this on the North parts of the World (where they place that fabulous Streight of Anian, not yet certaynly discouered) may be so: besides that on the South, men might passe from the Coasts of  Malacca to Iaua, and so to the South Continent, and from thence by the Magellane Streights into America. Groneland is found to bee the same Continent with Estotiland on the North. Some Negro's by force of tempest, it is probable, haue passed hither, because in Careca some haue beene found, betweene Saint Martha and Cartagena. Of whom IohnIo. di Castellanos. di Castellanos writeth.
Son todos ellos Negros comocueros, etc. They are all (sayth hee) as blacke as Rauens. And of this minde is Botero,Du Bartas Colonies. Morney. de verit. Christ. Relig. Botero vbi sup. and those French Worthies, Du Bartas and Philip Morney. It is not likely that the beasts could otherwise passe, but by the Continent, or by Ilands not farre off from the Continent, or from one another. Master Brerewood, a man learned and iudicious, in his Posthume workeGap. 13. of Languages and Religions, affirmeth that America receiued her first  Inhabitants, from those parts of Asia where the Tartars first inhabited. For those parts of America being most replenished which respect Asia; and there being no token of the Arts or industry of China, India, or Cataya, in many things also they seeming to r^semble those old Tartars: and their Countrey being eyther not at all, or least of all other, seuered from the North parts of America: he concludeth as aforesaid. A man may with like probable coniecture bring them from the Samoyeds bordering Northward from Russia, and the Laplanders, which by Northerne Iland^ (whereof, there are some daily discouered) might by passing from one to another, seate themselues in Greenland, Gronland, Estotiland and other parts, neere to, or vpon America. For the Inhabitants of the one are much like to the other. And thus by many wayes Gods Prouidence might dispose Inhabitants to th^se parts; that wee  speake not of the South vnknown^ Continent, which is supposed to extend it selfe to the Line, and from the Ilands of Asia might easily receiue and conuey Inhabitants hither. As for Genebrards deriuation of the Americans from the ten Tribes,Genebr. Chron. l. 1. and Cl. Duret. prooued by the dreames of Esdras, elsewhere alledged with like truth for the Tartars, and some inscriptions out of Thenet, they which will may beleeue.
Heere also ariseth another question, how these beaste^ could passe from the parts of the knowne World, where none such are knowne? to which it may be answered, That God hath a^pointed to euery Creature his peculiar nature, and a naturall instinct, to liue in places most agreeing to his nature: as euen in our World* Non omnis fa^^ omnia tellus, Euery Countrey hath not all Creatures: the Elephant, Rhinoceros, Riuer-hors^, Crocodile, Camell, Camelopardalis,  and others, are not ordinarily, and naturally in Europe: nor the Z^bra in Asia or Europe: and the like may be said of many other Creatures.

Now, as in the Arke it selfe, (the Cradle of Man, and stall of Beasts,) w^e must not onely obserue Nature and Art, for the making and managing thereof, but a higher and more powerful hand: euen so in dispencing the creatures which came from thence, they chose places by their owne naturall instinct, and man disposed by his industrie, according as he had vse of them, but most of all, the secret and mighty prouidence of God co-working in those works of Nature and industry, and (in likelihood) infusing some more speciall and extraordinarie instinct in that replenishing and refurnishing of the World,Act. 7.26. Assigning them their seasons and bounds of habitation, hath thus diuersified his workes, according to the diuersities of places, and sorted out to each Countrey their peculiar creatures. As for the comming by  ship, it is for the beasts improbable, for the men (by any great numbers, or of any set purpose) vnlikely (except as before is said) seeing in all America they had no shipping, but their Canoes. The beasts also haue not bin found in the Ilands, which are in the Continent. And if any hereunto will adde a supposition, that there might be some Ilands or parts of the Continent in times past, which is now swallowed by the mercilesse Ocean, so that then there might be a way, which now is buried in the waues: (as someSir Humfrey Gilberts Di^couerie of the North-West. Plato's owne Discouerie t^ls that it was swallowed by an Earthquake. suppose) of Plato's Atlantis, placed at the mouth of the Streits, or Hercules Pillars, which yet they would haue to be America, and some of theR. Verflegant Antiquities. Sea betwixt Douer and Callis, once one firme Land (as they doe imagine) I list not to contradict them.
As for theF.G. histor. gener part. 2. cap 13. I. Mar. lib. 26. cap. 3. Indians owne report of their beginning, which some ascribe to a Fountaine, others  to a Lake, others to a Caue, or what other opinion they conceiue thereof, we shall more fitly obserue in their proper places, discoursing of their Religions and Opinions. Now for he first certain Discouery of this New World, the World generally ascribeth it to Columbus, and worthily: but Columbus himselfe is said to haue receiued his instructions from another.


@. II. Of Christopher Colon, or Columbus, his first Discouerie, and three other Voyages.
 THis Historie is thus related by Gomera, and Ioannes Mariana: A certaine Carauel, sayling in the Ocean, by a strong East winde long continuing, was carried to a Land vnknowne, which was not expressed in the Maps and Cards. It was much longer in returning, then in going: and ariuing, had none left aliue but the Pilot, and three or foure Mariners, the rest being dead of famine and other extremities; of which also the remnant perished in few dayes, leauing toColumbus was borne at Cugureo, or (as some say) at Nerui in the Territorie of Genua: hee was a Mariner from a child, and traded into Syria, and other parts of the East. After this he became a Master in making Sea-cards, he went to Portugall, to learne th^ir Nauigations on the coast of Africa, and there married, Gom. cap. 14. R Eden. Columbus (then the Pilots host) their Papers, and some grounds of this Discouerie. The time, place, countrey, and name of the man is vncertaine: some esteeme this Pilot an Andaluzian, and that he traded at Madera, when this befell him: some a Biscaine, and that his trafficke was in England and France; and some a Portugall,  that traded at the Mina: some say hee ariued in Portugall; others, at Madera, or at one of the Azores: all agree that he dyed in the house of Christopher Columbus. It is most likely at Madera. This Relation (as it hath no witnesses to proue it, the whole company being dead; nor any good circumstances, so) Benzo and RamusiusHier. Benzo lib. 1. cap. 5. Ram. praef. 3. vol. plainely affirme it to be a fable, and a Spanish tricke, enuying a Forrenner and Italian that glory, to be the first finder of the Indies. And the most sincere and iudicious of the Spaniards themselues esteeme it but a t^le, as appeares by the testimonie of Gonzalo Fernando de Ouiedo in his Summary, and more fully in his generallLib. 2. cap. 1. Historie of the Indies. They shew, and so doth he which then liued in th^ Court of Spaine, Peter Martyr, another cause that moued Columbus to this Discouery, and not that Pilots papers orGaspar Ens lib 1. cap* 2. coniectureth, that Columbus (moued with his owne coniectures to this discouerie) was confirmed further therein by this Pylot, which is said to dye in his house. reports. For, he being a Mariner vsed to the Sea from his youth, and sayling  from Cales to Portugall, obserued, that at certaine seasons of the yeere, the windes vsed to blow from the West; which continued in that manner a long time together. And deeming that they came from some coast beyond the Sea, he busied his minde so much herewith, that he resolued to make some triall and proofe thereof. When he was now forty yeeres old, hee propounded his purpose to the Senate of Genua, vndertaking, if they would lend him ships, he would find a way by the West, vnto the Ilands of Spices. But they reiected it as a dreame.
Columbus frustrate of his hopes at Genua, yet leaues not his resolution, but goeth to Portugall, and communicates this matter with Iohn the second King of Portugall: but finding no entertainment to his suites, sendeth his brother Bartholomew Columbus to King Henry the seuenth of England, to sollicite him in the matter, whiles himselfe passed into Spaine, to implore  the aide of the Castilians herein.

BartholomewFernand Columb. in vita pat^is Christophori, c* 13. Hak t^m. 3. and Nauig. C. Col. in No. Orb. Ouied lib 2. cap^ 4. vnhappily lighted on Pirats by the way, which robbed him and his company, forced him to sustayne himselfe with making of Sea-cards. And hauing gotten somewhat about him, presents a Map of the World to King Henry, with his Brothers offer of Discouerie: which the King gladly accepted, and sent to call him into England. But hee had sped of his suite before in Spaine, and by the King and Queene was employed according to his request. For commingGomar. c. 15. Herera saith he first sollicited the Catholike Kings but receiuing an answere to his di^content, hee made offer to the Dukes. from Lisbone to Palos di Moguer, and there conferring with Martin Alonso Pinzon, an expert Pilot, and Fryer Io. Perez, a good Cosmographer, hee was counselled to acquaint with those his proiects, the Dukes of Medina Sidonia, and of Medina Caeli: which yeelding him no credit, the Fryer counselled him to goe the Court, and wrote in his behalfe to Fryer Fernand di Telauera, the Queenes  Confessor.
Christopher Columbus came to the Court of Castile, Anno 1486, and found cold welcome to his suite, at the hands of the King and Queene, then busied with hot warres in Granada, whence they expelled the Moores. And thus remayned hee in contempt as a man meanely clothed, without other Patron then a poore Fryer, saue that Alonso di Quintaniglia gaue him his Dyet who also at last procured him audience with the Archb^^hop of Toledo, by whose mediation he was brought before the King and Queene, who gaue him fauourable countenance, and promised to dispatch him, when they had ended the warres of Granada, which also they performed. Thus Columbus is set forth with three Caruels at the Kings charges, who because his treasure was then spent in the warres, borrowed sixteene thousand Duckets  of Lewes de Sanct Angelo: and on Friday the third of August, in the yeere of our Lord 1492. in a Vessell called the Gallega, accompanyed with the Pinta and Ninna, in which the Pinzons, Brethren, went as Pilots, with the number of an hundred and twenty persons, or thereabouts, set sayle for Gomera, one of the Canary Ilands, and hauing there r^freshed himselfe, followed his Discouery. After many dayes hee encountred with that Hearbie Sea (whereof before we haueLib. 7. cap. vlt. spoken) which not a little amated and amazed the Spaniards, and had caused theirPet. Mart. Dec. 1. l. 1. returne, had not the sight of some Birds promised him land not farre off. He also first taught the Spaniards to obserue the Sunne and Pole in their Nauigations, which till his Voyage they had not vsed, nor knowne.
But the Spaniards, after three and thirty dayes sayling, desperate of successe, mutined, and threatned to cast Columbus into the Sea:A. Benzo. lib. 1 cap. 6. disdayning much, that a stranger, a Genuois, had so abused them. But he pacified their enraged courages with milde speeches, and gentle promises. On the eleuenth day of October,Gaspar Ens lib. 1. cap. 2. one Rodorigo di Triana, espyed and cryed, Land, Land; the best Musicke that might be, especially to Columbus, who to satisfie the Spaniards importunity, had promised the day before, that if no Land appeared in three dayes, hee would returne.Columbi-Nauigatione^, 1. 2, 3, 4. Ouied. l. 2. c. 5. One, the night before, had descryed fire, which kindled in him some hope of great reward at the Kings hand, when hee returned into Spaine, but beeing heerein frustrate, hee burnt into such a flame, as that it consumed both Humanitie and Christianitie in him, and in the agony of indignation made him leaue his Countrey and Faith, and reuolt to the Moores. But thee, Columbus, how can I but remember? but loue? but admire? Sweetly may those bones rest, sometimes the Pillars of that Temple, where so diuine a SpiritOf his death see Ouied. l. 3. c. 9 resided: which neyther want of former example, nor publike discouragements of domesticall and forren States, nor priuate insultations of proud Spaniards, nor length of time (which vsually deuoureth the best resolutions) nor the vnequall Plaines of huge vnknowne Seas, nor grassie fields in Neptunes lap, nor importunate whisperings, murmurings, threatnings of inraged companions, could daunt. O nameHis true name was Colon, which corruptly is called Columbus. Colon, worthy to be named vnto the Worlds end, which to the Worlds end hast conducted Colonies; or may I call thee Colombo, for thy Doue-like simplicitie and patience? the true Colonna or Pillar, whereon our knowledge of this New World is founded: the true Christopher, which with more then Giant-like force and fortitude hast carried Christ his Name and Religion, through vnknowne Seas, to vnknowne Lands: which we hope and pray, that it may be more refined, and reformed, then Popish superstition, and Spanish pride will yet suffer. Now let the Ancients no longer mention Neptune, or Minos, or Erythras, or Danaus: to all which diuers authors diuersly ascribe the inuention of nauigation. Mysians, Troyans, Tyrians, vaile your bonnets, strike your top-sayles to this Indian-Admirall, that deserueth the top-saile indeed, by aspiring to the top that sayling could ayme at, in discouering another World Let Spaniards, French, English, and Dutch resound thy name, or His Name rather,Prou. 30.4. whose Name who can tell? that would acquaint Thee, and the World by thee, with newes of a New-World,
But lest we drowne our selues in this Sea of Extasie and Admiration, let vs go^ on shoare with Columbus in his new discouered Iland. And first mee thinkes I see the Spaniards, yesterday in mutinie, now as farre distracted in contrary passions; some gazing with greedie
 eyes on the desired Land, some with teares of ioy, not able to see that, which the ioy of seeing made them not to see: others embracing, and almost adoring Columbus, who brought them to that sight: some also with secret repinings enuying that glory to a stranger; but byting in their byting enuie, and making shew of glee and gladnesse: all new awaked out of a long trance, into which that Step-mother-Ocean, with dangers, doubts, dreads, despaires had deiected them, reuiued now by the sight of their mother-earth, from whom in vnknowne armes they had beene so long weaned and detayned. On shoare they goe, and felling a tree make a Crosse thereof, which there they erected, and tooke possession of that New World, in the name of the Catholike Kings. This was done on the eleuenth of October, Anno  1492. in the Iland Guanahani, one of the Lucai, which Columbo named San Saluatore: from whence hee sayled to Baracoa, a Hauen on the North side of the Ile Cuba, where hee went on Land, and asked of the Inhabitants for Cipango (so doth Paulus call Iapan.) They vnderstanding him of Cibao (where are the richest Mynes of Hispaniola) signed him, that it was in Haiti, (so was the Iland then called) and some of them went with him thither.
What worldly ioy is not mixed with some disaster? Their Admirall heere splitteth on a Rocke,Some thinke Columbus did run on ground of purpose, that he might leaue some behind. but the men are saued by the helpe of the other ships. This fell out in the North part of Hispaniola (so named by them) where they had sight of Inhabitants, which seeing these strangers, ranne all away into the Mountaynes. One woman the Spaniards got,  whom they vsed kindly, and gaue her meate, drinke and clothes, and so let her goe. She declaring to her people the liberalitie of this new people, easily perswaded them to come in troupes to the ships, thinking the Spaniards to be some Diuine Nation, sent thither from Heauen. They had before taken them for the Caribes, which are certaine Canibals, which vsed inhumane huntings for humane game, to take men for to eate them; Children likewise, which they gelded to haue them more fat, and then to deuoure them: the women they are not, but vsed them for procreation, and if they were old, for other seruices. The Ilanders had no othe defence against them but the wooddy Hils, and swiftest heeles to which they betooke them at the Spaniards arriuall, thinking them (as is said) to be Canibals. And such haue they since proued inBart. de las Casas, Hispan^ crudelit. effect, not leauing of three Millions of people which heere  they found, 200. persons, and that long since.
The Deuill had forewarned them of this byHistory of Chi^^, p. 312. H. Benzo. l. 1. c. 8. Oracle, that a bearded Nation should spoyle their Images, and spill the bloud of their children, as wee shall see in the particular Tractate of Hispaniola. Nothing more pleased the Spaniards then the Gold, which the naked Inhabitants exchanged with them for Bels, Glasses, Points, and other trifles.
Columbus obtained leaue of Guacanarillus, the Cacike or King, to buildThe Fort of the Natiuity in Hispaniola. a Fort, in which he left eight and thirty Spaniards, and taking with him sixe Indians, returned to Spaine, where he was highly welcomed of the King and Queene. Some controuersie fell out betweene Columbus, and one of the Pinzons, Master of one of the Caruels, about leauing these men behind; but Columbus sent a Letter to reduce him vnto peace by the Indians, who held  the Letter in almost religious regard, thinking it had some Spirit or Deitie, by which they could vnderstand one another being absent.
The PopeAlexander a wicked Pope. Guicciard l. 1. and he of whose daughter Lucretia Pontanus writeth that she wa Alexandri Filia, S^onsa, Nurus abused by the incestuous lusts of the Father and his two Sonnes, was Author of the Bul, whereby the Spaniards challenge the new World for thei^s. (then a Spaniard) Alexander the Sixt, hearing of this, diuided the World, by his Bull, betwixt the Portugals and Spaniards: bearing date the fourth of May, Anno 1493. drawing a Line a hundred leagues beyond the Ilands of Azores and Capt Verde, this Alexander giuing (more then Great Alexander could conquer) the East to the one, and West to the other. The Bull is become an Vnicorne, and his two hornes are now growne into one, in the vniting of those two States.
Columbus, graced with the the title of Admirall, and enriched with the tenths of the Spanish gaines in the Indies, is sent a secondSept. 25. 1493 time, with his brother Bartholomeus, who was made  Adelantado. or Deputie of Hispaniola. They had allowed them for this Expedition, small and great, seuenteene Sayle, and fifte^ne hundred men. The first Iland, hee espyed in his second Nauigation, he called Desseada, or Desired, because he had longed to see land. Arriuing in Hispaniola, he found the Spaniards which he had left there, that they were now not left, nor any where to be found. The Indians had murdered them, and laid the blame on the Spanish insolencies.
Hee now built and peopled the Towne of Isabella, which was their chiefe place of Residence and gouernment, which is in the yeere a thousand foure hundred ninetie eight, were remoued to the City of San Dominico. They built also the Fort of S. Thomas: but both in the one and the other, the Spaniards died of famine through the Indians wilfulnesse, who, vnwilling  to haue such Neighbours, would not plant their Maiz and Iucca, and so starued both themselues and their guests. As for the Pockes, the Spaniards in this Voyage got them of the Indian women, and brought them into Spaine, as Ouiedo of his owne knowledge

Ouied. l. 2 c. 13 reporteth of his owne Country-men: and they, after paid the IndiansRamus. in praefat. ad vol. 3. Ouied. l. 3. c. 6. (in recompence) with a disease as deadly and infectious to them, which consumed thousands, and was neuer before knowne amongst them: I meane, the small Pocks. The other were improperly named of the French, or of Naples, seeing that in those wars of Naples, which the Spaniards mayntayned against the French, some carryed this disease with them thither out of Spaine, and communicated the same both to the French and Neapolitans, hauing beene vsuall and easily curable, in the Indies. Another Disease also assaulted them of a little kinde of Fleas called Niguas, which would eate into, and breed in the flesh, and haue made many lose their toes.
Columbus at this time discouered Cuba and Iamaica with the Neighbour-Iles. Returning  to Hispaniola, he found his Brother and the Spaniards in dissention and separation, and punishing the Au hours of sedition, returned home. In the yeere of our Lord, 1497. hee made his third Voyage, and then touched on the Continent; discouered Cubagua, Paria, and Cumana.
But Roldanus Ximenius raysing a Rebellion, and accusing the Columbi to the King, effected that Bouadilla was sent Gouernour into Hispaniola, who sent the two Brethren bound as Prisoners to Spaine: vnworthy recompence of the worthy attempts of these Worthies. The King freeth them, and employeth Christopher in a fourth Voyage, Anno 1502. in which Oxandus the Gouernour forbade Columbus the first finder to land on Hispaniola.Gas. Ens lib. 1 cap. 5. Hee then discouered Guanaxa, Higuera, Fondura, Veragua, Vraba, and learned newes (as some say) of the South Sea. He stayed at Iamaica to repaire his Fleete, where some of his men were  sicke, and they which were sound in body, were more then sicke, froward and tumultuous in behauiour, and many left him. Vpon this occasion the Ilanders also forsooke him, and brought in no victuall. Herewith Columbus, neyther able to abide nor depart, was driuen to his shifts, no lesse admirable for subtlety then resolution.Vide l. 5. c 16 pag. 452. He told the Ilanders, that if they did not bring him in prouision, the Diuine Anger would consume them: a signe whereof they should see in the darkened face of the Moone within two dayes. At that time hee knew the Moone would bee eclipsed: which the simple Islanders seeing, with feare and griefe humbled themselues to him, and offered themselues readie to all kinde and dutifull Offices.
At last, returning into Spaine, hee there dyed, Anno 1506. His body was buried at Siuill  in the Temple of the Carthusians. This was the end (if euer there can bee end) of Columbus. PinzonusNauigationes, Vinc. Pinzoni. Naui Alb. Vesp. Seb. Cabota. vid. Hak. tom. 3. one of Columbus his Companions, by his example inuited, made new Discoueries, and Vespucius, and Cabota and many other, euery day making new searches and plantations, till the World at last is come to the knowledge of this New World almost wholly. The particulars will more fitly appeare in our particular Relations of each Countrey.


@. III.  Of the Beasts, Fowles and Plants in America.
AFter this Discourse of the men in those parts, let vs take some generall view of the other Creatures, especially, such as are more generally disperst through the Indies. I haue before noted, that America had very few of such Creatures as Europe yeeldeth, vntill they were transported thither: and therefore they haue no Indian names for them,A rule to know what beasts were here naturall (for to such they haue names in their own language) and what transported: for these the Indians call by their Spanish names. but those which the Spaniards that brought them, giue vnto them: as Horse, Kine, and such like. They haue Lions, but not like in greatnesse, fiercenesse, nor colour to those of Africa. They haue Beares in great abundance, except on the  North parts. They haue store of Deere, Bores, Foxes, and Tygres, which (as in Congo) are more cruell to the Naturals then to the Spaniards. These beasts were not found in the Ilands, but in the Continent; and yet now in those Ilands, Kine are multiplyed and growne wilde, without other Owner then such as first can kill them:Acost. l. 1. c. 21 and l. 4. c. 34. the Dogges likewise march by troupes, and endammage the Cattle worse then Wolues. Their Swine did multiply exceedingly, but (as an Enemy to their Sugars, a great commoditie in Hispaniola, where Anno 1535. Ouiedo reckons almost thirty Ingenions, the number daily increasing) they were forced to root out this rooting kind of beasts. This Iland hath stored the other about it with store of Horse and Mares which are sold very cheape. For Kine, the Bishop of Venezuola had sixteene thousand head of that kind of beasts, and more: others possessed thousands also, and  some killed them only for their Hides, of which were shipped from hence for Spaine, Anno 1587. 35444. and from New Spaine 64350. as Acosta relateth.

The Lyons are gray, and vse to clime Trees: The Indians hunt and kill them. The Beares and Tygres are like those in other parts: but not so many. Apes and Monkies they haue of many kinds, and those admirably pleasing in their Apish tricks and imitations, seeming to proceed from Reason. A Souldier leuelling at one of them to shoot him, the silly beast dyed not vnreuenged, but hurling a stone as the other aymed at him, depriued the Souldier of his eye, and lost his owne life. They haue Monkies with long beards. AcostaLib. 4. c. 39. See Car. Clus. de exot and Ouied. gen. hist and summar. and sebast. Schroteri to. 2. Gens. de Qu dr. tels of one Monkie that would goe to the Tauerne at his Masters sending, and carrying the pot in one hand, and money in the other, would not by any meanes depart with his money, till he had his pot filled with wine: and returning home, would pelt the boyes with stones, and yet haue care  to carie his Wine home safe to his Master, neither touching it himselfe till some were giuen him, nor suffering other. TheyVincent. Pinzon. haue a monstrous deformed beast, whose forepart resembleth a Fox, the hinder part an Ape, excepting the feet which are like a mans; beneath her belly she hath a receptacle like a purse, wherein she bestowes her yong vntill they can shift for themselues, neuer comming out of this naturall nest, but to sucke.
Sheepe haue much encreased, and by good husbandry, in that plenty of pasture, would be a great commoditie: but in the Islands the wilde Dogges destroy them: and therefore they that kill these Dogges, are rewarded for it, as they which kill Wolues in Spaine. The DoggesP. Mart. de I^sulis. which the Indians had before, were snowted like Foxes; they fatted them to eat, and kept them also for pleasure: but they could not barke: Such Dogges (we haue shewed)  are in Congo. Their Stagges andOuied. summar. 22. Deere in the South parts of America, haue no horns. They haue store of Conies. The Armadilla is an admirable creature, of which there bee diuers kinds: they resemble aCataphractus equus. barded Horse, seeming to be armed all ouer, and that as if it were rather by artificiall Plates, opening and shutting, then naturall scales: it digs vp the earth as Conies and Moules.
The Hogs of the Indies haue their nauill vpon the ridge of their backs. They go in heards together and assaile men, hauing sharpe talons, like razors, and hunt their Hunters vp the tops of trees, whence they easily kill these enraged Sainos (so they call them) biting the tree for anger. The Dantes resemble small Kine, and are defended by the hardnesse of their hydes. The Vicugne somewhat resembleth a Goat, but is greater: they sheare them, and of  their fleeces make Rugs and Couerings, and stuffes. In the stomacke and belly of this beast is found the Bezar-stone; sometimes one alone, sometimes two, three, or foure: the colour of which is blacke, or gray, or greene, or otherwise; it is accounted soueraigne against poisons and venemous diseases. It is found in diuers sorts of beass: but all chew the cud, and commonly feed vpon the snow and Rockes. The Indian sheepe they call Lama, it is a beast of great profit, not onely for food and raiment, but also for carriage of burthens: they are bigger then sheepe, and lesse then Calues: they will beare a hundred and fifty pound weight. In some places they call them Amydas, and vse them to greater burthens. Hulderike SchmidelHul. Schmidel cap 44. A.D ^. 1548. affirmes, that hee liuing in the parts about the Riuer of Plate, being hurt on his legge, rode fortie leagues vpon one of them. They will grow restie, and will lye downe with their burthen, no stripes nor death able to asswage their mood: onely  good words, and faire dealing, with gentle entreatie, sometimes diuers houres together, can preuaile.
Of fowles they haue many kinds which we haue, as Partridges, Turtles, Pidgeons, Stock-Doues, Quailes, Faulcons, Herons, Eagles: and a World of Parrots, which in some places fly by flockes, as Pidgeons. There are also Estridges. Hens they had before the Spaniards arriued. They haue other kinds peculiar: The TomineiosAug. Carate. hist. Peru. l. 1. is the least in quantitie, the greatest for admiration and wonder. I haue oftentimes doubted (saith Acosta) seeing them fly, whether they were Bees or Butter-flyes; but in truth they are Birds. ThenetAnd. Theuet cap. 41. Lerius nau. c. 11. and Lerius call it Gonambuch, or Gonanbuch. They affirme that it yeelds nothing in sweetnesse  of note to the Nightingale, and yet is not bigger then a Beetle, or Drone-Bee: One would say, Vox ^s, praeterea nihil: but so could not any truely say, for euen otherwise it is almost miraculous: Nature making this little shop her great store-house of wonder and astonishment, and shewingNatura in magnis magna, in minimis maxima. her greatest greatnesse in the least Instruments. The Prouinciall of the Iesuites in Brasil, affirmeth asCar. Clus. Exot. lib. 5. Clusius testifies, that the Brasilians called it Ourissia, which signifyeth the Sun-beame, and that it was procreated of a Fly; and that he had seene one, partly a Bird, and partly a Fly: first, coloured blacke, then ash-coloured, then rose-coloured, then red: and lastly, the head set against the Sunne, to resemble all colours, in most admired varietie. It flyeth so swift (saithOuiedo summar. cap. 48. Ouiedo) that the wings cannot be seene. It hath a nest proportionable. I haue seene (saith he) one of those birds, together with her nest, put  into the scales wherein they vse to weigh Gold, and both weighed but two Tomins, that is, foure and twenty graines. Haply, it is therefore called Tomineios, as weighing one Tomin. The feathers are beautified with yellow, greene, and other colours: the mouth like the eye of
 an Needle. It liueth onLo^ez de Gom^ra hist. Mexicana, o^ Conqu^st of the W^st Indi s. dew, and the juice of herbs, but sitteth not on the Rose. The feathers, specially, of the necke and brests, are in great request for those feather-pictures, or portraitu^es, which the Indians make cunningly and artificially with these natural feathers, placing the same in place and proportion, beyond all admiration: The Indian Bats should not flee your light, and are for their rarity worthy consideration, but that wee haue spoken before somewhat of them.
They haueAcost l. 4. c. 17. Birds called Condores, of exceeding greatnesse and force, that will open a sheepe, and a whole Calfe, and eate the same. They haue abundance of Birds, in beautie of their feathers farre surpassing all in Europe, wherewith the skilfull Indians will perfectly represent in feathers, whatsoeuer they see drawne with the Pensill. A figure of Saint Francis, made of feathers, was presented to Pope Sixtus Quintus, whose eye could not discerne them  to be naturall colours, but thought them pensill-worke, till he made tryall with with his fingers. The Indians vsed them for the ornaments of their Kings and Temples. Some Birds there are of rich commoditie, onely by their dung. In some Islands ioyning to Peru, the Mountaines are all white, like Snow, which is nothing but heapes of dung, of certaine Sea-fowle which frequent those places. It riseth many Ells, yea, many Launces in height, and is fetched thence in Boats, to hearten the Earth, which hereby is exceeding fertile.
To adde somewhat of the Indian Plants, and Trees.See Monardus and Clusius. D. Lovel. Gerard and other H^rbarists, and chi^fly of these and other the Indian plants and trees, see Ouied. gen. hist. Ind. l. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and of the beasts, fowles, fish^s in the 12, 13, 14, 15. bookes and also his Summario. Mangle is the name of a Tree, which multiplyeth it selfe into a wood (as before we haue obserued of it) the branches descending and taking root in the Earth. The Plane-tree of India hath leaues sufficient to couer a man from the foot to the head: but these, the Coco, and other Indian Trees, are in the East-Indies  also, and there we haue mentioned them. Cacao, is a fruit little lesse then Almonds, which the Indians vse for money, and make thereof a drinke, holden amongst them in high regard. They haue a kinde of ApplesTh. Turner. called Ananas, exceeding pleasant in colour and taste, and very wholesome, which yet haue force to eate iron, like Aqua fortis. TheAcost. l. 4. c. 24. Mamayes, Guayauos, and Paltos be the Indian Peaches, Apples and Peares. But it would bee a weary wildernesse to the Reader, to bring him into such an Indian Orchard, where he might r^ade of such varietie of fruits, but (like Tantalus) can taste none: or to present you with a Garden of their Trees, which beare flowres with other fruit, as the Floripondio, which all the yeere long beareth flowres sweet like a Lilly, but greater: the Volusuchil, which beareth a flowre like to the forme of the heart, and others, which I omit: The flowre of the Sunne is  is now no longer the Marigold of Peru, but groweth in many places with vs in England. The flowre of the Granadille they say (if they say truely) hath the markes of the Passion, Nayles, Pillar, Whips, Thornes, Wounds, exceeding stigmaticall Francis.
For their Seeds and Craines, Mays is principall, of which they make their bread, which our English ground brings forth, but hardly will ripen^: it growes, as it were on a Reed, and multiplyeth beyond comparison; they gather three hundred measures for one. It yeeldeth more blood, but more grosse, then our Wheat. They make drinke thereof also, wherewith they will be exceedingly drunke: They first steepe, and after boyle it to that end. In some places they first cause it to be champed with Maids, in some places with old women, and then make a leauen thereof, which they boyle, and make this inebriating drinke. The Canes  and leaues serue for their Mules to eate. They boyle and drinke it also for paine in the back. The buds of Mays serue in stead of Butter and Oyle.
In some parts they make bread of a great root called Yuca, which they name Cacaui. They first cut and straine it in a Presse, for the iuyce is deadlyIn the Ilands, but not in all places of the firme Land. poison: the Cakes dryed, are steeped in water before they can eate them. Another kinde there is of this Yuca or Iucca, the iuice whereof is not poison. It will keepe long like Bisket. They vse this bread most in Hisponiola, Cuba, and Iamaica, where Wheat and Mays will not grow, but so vnequally, that, at one instant, some is in the grasse, other in the graine. They vse in some places, another root called Papas, like to ground Nuts, for bread, which they call Chuno. Of other their roots and fruits I am loth to write, lest I weary the Reader with tedious officiousnesse. Spices grow  not there naturally: Ginger thriueth well, brought and planted by the Spaniards. They haue a good kinde of Balme, though not the same which grew in Palestina. Of their Amber, Oiles, Gums, and Drugs, I list not to relate further. OutSpanish fruits thriue well in one place or other of the Indies. of Spaine they haue caried great varietie of Plants, herein, Americo exceeding Spaine, that it receiueth and fructifieth in all Spanish Plants that are brought thither, whereas the Indian thriue not in Spaine: as Vines, Oliues, Mulberies, Figs, Almonds, Limons, Quinces, and such like. And, to end this Chapter, with a comparison of our World, with this of America; Our aduantages and preferments are many.Botero Rel. port. prima l. 4. Our Heauen hath more Stars, and greater, as Acosta by his owne sight hath obserued, challenging those Authors which haue written otherwise, of fabling. Our Heauen hath the North-Starre, within three degrees, and a third of the Pole: their Crosier, or foure Stars  set a-crosse, which they obserue for the Antarticke, is thirtie degrees off. The Sunne commucateth
 his partiall presence longer to our Tropike, then that of Capricorne; remaining in the Southerne Signes, 178. dayes, one and twenty houres, and twelue minutes: in the Northerne 186. dayes, eight houres, and twelue minutes. B. Keckerman, System. Astron. L. 1. Tycho, Brahe, L. 1. reckoneth these a hundred fourescore and sixe dayes, houres eighteene and a halfe, dayes eight, and one third part, fere plus quam in Australi, etc.
This want of the Sunne and Stars is one cause of greater cold in those parts then in these. Our Earth exceeds theirs for the situation, extending it selfe more between East and West (fittest for humane life) whereas theirs trends most towards the two Poles. Our Sea is more fauourable, in more Gulfes and Bayes, especially, suchThe Baltike, Persian, Arabian, Caspian Seas, etc. as goe farre within Land, besides the  Mid-Land-Sea, equally communicating her selfe to Asia, Africa and Europa. This conuenience of traffique America wanteth. Our beasts wilde and tame, are farre the more noble, as the former discourse sheweth.
For, what haue they to oppose to our Elephants, Rhinocerotes, Camels, Horses, Kine, etc. Neither were the naturall fruits of America comparable to those of our World, Whence are their Spices, and the best Fruits, but from hence by transportation, or transplantation? As for Arts, States, Literature Diuine and Humane, multitudes of Cities, Lawes, and other Excellencies, our World enioyeth still the priuiledge of the First-borne. America is as a yonger brother or sister, and hath in these things almost no inheritance at all, till it bought somewhat hereof, of the Spaniards, with the price of her Freedome. On the other side, for temperature  of Ayre, generally, America is farre before Africa, in the same height. For greatnesse of Riuers, Canada, Plata, and Maragnon, exceed our World. Whether Africa or America exceed in Gold, it is a question: In Siluer, Potozi seemes to haue surmounted any one Mine of the World, besides those of New-Spaine, and other parts, howsoeuer Boterus doubts. Yet, Exitus acta probat: And now America excels, because, besides her owne store, shee is so plentifully furnished with all sorts of liuing and growing creatures from hence, as euen now was shewed.



CHAP. III. Of the Discoueries of the North parts of the New-World, and toward the Pole, and of Greene-Land, or New-Land, Groen-Land, Estoti-Land, Meta Incognita, and other places vnto New-France.

@. I.  Of the Discoueries made long since by Nicolo and Antonio Zeni.
AMerica is commonly diuided by that Isthmus, or necke and narrow passage of Land at Darien, into two parts; the one called Northerne America, or Mexicana; the other Southerne, or Peruana. This trendeth betwixt the Darien and Magellan Straights: that from thence Northwards, where the Confines are yet vnknowne. For it is not yet fully discouered, whether it ioyneth somewhere to the Continent of Asia, or whether Groen-land, and  some other parts, accounted Islands, ioyneMany haue written discourses of the possibility of a passage by the N. or N.W. a^ Thome, S.H. Gilbert, Cir. of the earth, alleaging some examples of a Fryer which passed it, the Portugall cards, etc. with it. These were discouered before the dayes of Columbus, and yet remaine almost couered still in obscuritie, and were therefore iustly termed.Discourse of Frobishers Voyages by Georgae Best, Voyage 3* Meta Incognita, by Great ELIZABETH the best knowne and most renowned Lady of the World. The first knowledge that hath come to vs of those parts, was by Nicholas and Antony Zeni, two Brethren, Venetians. Happy Italy, that first, in this last Age of the World, hath discouered the great Discouerers of the World, to whom we owe our M. Paulus, Odoricus, Vertomannus, for the East, Columbus, Vespacius, Cabot, for the West; these noble Zeni for the North: and the first encompassing the Worlds wide Compasse, vnto Pigafetta's Discourse, companion of Magellan in his journey: that I speake not of the paines of Russelli, Ramusius, Boterus, and a world of Italian Authors, that (I thinke more then any other  Language) haue by their historicall labours discouered the World to it selfe. Vnhappie Italy, that still hath beaten the bush, for others to catch the Bird, and hast inherited nothing in their Easterne and Westerne Worlds, excepting thy Catholike claime, w^ereby, the Catholike
 and Spanish Sword makes way for the Catholike-Roman Crowne and Keyes: Neither the Sword of Paul, nor the Keyes of Peter; for both these were2. Cor. 4. spirituall. But to returne to our Venetians.The discoueries of M. Nic. and Ant. Zeni, gathered out of their letters by Francisco Marcolina. They are rel^ted by M. Hakluyt, in his 3. vol. pa. 121. In the yeere a thousand three hundred and fourescore, Mr Nicolo Zen^ being wealthy, and of a haughty spirit, desiring to see the fashions of the world, built and furnished a Ship at his owne charges, and passing the Straits of Gibralter, held on his course Northwards, with intent to see England and Flanders. But a violent Tempest assailing him at Sea, he was carried hee knew not whither, till at last his Ship was carried away vpon the Ile of Frisland; where the men and most part of the good^ were saued. In vaine seemes that deliuerie that deliuers vp presently to another Executioner. The Ilanders like Neptunes hungry groomes or his base and blacke gard, set vpon the men whom the Seas had spared: but  here also they found a second estape, by meanes of a Prince named Zichmui, Prince of that and many Ilands thereabouts: who being neere hand with his Armie, came at the out-cry, and chasing away the people, tooke them into protection.
This Zichmui had the yeere before giuen the ouerthrow to the King of Norway, and was a great aduenturer in feates of Armes. Hee spake to them in Latine; and placed them in his Nauie, wherewith he wonne diuers Ilands. Nicolo behaued himselfe so well, both in sauing the Fleet by his Sea-skill, and in conquest of the Ilands by his Valour, that Zichmui made him Knight and Captaine of his Nauie,
S. Thomas Monasterie in Groenland.After diuers notable Exploits, Nicolo armed three Barkes, with which he ariued in Engroneland: where hee found a Monasterie of Friers of the Preachers Order, and a Church  dedicated to St Thomas hard by a Hill, that casteth out fire like Vesuuins and Aetna. There is a Fountaine of hote water, with which they heat the Church of the Monasterie, and the Friers chambers. It commeth also into the Kitchin so boyling hote, that they vse no other fire to dresse their meat; and putting their Bread into Brasse Pots without any water, it doth bake as it were in an hot Ouen. They haue also small Gardens, which are couered ouer in the Winter time, and being watered with this water, are defended from the violence of the Frost and Cold, and bring forth Flowers in their due seasons. The common people astonished with these strange effects, conceiue highly of those Friers, and bring them presents of flesh and other things.
They with this Water, in the extremitie of the Cold, heat their Chambers, which also (as the other buildings of the Monasterie) arc framed of those burning stones, which the mouth  of the Hill casts forth. They cast Water on some of them, whereby they are dissolued, and become excellent white Lime, and so tough, that being contriued in building, it lasteth for euer. The rest, after the fire is out, serue in stead of stones to make Walls and Vaults, and will not dissolue, or breake, except with some iron toole.
Their Winter lasteth nine moneths; and yet there is a faire Hauen, where this water falleth into the Sea, not frozen: by meanes whereof there is great resort of wilde fowle and fish, which they take in infinite multitudes. The Fishers Boats are made like to a Weauers Shuttle, of the skins of fishes, fashioned with the bones of the same fishes, and being sowed together with many doubles, they are so strong, that in foule weather they will shut themselues within the same, not fearing the force either of Sea, or Winde. Neither can the hard-hearted  Rocks breake these yeelding vessels. They haue also as it were a Sleeue in the bottome thereof, by which with a subtill deuice, they conuey the water forth, that soaketh into them. The most of these Friers spake the Latine Tongue.
A little after this Nicolo returned, and died in Frisland, whither his brother Antonio had before resorted to him, and now succeeded both in his goods and honour; whom Zichmui employed in the Expedition for Estotiland:Estotiland. which happened vpon this occasion. Sixe and twenty yeeres before, foure Fisher-Boats were apprehended at Sea by a mighty and tedious storme; wherewith after many dayes, they were brought to Estotiland, aboue a thousand miles West from Frisland: vpon which, one of the Boats was cast away, and sixe men that were in it, were taken, and brought to a populous Citie; where, one that spake Latine, and  had beene cast by chance vpon that Iland, in the name of the King asked them what Country-men they were: and vnderstanding their case, he acquainted the King there with. They dwelt there fiue yeeres, and found it to bee an Iland very rich, being little lesse then Iseland, farre more fruitfull. One of them said he saw Latine Bookes in the Kings Librarie, which they at this present doe not vnderstand. They haue a peculiar Language, and Letters or Characters to themselues. They haue Mines of Gold, and other Metals, and haue trade with Engroneland. They sow Corne, and make Beere and Ale. They build Barks (but know not the vse of the Compasse) and haue many Cities and Castles. The King sent these Fisher-men with twelue Barkes Southwards, to a Countrey which they call Drogio: in which Voyage escaping dreadfull Tempests at Sea, they encountred with Canibals at Land,  which deuoured many of them. These Fishers shewing them the manner of taking Fish
 with Nets, escaped: and for the presents which they made of their fish to the chiefe men of the Countrey, were beloued and honoured. One of these (more expert, it seemeth then the rest) was holden in such account, that a great Lord made warre with their Lord to obtayne him: and so preuayled, that he and his company were sent vnto him. And in this order was he sent to fiue and twenty Lords, which had warred one with another to get him, in thirteene yeeres space: whereby hee came to know almost all those parts; which, hee said, was a great Country, and (as it were) a New World. The people are all rude, and void of goodnesse: they goe naked, neyther haue they wit to couer their bodies with the Beasts skins, which they take in hunting, from the vehement cold. They are fierce, and eat their Enemies,  hauing diuers Lawes and Gouernours. Their liuing is by hunting.
Further to the Southwest, they are more ciuill, and haue a more temperate Ayre: They haue Cities and Temples dedicated to Idols, where they sacrifice men, and after eate them; and haue also some vse of Gold and Siluer.
He fled away secretly, and conueying himselfe from one Lord to another, came at length to Drogio, where hee dwelt three yeeres. After this time finding there certaine Boates of Estotiland, he went thither with them: and growing there very rich, furnished a Barke of his owne, and returned into Frisland: where hee made report vnto his Lord of that wealthy Countrey. Zichumi prepared to send thither: but three dayes before they set forth, this Fisherman dyed. Yet taking some of the Mariners which came with him, in his  stead, they prosecuted the Voyage, and encountred, after many dayes, an Iland; where ten men, of diuers Languages, were brought vnto them, of which they could vnderstand none, but one of Island. He told them, That the Iland was called Icaria, and the Knights thereof called Icari, descended of the ancient pedigree of Dodalus, King of Scots, who conquering that Iland, left his Sonne there for King, and left them those Lawes, which to that present they retayned. And, that they might keepe their Lawes inuiolate, they would receiue no stranger. Onely they were contented to receiue one of our men, in regard of the Language, as they had done those ten Interpreters.
Zichumi sayling hence, in foure dayes descried Land, where they found abundance of Fowle, and Birds Egges, for their refreshing. The Hauen they called Cape Trinity. There  was a Hill, which burning, cast out smoake: where was a Spring, from which issued a certaine water like Pitch, which ranne into the Sea. The people of small stature, wilde, and fearefull, hid themselues in Caues. Zichumi built there a Citie, and determining to inhabit, sent Antonio backe againe, with the most of his people, to Frisland.
This History I haue thus inserted at large, which perhaps, not without cause in some thinges, may seeme fabulous; not in the Zeni, which thus writ, but in the Relations which they receiued from others. Howsoeuer; the best GeographersAbrah. Ortel, Chart. 6. Hak. vol. 3. Botero. Maginus. are beholden to these Brethren, for that little knowledge they haue of these parts; of which none before had written: nor since haue there beene any great in-land Discoueries.


 @. II. Discoueries made by SEBASTIAN CABOT, CORTREGALIS, GOMES, with some notes of Groenland.
SOmewhat since there hath beene discouered by Gasper Corteregale, a Portugall; Stephen Gomes, a Spaniard, and Sebastian Cabot: and more by later Pilots, of our Nation, but little of the disposition of the In-land people. Yea, it was thought to be all brokenGroenland is now found a huge Continent to 78. by Baffin, An. 1616. Ilands, and not inhabited, but at certayne seasons frequented by  some Saluages, which come thither to fish. Such as we can, in due order we here bestow.
SebastianRamus. in praefat. in 3. Vol.Cabot reported to Ramusio, that in the yeere 1497. at the charge of King Henry the Seuenth, he discouered to the 67. degree and a halfe of Northerly latitude, minding to haue proceeded for the search of Cathay, but by the mutiny of the Mariners was forced to returne. The Map of Sebastian Cabot, cut byClem. Adams. Hak. to 3. p. 1. 6. Clement Adams, relateth, That Iohn Cabot, a Venetian, and his Sonne Sebastian, set out from Bristoll, discouering the Land, called it Prima Vista, and the Iland before it, Saint Iohns. The Inhabitants weare beasts skinnes. There were white Beares and Stags farre greater then ours. There were plenty of Seales, and Soles aboue a yard long. He named (sayth PeterP. Mart. Dec. 3. l. 6. Martyr) certaine IlandsCod-fish. Boccalaos, of the store of those fish, which the Inhabitants called by that name, which with their multitudes sometimes  stayed his ships. The Beares caught these fish with their clawes, and drew them to land, and ate them. In the time ofRob. Fabian. ap. Hak. vbi sup. Henry the Seuenth (William Purchas being then Maior of London) were brought vnto the King three men, taken in the New-found Iland: these were
 clothed in beasts skins, and did eate raw flesh. But Cabot discouered all along the Coast to that which since is called Florida; and returning, found great preparations for wars in Scotland, by reason whereof, no more consideration was had to this Voyage. Whereupon he went into Spaine; and being entertayned by the King and Queene, was sent to discouer the Coasts of Bra^ill, and sayled vp into the Riuer of Plate, more then six score leagues. He was a made Pilot Maior of Spaine: and after that, Anno 1549. was constituted Grand Pilot of England, by King Edward the Sixt, with the yeerely Pension of an hundred threescore and sixe pounds, thirteene shillings, foure pence: Where, in the yeere 1553. hee was chiefe dealer and procurer of the Discouery of Russia, and the North-east Voyages,Sir Hugh Will^ughby. R. Chancel^r. Steuen Bu^row. Pet. and Iackman; written by Hugh Smith, and all in Hak. to 1. made by Sir Hugh Willoughby, R. Chancelour, Stephen Burrough, and prosecuted by Pet, Iackman, and others, towards Noua  Zemla, Persia, Tartaria, as in Master Hakluits first Tome appeareth. Perhaps this Voyage of Cabot was the same which is mentioned by Master Robert Thorne in a Treatise of his written 1527. that his Father and Hugh Eliot, a Merchant of Bristow, were the Discouerers of the New-found-lands: and if they had followed their Pilots minde, the Lands of the West Indies had beene ours.
Anno 1500.Osor. de reb. Eman. l. 2. tit. Pet. Pasquali. 3. in N^orbe. Gasper Corteregalis, a Portugall minding new Discoueries, set forth a ship at his owne charge from Lisbone; and sayling farre North, at last came to a Land, which for the pleasantnesse thereof, he called Greene. The men, as he reported, were barbarous, brown-coloured, very swift, good Archers, clothed in Beasts skins. They liue in Caues or base Cottages, without any Religion, but obserue Sooth-sayings. They vsed Marriages, and were  very iealous. Petrus Pasqualigi in a Letter concerning this Voyage, sayth, they brought from thence a piece of a gilded Sword, which seemed to be of Italian workmanship: a child also amongst them ware two siluer-earings, which by the workmanship appeared to bee brought from these parts, perhaps belonging to some of Cabots company. Returning into Portugall hee sayled thitherward againe, Anno 1501. But what became of him, none can tell. His Brother Michael Corteregalis the next yeere set forth two ships to make search for his Brother; but he also was lost. The King Emanuel grieued herewith, sent to enquire of them; but all in vaine. Their Brother Vasco would haue put himselfe on this aduenture, but the King would not suffer him. The name Greene vpon this occasion was withered, and the land was calledCorterealis, or Lab^rador, extend^th from 60. degrees to the Riu^r of S. Lawrence. G. Bot. Ben* Terra Corteregalis. Thus farre Osorius. It reacheth, according to Boterus reckoning  to the 60. degree. Let vs come to our owne: For of SteuenSteph. Gomes. Gomes little is left vs but a Iest.
This Gomes hauing beene with Magellan a few yeeres before, in his Discouery of the South Sea, inlarged with hopes of new Streights, in the yeere 1525. set forth to search this Northerly passage. But finding nothing to his expectation, he laded his ship with slaues, and returned.Gaspar Ens, l. 2. c. 25. hist. Ind. At his returne, one that knew his intent was for the Moluccas by that way, inquiring what hee had brought home, was told Esclauos, that is, slaues. Hee fore-stalled with his owne imagination of Cloues, had thought it was said Clauos, and so posted to the Court to carry first newes of this Spicy Discouery, looking for a great reward: but the truth being knowne, caused hereat great laughter.
Dithmar Bleskens.Dithmar Bleskens in his Treatise of Island relateth, that in the yeere 900. the Nobilitie  of East Frisia and Breame found that Iland, and 200. leagues from thence discouered Groenland, which he saith was named per antiphrasin, of the contrary, for want of greene and pleasant Pastures: and that by Whirle-pooles, and misty darknesse, all their Nauie but one ship perished.
William Steere translated aWritten by Iuer Boty a principall man in the Bishops Cour^. Booke, Anno 1608. before translated out of the Norsh Language 1560. for the vse of Henry Hudson, in which is mention of diuers Townes of Groenland, as S^agenford, an Easterne Dorp or Village, and from thence more Easterly, Beareford, where was great fishing for Whales by the Bishops licence, the benefit redounding to the Cathedrall Church: Allabourg sound, where Fowle and Oxen were plentifull: Fe^dbrother  Hauen, where, in Saint Olaffs time, some were drowned, and their ship cast away. Crosses being yet seene on their Graue-stones: Corsehought, where, by authority from the Bishop, they hunted for White Beares: from hence Eastward nothing but Ice and Snow. Westward stood Kodesford, a Dorp well built with a great Church, Wartsdale, Peterswi^ke, Saint Olaffes Monastery, and another of Saint Benets Nuns: here were many warme-water^ in the Winter intolerably hot, and medicinable. There was also a Church of Saint Nicholas and many other Parishes and Villages, Desarts; Beares with red patches on their heads Hawkes, Marble of all colours, great Streames, Nuts, and Acornes in the Hils, Wheate, S^bles, Loshes, etc. He affirmeth that it is not so cold there, as in Island and Norway. But let vs obserue the Discoueries of our owne Countrimen.  



@. III. Discoueries by Sir MARTIN FROBISHER.
SIr Martin FrobisherSir Mart. Frob. deserueth the first place, as being the first that in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth, sought the Northwest Passage in three seuerall Voyages. The first whereof was written by ChristopherChrist. Hall. Dionise Settle. Thomas Ellis. George Best. Hall; the second, by Dionise Settle; the third by Thomas Ellis; and all in one Discourse by M. George Best: all which at large, the Reader may find in M. Hakluyts laborious Discouery of Discoueries. To speake  briefly what may best befit vs in our Pilgrimage: Sir Martin Frobisher sayled from Blackewall, Iune the fifteenth; and the seuenth of Iuly,1576. had sight of Frisland, but could not get on shore for the abundance of Ice, which was also accompanyed with an extreame fogge, as double gard to that Iland (vncertaine whether to fortifie it, or to imprison them.) The twentieth of Iuly he had sight of and high Land, which he namedQueenes Fore-land, and opposite thereto Hals Ile, in 62. degrees, 50. min. Queene Elizabeths Fore-land. Here was he much troubled with Ice: but sayling more Northerly, descryed another Fore-land, with a Great Gut, Bay, or Passage, which he entred, calling it Frobishers Straits, supposing it to be the diuision of Asia and America. Hauing entred threescore leagues, hee went on shore, and was encountred with mighty Deere, which ranne at him, with danger of his life. Here had he sight of the Saluages, which rowed to his ship in Boats of Seales skinnes,  with a Keele of wood within them, like a Spanish Shallop, saue onely they be flat in the bottome, and sharpe at both ends. They eat raw flesh and fish, or rather deuoured the same: they had long blacke haire, broad faces, flat noses, tawny of colour, or like an Oliue (which neyther Sunne or Wind, but Nature it selfe, imprinted on them, as appeared by their Infants, and seemeth to be the generall Liuery of America.) Their apparell was Scales skins: their women were painted or marked downe the cheekes and about the eyes with blue strakes. Th^se Saluages intercepted fiue of our men, and the Boat: Ours also tooke one of theirs, which they brought into England, where they arriued the second of OctoberGaspar Ens l. 2. Hist. Ind. Occid. c. 26. affirmeth that one Iohn Scoluc a Poloni^n, this yeere 1576 sayled beyond Frisland and Groneland, and thence to Estotiland and Labrador. 1576. Hee had taken possession of the Countrey in right of the Queene, and commanded his company to bring euery one somewhat, in witnesse of the same. One brought a piece of blacke stone, like  Sea-coale, which was found to hold Gold in good quantity. Whereupon a second Voyage was made the next yeere 1577. to bring Ore. And comming to those Straits in Iuly, found them in manner shut vp with a long Mure of Ice, which sometime indangered their ships, especially on the nineteenth of that moneth. They found a great dead fish, round like a Porcpis, twelue foot long, hauingSuch a horne was brought home two yeeres since, found on shore in Greenland by the Carpenter of Ionas Pooles ship 7. foote and a halfe long and sold since at Constantinople, reported to be good against poysons: and such a one was taken vp Anno 1588. in the Coast of Norfolke; and sold by an ignorant woman for 18. pence, which was also said to be effectuall against poysons, as I was told by M. Rob. Salmon of Leegh, who had a piece of it. a Horne of two yards, lacking two inches, growing out of the Snout, wreathed and straight, like a Waxe Taper, and might bee thought to be a Sea Vnicorne. It was broken in the top, wherein some of the Saylers said they put Spiders, which presently dyed. It was reserued as a Iewell by the Queenes commandement, in her Wardrobe of Robes, and is still at Windsore to bee seene. They went on shore, and had some encounter with the Inhabitants, which were of so fierce and terrible resolution, that finding themselues wounded, they leapt off the Rockes into the Sea, rather then they would fall into  the hands of the English. The rest fled. One woman, with her child, they tooke and brought away. They had taken another of the Sauages before. This Sauage in the ship seeing the Picture of his Countriman taken the yeere before, thought him to be aliue, and beganne to be offended, that he would not answere him, with wonder thinking, that our men could make men liue and dye at their pleasure. But strange were the gestures and behauiour of this man and the woman, when they were brought together; which were put into the same Cabbin, and yet gaue such apparant signes of shamefastnesse and chastity, as might bee a shame to Christians to come so farre short of them.
Where they could haue any Trade with the Sauages, their manner of Traffique was to lay  downe somewhat of theirs, and goe their way, expecting, that our men should lay downe somewhat in lieu thereof; and if they like of their Mart, they come againe and take it: otherwise, they take away their owne, and depart. They made signes, that their Catchoe, or King, was a man of higher stature then any of ours, and that he was carried vpon mens shoulders.
They could not learne what became of the fiue men they lost the yeere before: onely they found some of their apparell; which made them thinke they were eaten. They laded themselues with Ore, and so returned. And with fifteene Sayle the next yeere 1578. a third Voyage for Discouery was made by the said Captayne and Generall. Hee went on shore the twentieth of Iune on Frisland,Frisland is in length 25. leagues: the Southern part of it is in the latitude of 57. degrees and one second. Thomas Wi^^^ which was named by them West England, where they espyed certayne Tents and People like those of Meta Incognita. The people fled, and they  found in their Tents a boxe of small nayles, Red Herrings, and Boords of Firre-tree well cut, with other things artificially wrought: whereby it appeareth, that they are workmen themselues, or haue trade with others. Some of them were of opinion, This was firme land with
 Meta Incognita, or with Gronland; whereunto the multitude of Ilands of Ice, betweene that and Meta Incognita induced them. In departing from hence, the Salamander (one of their Ships) being vnder both her Courses and Bonets, happened to strike on a great Whale with her full stemme, with such a blow, that the Ship stoode still, and neither stirred forward nor backeward. The Whale thereat made a great and hideous noyse, and casting vp his body and tayle, presently sanke vnder water. Within two dayes they found a Whale dead, which they supposed, was this which the Salamander had stricken.
The second of Iuly they entred in with the Straits, the entrance whereof was barred with Mountaines of Ice, wherewith the Barke Dennis was sunke, to the hinderance of their proiects. For in it was drowned part of a house, which they had intended to erect there for habitation.  The men were saued. The other Ships were in very great danger, the Seas mustering Armies of ycie souldiers to oppresse them, vsing other naturall stratagems of Fogges and Snowes to further these cruell designes.
These ycie Ilands seeme to haue bin congealed in the winter further North, in some Bayes,It seemeth they are of fresh waters, becau^e the Ice is fresh, and the Sun melting the tops, causeth rils of fresh water to runne downe, which meeting together make a prettie streame. or Riuers, and with the Summers Sunne being loosed, and broken out of their naturall prisons, offer themselues to all outrages, whereto the swift Currents and cold Windes will conduct them. Strange it i^ to see their greatnesse, some not lesse then halfe a mile about, and fourescore fathomes aboue water, besides the vnknowne depth beneath, (the vsuall rule being, that onely the seuenth part is extant aboue the waues:) strange the multitude; strange the deformed shapes: if this be not more strange, that they sometimes saue with killing, and  suffer men to moore their Anchors on them, and to get vpon them to worke against them, for the safegard of their Ships: That bloody enemies should entertaine them with disports, to walke, leape, shout, fortie miles from any Land, without any Vessell vnder them (according to M. Bests Riddle) and a hundred and ten miles from Land, should present them with-running streames of fresh Waters, able to driue a Mill. The Flood was there nine houres, the Ebbe but three. A strong Current ranne Westwards. The people resemble much the Tartars, or rather the Samoeds, in apparell, and manner of liuing. It is colder here in 62. then 9. or 10. degrees more Northerly toward the Northeast, which (it seemeth) comes to passe by the Windes, East, and Northeast, which from the yce bring so intolerable a cold. The people are excellent Archers; a thing generall throughout America. Besides Seales-skins, they  vse the skinnes of Deere, Beares, Foxes, and Hares, for apparell, and the cases also of Fowles sowed together. They weare in Summer the hairy side outward; in Winter, inward; or else goe naked. They shoote at the fish with their darts. They kindle fire with rubbing one sticke against another. They vse great blacke Dogs, like Woolues, to draw their Sleds, and a lesse kinde to eate. They haue very thin beards. In the best of Summer, they haue Haile and Snow (sometimes a foote deepe, which freezeth as it falles) and the ground frozen three fathome deepe. They haue great store of Fowle, whereof our men killed in one day fifteen hundred. They haue thicker skins, and are thicker of Downe and Feathers then with vs, and therefore must be flayed. The Sunne was not absent aboue three houres and a halfe: all which space it was very light, so that they might see to write and reade.  
Hence is it, that those parts neere the Pole are habitable: the continuance of the Sunnes presence in their Summer, heating and warming with liuely cherishment all Creatures: and in the Winter, by his oblique motion, leauing so long a twilight; and the increased light ofThe Moone se^teth not nor the Sun in the Polar regions; being in Cancer. See the Relations of the Dutch wintering in Noua Z^mbla in the third part of my Pilgrimes, and W. He^y his reports of lighting Tobacco^ by the Sun with a Glasse at mid night. the Moone, the Sunnes great and diligent Lieutenant, the brightnesse of the Starres, and whitenesse of the Snow, not suffering them to be quite forlorne in darkenesse. The Beasts, Fowles and Fishes, which these men kill, are their houses, bedding, meat, drinke, hose, thread shooes, apparell, and sayles, and boates, and almost all their riches. Besides their eating all things raw, they will eate grasse and shrubs, like our kine; and morsels of Ice, to satisfy thirst. They haue no hurtfull creeping things but Spiders; and a kinde of Gnat is there very troublesome. Timber they haue none growing, but as the vndermining water doth supplant and  bring them from other places. They are great Inchanters. When their heads ake, they tye a great stone with a string into a sticke, and with certaine words effect, that the stone with all a mans force wil not be lifted vp, and sometimes seemes as light as a feather, hoping thereby to haue help. They made signes, lying groueling with their faces vpon the ground, making a noyse downward, that they worship the Deuill vnder them. There is no flesh or fish which they find dead (smel it neuer so filthily) but they wil eat it, without any other dressing. Their Deere haue skins like Asses, and feet large, like Oxen, which were measured 7. or 8. inches in breadth. There are no Riuers or running Springs, but such as the Sun causeth to come of snow. Sometimes they will perboyle their meate a little, in kettles made of beasts skins, with the bloud and water which they drinke; and lick the bloudy knife with their tongues: This licking  is the medicine also for their wounds. They seeme to haue traffike with other Nations: from whom they a small quantity of Iron. Their fire they make of heath and mosse. In their leather Boats they row with one oare faster, then we can in our Boats with all our oares.



@. IIII. Discoueries by IOHN DAVIS, GEORGE WEYMOVTH, and IAMES HALL to the North-West.
MAster Iohn DauisThe voyage of M Dauis written by Iohn Iames. Hac.. to. 3. p. 100 in the yeere 1585. made his first voyage for the North-west discouery, and in 64. degrees, and 15. minutes, they came on shore on an Iland, where they had sight of the Sauages, which seemed to worship the Sunne. For pointing  vp to the Sunne with their hands, they would strike their breasts hard with their hands: which being answered with like action of the English, was taken for a confirmed league, and they became very familiar. They first leaped and danced with a kind of Timbrel, which they strucke with a sticke. Their apparell was of beasts and birds skins, buskins, hose, gloues, etc. Some leather they had which was dressed like the Glouers leather. The 6. of August they discouered land in 66. deg. 40. min. They killed white Beares, one of whose fore-feet was fourteene inches broad, so fat, that they were forced to cast it away. It seemed they fed on the grasse, by their dung, which was like to Horse-dung, they heard Dogs howle on the shore, which were tame: They killed one with a Collar about his necke: hee had a bone in his pisle; these it seemed were vsed to the Sled, for they found two Sleds.
 The next yeere he made his second voyage, wherein hee found the Sauage people tract^ble. They are great Idolaters, and Witches. They haue many Images which they weare about them, and in their Boats. They found a graue, wherein were many buried couered with Seales skinnes, and a Crosse* laid ouer them. One of them made a fire of Turfs, kindled with the motion of a sticke in a piece of a boord, which had a hole halfe thorow, into which hee put many things, with diuers words and strange gestures: our men supposed it to be a sacrifice. They would haue had one of the English to stand in the smoke, which themselues were bidden to doe, and would not by any meanes; whereupon one of them was thrust in, and the fire put out by our men. They are very theeuish. They eate raw Fish. grasse and Ice: and drinke salt-water, Heere they saw a whirlewinde take vp the water in great quantitie, furiously  mounting it vp into the ayre, three houres together with little intermission. They found in 63. degrees, 8. minutes a strange quantitie of Ice in one entire masse, so bigge, that they knew not the limits thereof, very high, in forme of land, with Bayes and Capes like high-cliffe-land; they sent their Pinnasse to discouer it, which returned with information, that it was onely Ice. This was the 17. of Iuly, 1586. and they coasted it till the thirtieth of Iuly. In the 66. deg. 33. min. they found it very hot, and were much troubled with a stinging Fly, called Muskito. All the Lands they saw seemed to bee broken, and Ilands; which they coasted Southwards, till they were in foure and fifty and a halfe, and there found hop^ of a passage. In the same voyageHen. Morgan. he had sent the Sun-shine from him in 60. degrees which went to Iseland, and on the seuenth of Iuly had sight of the Gronland, and were hindered  from harbour by the Ice. They coasted it till the last of Iuly. Their houses neere the Sea-side were made with pieces of wood, crossed ouer with poles, and couered with earth. Our men played at foot-ball with them of the Iland.
The third voyage was performed the next yeere, 1587. wherein MrIohn Dauis in his Hydrographicall description. Dauis discouered to the 73. degree, finding the Sea all open, and forty leagues betweene land and land, hauing Groenland (which hath an Iland neere it to the West, for the loathsome view of the shore couered with snow, without wood, earth, or grasse to be seene, and the irkesome noise of the Ice, called Desolation) in 59. on the East, and America on the West. The Spanish Fleet, and the vntimely death of Master Secretarie Walsingham, (the Epitome and summary of Humane worthinesse) hindered the prosecution of these intended Discoueries.
 In the yeere 1602. Captain George Weymouth made a voyage of Discouery to the Northwest, with two Fly-boats, set forth by the Muscouy Company: saw the South part of Gronland, and had water in 120. fadome, blacke, as thick as puddle, and in a little space cleere, with many such enterchanges. The breach of the Ice made a noise as a thunder-clap, and ouerturning had sunke both their Vessels, if they had not with great diligence preuented it. They had store of Fogges, some freezing as they fell. In 68: deg. 53. min. they encountred an Inlet forty leagues broad, and sailed West and by South in the same, 100. leagues.
Iames Hall An. 1605. sailed to Groenland from Denmarke,Iames Hall his 4. voyage to Groenland. and had like encounters of Ice, yeelding in the breach no lesse noise, then if fiue Canons had beene discharged with people also like those, which in Frobishers Voyage are mentioned; they make sailes of guts  sowed together, for their fishing Boats, and deceiued the Seales with Seales-skin garments. Groenland is high, Mountainous, full of broken Ilands alongst the Coasts, Riuers nauigable, and good Bayes, full of fish. Betweene the Mountaines are pleasant Plaines and Vallies, such
 as a man would scarce beleeue.This Gronland is W stw^rd from Greenland 150 ^e^ues. In Greenland are no people nor wood. He saw store of Fowle; no beasts but blacke Foxes, and Deere. The people seemed a kind of Samoydes, wandering in Summer by companies for Hunting and Fishing, and remouing from place to place with their Tents and Baggage: they are of reasonable stature, browne, actiue, warlike, eate raw meat, or a little perboyled with bloud, Oyle, or a little water which they drinke: their apparell, beasts of fowles skinnes; the hairy or feathered side outward in Summer, in the Winter inward: their arrowes and darts with two feathers, and a bone-head: they haue no wood but drift: they worship the Sunne.
Anno 1606. He made a second Voyage thither: found their Winter houses built with Whales bones, couered with Earth: and Vaults two yards deepe, vnder the Earth, square. They call Groenland in their language Secanunga. Vp within the Land they haue a  King carried on mens shoulders. The next yeere he sailed thither the third time:This Voyage was written by Iosias Hubert. and in a fourth VoyageWritten by Will Baffin. Allen. Sallowes of Redriffe told me Hall was slaine in 76. degrees. 1612. was slaine there by a Sauage, in reuenge (as was thought) for some of the people before shipped from thence. They haue Hares white as snow, with long furre: Dogs which liue on Fish, whose pisles, as also of their Foxes, are bone. Their Summer worke is to dry their Fish on the Rocks. Euery one, both man and woman, haue each of them a Boat, made with long pieces of Firre, couered with Seales skins, sowed with sinewes or guts, about twenty foot long, and two and a halfe broad, like a shittle, so light, that one may carry many of them at once; so swift, that no ship is able with any winde to hold way with them, and yet vse but one oare which they hold by the middle, in the middest of their Boat,One of these Boats with the O^re is in Sir Thomas Smiths Hall in Philpot Lade. broad at both ends, wherewith they row forwards, and backwards at pleasure. Generally they  worship the Sunne, to which they pointed at our approach (saith Baffin) striking on their brests, and crying Ilyout, not comming neere till you doe same.Dauis mentions the same voy. 2. Io. Knight. They bury in out-lands on the tops of hils in the heapes of stones to preserue from the Foxes, making another graue hard by, wherein they place his Bow and Arrowes, Darts, and other his vtensils. They bury them in their apparell, and the cold keepes them from putrefaction.
Anno 1606. Mr Iohn Knights made a North-west voyage, lost his Ship, sunke with Ice, and was with three more of his company surprised by the Sauages: of whose language hee wrot a pretty Dictionary, which I haue seene with M. Hakluyt.


@. V.  Of King IAMES his Newland, alias, Greeneland, and of the Whale and Whale-Fishing.
I Will not heere beginne with records of Discoueries in these parts written two thousand yeeres since, out of which Mr Doctor Dee is reported to haue gathered diuers Antiquities, antiquated by Antiquitie, and rotten with age: nor to shew that King ArthurLambert Ap^. Sr H. Willoughby possessed as farre as Greeneland; nor that Sir Hugh Willoughby discouered hitherto, as some coniecture: but content my selfe with later Discoueries and Obseruations.  Much hath been spent both of Cost, Industrie, and Argument about finding a more compendious way to the Indies by the Northwest, and by the North-East, and by the North. Of the first somewhat hath been spoken. Of the second were the Voyages of Master Stephen Burrough, Pet, and Iacman, our Countrey-men, and of the Hollanders in the yeere 1594. and the three following before by vs mentioned in a duerL. ^4. c. 17. Nauig 3. Ger. de Vetr. place, as appertaining to Asia: for they found themselues by Astronomicall obseruation in a hundred and twelue Degrees fiue and twenty minutes of Longitude, and threescore and sixteene of Latitude in the place where they wintered. They had touched more Northerly in some parts (as is thought) of Greene-land, sailing along by the Land from fourescore Degrees eleuen minutes, vnto Noua Zemla. I omit their red Geese in one place of this Voyage, their azure-couloured  Ice in another place, and the losse of their Ship in the Ice which constrained them to set vp a house to Winter in that Land of Desolation. This building they beganne about the 27. of September (Stilo Nouo) the cold euen then kissing his New-come Tenants so eagerly, that when the Carpenters did but put a naile in their mouths (after their wont) the Ice would hang thereon, and the bloud follow at the pulling out. In December their fire could not heat them,This is also the effect of Charcole, wherewith in close roomes diuers hau^ beene smothered. their Sack was frozen, and each man forced to melt his share thereof before he could drinke it, their melted Beere drinking like water. They sought to remedie it with Sea-cole fire, as being hotter then the fire of Wood (which they had store of, though none there growing, by drifts) and stopped the chimney and doores to keep in the heat, but were suddenly taken with a swounding, which had soone consumed them, if they had not presently  admitted the aire to their succor. Their shooes did freeze as hard as horns on their feet, and as they sate within doores before a great fire, seeming to burne on the fore-side, behinde
 at their backs they were frozon white, the Snow meane-whiles lying higher then the house, which sometimes in clearer weather they endeuoring to remoue, cut out steps, and so ascended out of their house as out of a Vault or Seller. They were forced to vse (besides store of cloathes and great fires) stones heated at the fire and applyed to their feet and bodies, and yet were frozen as they lay in their Cabins: yea the cold not onely staid their Clocke, but insulted ouer the fire in some extremities, that it almost cast no heat; so that putting their feet to the fire, they burnt their hose, and discerned that also by the smell, before they could feele the heat. They supposed that a barrell of water would haue been wholly frozen in the space of one night, which you must interpret of their twelue houres glasse; for otherwise  they saw no Sunne after the third of Nouember to the 24. of Ianuary, reckoning by the new Calendar; a thing strange to be without the Sunne fifttie dayes before the Solstice, which happened after their account on December 23. and yet within forty one dayes after might see the vpper circle of the Sun-rising aboue the Horizon; which made great question, whether their Eyes had deceiued them, or the Computation of time in that long Night: which both being found otherwise by their obseruation and experience, caused no lesse wonder whether this timely approach should be attributed to the reflexion by theM. Scory told me that on the Pike of Tenariffe they might see the Sun an houre sooner by this meanes. water, or the not absolute roundnesse of the Earth in those parts, or the false accounting of the Solstice (or, which some affirme, the falshood of their calculations.) But I leaue this to Philosophers. Our Author affirmes, that when the Sunne had left them, they saw the Moone continually  both Day and Night, neuer going downe when it was in the highest Degree, the twi-light also remaining many dayes, and againe they might see some day-light sixteene dayes before they saw the returne of the Sunne. The Beares which had held them besieged, and often endangered them, forsooke them and returned with the Sunne; the white Foxes all that while visited them, of which they tooke many whose flesh was good Venison to them, and their skins in the linings of th^ir Caps good remedies against that extremitie of Cold. As for their feet, they vsed Pattents of wood, with sheepe-skinnes aboue, and many socks or soles vnderneath: they vsed also shooes of Rugge and Felt. These Beares were very large and cruell, some of them yeelding skins thirteene foot long, and a hundred pounds of fat, which serued them for Oyle in their Lampes, the flesh they durst not eate; some of them forfeiting  their whole skinnes after they had eaten of the Liuer of one of these eaters, which deuoure any thing, not sparing their owne kinde. For the Hollanders hauing killed one Beare, another carried it a great way ouer the rugged Ice in his mouth in their sight, and fell to eating i^; they made to him with their weapons, and chased him from his purchase, but found it halfe eaten, and then foure of them could scarcely carry the other halfe, when as the whole body had been very lightly carried in his fellowes mouth. As for the thin Diet which these Hollanders endured, and other discommodities, together with their returne in two open Scutes. wherein they sailed aboue a thousand miles, after ten moneths continuance in this desolate habitation, their dangers in the Ice which somewhat besieged them like whole Tents, Townes, and Fortifications; and other the particulars of this Voyage, I referre to  the Author himselfe. Here I remember thus much for Greene-lands sake, on which in this Nauigation ^hey are said to haue touched. How euer that be, they continued no trade nor Discouerie thither, till the English diuers yeeres after had made a new Discouerie, and found there a profitable Whale-^^shing.
In the yeere 1607. H^n. Hudson discou^^ed these parts to the Latitude of fourescore,Ex M.S.W. Baffin. there naming a point of Land, Hackluyts Head-land; which name is still beareth. And Ion^s P^^la in the yeere 1610. was set forth by the Muscouy Company in the Amitie, and discouered diuers Sounds and Harbours here, with the Sea-Horses he killed, and other things found on shore, giuing such good Content to the Aduenturers, that He was by them employed the next y^ere in the Elizabeth, with Master ^teuen Be^^ot in the Mary Margaret, both which  Ships were vnfortunately ^^st away; the Men and part of the goods were brought home by Master Marmaduke then there in a Ship of Hull.
In the yeere 1612. were set forth three Ships from Holland, and one from Biscay, all hauing English Pilots, besides two sent thither by the Company, called the Sea-Hors^ and th^ Whole, vnder the Masters before mention^^. In the yeere 16^3. many Ships were thither sent from France, Bi^kay, Holland, so that the Company addressed thither seuen warlike ships vnder the Command of Master Beniamin Ioseph, who without bloudshed disappointed those Strangers, ready to reape that which others had sowne, and either had not at all discouered, or wholly giuen ouer the businesse. The next yeere 1614. eleuen good Ships, and two Pinasses, were employed to Greeneland, and three more not then ready, appointed  to follow vnder the same Generall, which Voyage is in my hands, communicated to mee by my industrious Friend, a skilfull Mariner and Discouerer both in these and other parts, William Baffin, entertained in this Fleet. But the particulars would be (howsoeuer profi^^ble
 to our Mariner) tedious to our ordinarie Reader. They then discouered wel-neere to 81. For beyond that degree, our Author beleeues not that any hath beene. The names of diuers places, as Saddle Iland, Barren Iland. Beare Iland, Red Goose Iland, all betwixt 80. and 81. and Sir Tho: Smiths Inlet, Maudlin Sound, Faire Hauen, Sir Thomas Smiths Bay, Ice Sound, Bell Sound, with other places on or neere the Greater Ile or supposed Continent, I forbeare to recite, as not intending to instruct the Mariner so much as the Scholler. This yeere 1616. were sent thither ten ships, which killed aboue a hundred Whales, as Master Thomas Sherwin imployed therein, related to me. Greeneland is now almost altogether discouered to bee an Iland, or rather many Ilands and broken grounds.
In the Greeneland voyage 1611. from Cherry Iland toward Greeneland, they met with  a banke of Ice fortie leagues long: and ranne almost alongst another a hundred and twenty Leagues. At their first comming, all was couered with Snow, at their departure the tops of the Hils and Plaines had receiued a new liuerie of greene Mosse, and a little grasse. The Aire was mistie like night. They found many fat Deere, many white Beares, with white, gray, and dunne Foxes. There was a bird called an Allen, which beats the other birds till they vomit their prey for him to deuoure: and then dismisseth them with little meat in their bellies, or feathers on their backs. They finde Morses, Sea-Vnicornes hornes, white Partriches, Wilde-geese, but not a bush or tree.
In my Pilgrims I haue published many Voyages, and letters of Greenland, written by Ionas Pooley, Rob. Fotherby. Tho. Edge, Will. Hely, Robert Salmon, Thomas Sherwin, Iames Beuersham, Io. Chambers, I. Catcher, W. Goodlard, etc. Also to Cherry Iland in 74. by Ionas Pooley, Will. Garden. etc. and to other Northerne parts by Hudson, Playse, Widhouse, etc. to which I referre the more industrious Reader.I might heere adde diuers Voyages to Cherry Iland, where they haue thousands of Morses, the Teeth and Oyle whereof yeeld them no small commoditie. There also are many  Beares. I might here recreate your wearied eyes with a hunting spectacle of the greatest chase which Nature yeeldeth, I meane, the killing of the Whale. When they espy him on the top of the water, (which he is forced to for to take breath) they row toward him in a Shallop, in which the Harponier stands ready, with both his hands to dart his Harping-iron, to which is fastened a line of such length, that the Whale (which suddenly, feeling himselfe hurt, sinketh to the bottome, may carry it down with him, being before fitted, that the Shallop be not therewith indangered; comming vp againe they againe strike him with Launces made for that purpose about twelue foot long, the iron eight therof, and the blade eighteene inches: the Harping-iron principally seruing to fasten him to the Shallop: and thus they hold him in such pursuit, till after streames of water, and next that of blood, cast vp into the  Aire and Water (as angry with both Elements, which haue brought thither such weak hands to his destruction) he at last yeeldeth his slaine carkasse as meed to the conquerors. They tow him to the Ship with two or three Shallops made fast to one another: and then floating at the sterne of the Ship, they cut the blubber or fat from the flesh, in pieces three or foure foot long, which after at shore are cut smaller, and boiled in coppers: which done, they take them out and put them into wicker baskets, which are set in Shallops halfe ful of water, into which the Oyle runneth, and is thence put into buts. This Whale-fishing is yeerely now vsed by our men in Greeneland, with great profit. The ordinarie length of a Whale is sixty foot, and not so huge as Olaus hath written, who maketh the Mors also as bigge as an Elephant.
The proportion of this huge Leuiathan deserues description, as one of the greatest Wonders  of the Lord in the deep^, whereon Himselfe so much insisteth (Iob 41.12.) that he will not conceale his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion. The Whale that here we speake of, is the Great Bay-Whale: for there are many other kinds: the Tromp^ which hath two Trunkes or breathing holes on his head (whereas the Bay-Whale hath but one) whose braines are said to be the Sperma Cete; the Inbarte, which hath a Fin on his backe dangerous to boats, exceeding swift, and little profitable; b^sides other kinds. This is the most simple and vsefull; the greater and fatter, the more easily taken. His head is the third part of him; his mouth (O hellish wid^ (sixteene foot in the opening; and yet out of that belly of Hell yeelding much to the ornaments of our womens backs; the Whale-bones or Finnes being no other then the rough and inner part of the mouth, closing in the shutting thereof, as the fingers of  both hands within each other. Of these Finnes are fiue hundred from the length of fourteene foot or more in lesse and lesse proportions; hee hath no teeth, his meat hee sucketh: his tongue i^ monstrous great, of deformed forme like a Wool-sack^, about eight Tunne weight, and one part thereof vsed to this purpose, yeeldeth from sixe to eleuen Hogs-heads of Oyle. His food (that Nature might teach the Greatest, to be content with little* and that Greatnesse may be maintained without Rapine, as in the Elephant and Whale, the Greatest of Land-Creatures, and Sea-monsters) is grasse and weeds of the Sea, and a kinde of water-worme like a Beetle, whereof the Fins in his mou^h hang full, and sometimes little birds; all which striking the water with his Tayle, and making ^n Eddie, hee gapes and receiueth into his mouth, neither is any thing else (Master Sherwin hath seene them opened, and opened  this vnto me) found in their bellies. This Great head hath little eyes like Apples, very little bigger then the Eyes of an Oxe, and a little throat, not greater th^n for a mans fift to enter;
 and that with huge bones on each side, not admitting it to stretch wider. His body is round, fourteene or sixteene foot thicke: his Pisle hangs from him as a Beasts: in Generation they draw to shallow waters neere the shore, and in the Act ioyne belly to belly as is also said of the Elephant. In their engendering season, much of that matter floteth on the water. They are Swallow-tailed, the extremes being twenty foot distant. They haue but one yong at a time, which is brought forth as in beasts, (Master Sherwin hath seene them in the belly being ripped) about the bignesse, but longer, of a Hogs-head: The Female hath two brests and teats, with white milke in them, not bigger then a mans head, wherewith she suckleth the yong, whereof she, as the Mors also, is very tender. They killed one, and could not get the  yong one from it. There hath been made seuen and twenty Tunne, and a pipe of Oyle out of one Whale: ordinarily sixteene Tunnes, but much is wasted for haste in that store. The English are growne as expert in this businesse as the Biscainer. They neuer lost man in this action, but one onely this last yeere.


@. VI. Of HVDSONS discoueries and death.
HEnry Hudson, 1607. discouered further North toward the Pole, then perhaps any before him. He found himselfe in 80. deg. 23. minutes, where they felt it hot, and dranke water to coole their thirst. They saw land (as they thought) to 82. and further: on the shore they had Snow, Morses teeth, Deeres hornes, Whale-bones, and footing of other Beasts, with a streame of fresh-water. The next yeere 1608. he set forth on a Discouery to the North-east, at which time they met, as both himselfe and Iuet haue testified, a Mermaid in the Sea, seene by Thomas Hils, and Robert Rainer. Another voyage he made 1609. and coasted New-found-land, and thence along to Cape Cod. His last and fatall voyage was 1610. which I mentioned in my former edition, relating the same as Hesselius Gerardus had guided me, by his card and reports, who affirmeth that he  followed the way which Captaine Winwood had beforc searched by Lumleys inlet, in 61. degrees, so passing thorow the strait to 50. etc, But hauing since met with better instructions, both by the helpe of my painfull friend Master Hakluit,He communicated to me Hudsons abstract, Th. Wid. house, Abacuk Prickes, of thi^ voyage. (to whose-labours these of mine are so much indebted) and specially from Him, who was a speciall setter forth of the voyage, that learned and industrious Gentleman Sir Dudley Digges (how willingly could I heere lose my selfe in a parenthesis of due praises? to whom these studies haue seemed to descend by inheritance in diuers Descents, improued by proper industry, employed to publike good both at home and in Discoueries and Plantations abroad, and for my particular! but why should I vse words, vnequall pay to him, vnequall stay to thee?) from Him, I say, so great a furtherer of the North-west Discouerie, and of your Discouerer the poore Pilgrim and his  Pilgrimage, hauing receiued full relations, I haue beene bold with the Reader to insert this Voyage more largely.
In the yeare 1610. Sir Tho. Smith,Sir Tho. Smith. Sir Dudley Digges, and Master Iohn Wostenholme, with other their friends, furnished out the said Henry Hudson, to try if through any of those Inlets, which Dauis saw, but durst not enter, on the Westerne side of Fretum Dauis, any passage might be found to the other Ocean called the South-Sea. There Barke was named the Discouerie. They passed by Island, and saw Mount Heela cast out fire (a noted signe of foule weather towards; others conceiue themselues and deceiue others with I know not what Purgatorie fables hereof confuted by Arngrin IonasA. Io. Crym^gaea. an Islander, who reproueth this and many other dreames related by Authors, saying, that from the yeere 1558. to 1592. it neuer cast  forth any flames) they left the name to one harbour in Island, Lousy Bay: they had there a Bath hot enough to scald a fowle. They raised Gronland the fourth of Iune, and Desolation after that; whence they plyed North-west among Ilands of Ice, whereon they might runne and play, and filled sweet water out of Ponds therein: some of them a ground in sixe or seuen score fadome water, and on diuers of them Beares, and Partriches. They gaue names to certaine Ilands, of Gods mercy, Prince Henries forland, K. Iames his Cape, Q. Annes Gape. One morning in a Fogge they were carried by a set of the Tide from the N. E. into one of the Inlets aboue mentioned, the depth whereof and plying forward of the Ice, made Hudson hope it would proue a through-fare. After he had sailed herein by his computation 300. leagues West, he came to a small strait of two leagues ouer, and very deepe water, through which h^  passed betweene two Headlands, which he called, that on the South, Cape Wostenholme, the other to the N.W. Digges Iland in deg. 62. 44. minutes, into a spacious Sea, wherein he sayled aboue a hundred leagues South, confidently proud that he had won the passage.

Hudsons wintering.But finding at length by shole water that he was embayed, he was much distracted therewith, and committed many errours, especially, in resoluing to winter in that desolate place, in such want of necessarie prouision. The third of Nouember, he moored his Barke in a small Coue, where they had all vndoubtedly perished, but that it pleased God to send them seuerall kinds of kinds of Fowle; they killed of white Partridges aboue a hundred and twentie doozen: These left them at the Spring, and other succeeded in their Place, Swan, Goose, Teale,A strange tree. Ducke, all easie to take; besides the blessing of a Tree, which in December blossomed, with leaues greene and yellow, of an Aromaticall sauour, and being boyled, yeelded an Oyly substance, which proued an excellent Salue, and the decoction being drunke, proued as wholsome a Potion, whereby they were cured of the Scorbute, Sciaticas, Crampes, Conuulsions  and other diseases which the coldnesse of the Climate bred in them. At the opening of the yeere also, there came to his Ships side such aboundance of Fish of all sorts, that they might therewith haue fraught themselues for their retur^e, if Hudson had not too desperately pursued the Voyage, neglecting this oportunitie of storing themselues with fish, which hee committed to the care of certaine carelesse, dissolute Villaines, which in his absence conspired against him; in few dayes, the fish all forsooke them. Once a Sauage visited them, who for a knife, glasse, and beads giuen him, returned with Beuers skins, Deeres skins, and a Sled. At Hudsons returne, they set sayle for England. But in few dayes, their victuals being almost spent, and hee out of his despaire, letting fall some words of setting some on shore, the former Conspirators (the chiefe whereof, was Hen. Greene, none of  their allowed Company,These were the worst, or weakest of the Company. but taken in by Hudson himselfe; and one Wilson) entred his Cabin in the night, and forced him the Master, together with his sonne Iohn Hudson, Tho. Widowes, Arn. Ludlo, Sidraoh Fauor, Ad. Moore, Hen. King, Mic. Bute, to take Shallop and seeke their fortune. But see what since^itie can doe in the most desperate tryals: One Philip Staffe, an Ipswich man, who according to his name, had beene a principall staffe and stay to the weaker and more enfeebled courages of his Companions in the whole action, lightening and inlightening their drooping darkened spirits, with sparkes from his owne resolution; their best Purueyor, with his Peece on shore, and both a skilfull Carpenter and lusty Mariner on boord; when hee could by no perswasions, seasoned with teares, diuert them from their diuellish designes, notwithstanding, they entreated him to stay with them, yet  chose rather to commit himselfe to Gods mercy in the forlorne Shallop, then with such Villaines to accept of likelier hopes.
A floud from the West, a very proble argument of an open passage to the South Sea. And so are their weapons, and arts, being farre beyond other Sauages.A few dayes after, their victuals being spent, the ship came aground at Digges Iland, and so continued diuers houres, till a great floud (which they by this accident tooke first notice of) came from the Westward, and set them on flote. Vpon the Cliffes of this Iland they found aboundance of Fowles tame, whereof they tooke two or three hundred, and seeing a greas long Boat with forty or fifty Sauages vpon the shore, they sent on Land; and for some of their toyes, had Deeres skinnes well dressed, Morse-teeth, and some few Furres. One of our men went on land to their Tents, one of theirs remaining for hostage, in which Tents they liued by hoords, men, women, and children; they are bigge-boned, broad-faced,  flat-nosed, and small-footed, like the Tartars: their Apparell of skinnes, but wrought all very handsomely, euen Gloues and Shooes. The next morning, Greene would needs goe on shore with some of his chiefe companions, and that vnarmed, notwithstanding, some aduised and intreated him the contrary. The Sauages entertained him with a cunning ambush, and at the first onset shot this mutinous Ringleader into the heart, (where first, those those Monsters of treacherie and bloody crueltie, now payed with the like, had beene conceiued) end Wilson his Brother in ^uill, had the like bloody inheritance, dying swearing and cursing: Perse, Thomas, and Moter, dyed a few dayes after of their wounds. Euery where can Diuine Iustice finde Executioners.
See his Relation of the third part of my Pilgrims with oth^^s many for these parts.The Boat by Gods blessing, with some hurt men escaped in this manner. One Abacuck^  Pricket, (a seruant of Sir Dudley Digges, whom the Mutiners had saued, in hope to procure his Master, to worke their pardon) was left to keepe the Shallop, where he sate in a gowne, sicke and lame, at the sterne: vpon whom, at the instant of the ambush, the leader of all the Sauages leapt from a Rocke, and with a strange kinde of weapon,Such they vse in Iaua. indented, broad and sharpe, of bright steele, riueted into a handle of Morse-tooth, gaue him diuers cruell wounds, before hee could from vnder his gowne draw a small Scottish-Dagger, wherewith at one thrust into his side, he killed this Sauage, and brought him off with the Boat, and some of the hurt company that got to him by swimming. Being got aboord with a small weake and wounded company, they made from this Iland vnto the Northerne Continent, where they saw a large opening of the Sea North-West-ward, and had a great floud, with such a large  Billow, as they say, is no where but in the Ocean. From hence, they made all possible haste home-wards, passing the whole Straits, and so home, without euer striking sayle or any other
 let, which might easily haue made it impossible. For their best sustenance left them, was Sea-weeds fryed with Candles ends; and the skins of the Fowles they had eaten. Some of their men were starued, the r^st all so weake, that onely one could lye along vpon the Helme and steere. By Gods great goodnesse, the sixt of September 1611. they met with a Fisherman of Foy, by whose meanes they came safe into England.


@. VII.  Of BVTTONS and BAFFINS late Discoueries.
THis newes so incouraged the Aduenturers,Sir Th. Button is very confident of a passage by the North West into the South sea, as appeares by his Relations in the end of rhe fourth Booke of the third part of my Pilgrims. Where also Mr Brigs his Map, the letters of Mr Lock, and Iuan de Fuca, the testimonie of Th. Cowles, etc. further proue the same. that by the gracious assistance of that Starre of the North (Illustrious Sonne of Britaines brightest Sunne, and in his presence shining with beauteous beames in this, and euen to that further Hemisphere; but with speedier setting, raised aboue the Sunne, and Spheres, and Starres, to discouer the Straits, and passage to a better World, there to shine with light vnspeakeable, in the fruition of that light inaccessible, with the Father of Lights and Sunne of Righteousnesse: For how could a worldly Kingdome, though the Kingdome of the World, deserue so good, so great a spirit  to rule it? But these my words are too short an Epitaph; his owne Name, euen after death, speakes more, and proclaimeth in a few Letters al humane Greatnesse, Great Britaines great hope, PRINCE HENRY) the Aduenturers I say (whom my weaker eyes, dazled with thi^ greater Light, could scarce recouer) by this Princely assistance, pursued the action in more Royall fashion, with greater shipping, vnder the command of a Worthy Sea-man, seruant to Prince HENRY, Captaine Thomas Button, whose Discouerie of a great Continent, called by him New-Wales, and other accidents of his Voyage, I haue not seene: onely I haue seene a Chart of those discouered places, and I heare that he passed Hudsons Straits, and l^auing Hudsons Bay to the South, sailed aboue two hundred Leagues South-West-Ward, ouer a Sea aboue fourescore fathoms deepe, without sight of Land, which at length, hee found  to be another great Bay. And after much misery of sicknesse in his wintering, notwithstanding he was forced to quit the great ship, he^ beat and searched the whole Bay, with very great industrie, euen backe againe, almost to Digges Iland: neere which hee found the comming in of the great and strong tyde from the North-West,This was after found otherwise, the error growing by his meeting of Bylet, and asking of the floud at this Iland, which hee said was eight of the clock, wherea^ it was about eleuen, Baffin which feeds both those huge Bayes. This seemed strange, that in this Voyage, as he searched many Leaguee East and We^t, he found the variation of the Compasse to rise and fall in an admirable proportion, as if the true Magneticall Pole might be discouered.
The comming in of the floud from the Northwest, giuing them hopes of a passage, in March 1614. Captaine Gibbins was employed on this Discouerie, in the Discouerie (so was the ship called) but withous any great discouerie that I haue heard of. Persisting in their purpose, the  next yeereEx Relat. W. Baff. 1615. Robert Byleth, one which had beene in three former Voyages, was sent forth in that ship as Master, and William Baffin his Mate, with foureteene other Men and two Boyes; which leauing England about the latter end of March, stayed at Silly till the seuenth of April, and were forced to put-backe to Padstow in Cornwall: but weighing Anchor on the nineteenth, on the sixt of May, saw land on the Coast of Groen-land, on the East-side of Cape Farewell. On the first of Iun^, they came into a good Harbour, on the N. W. side of the Iland of Resolution (which is at the entrance into Hudsons Strait) in 61. degrees, 45. minutes. On the eight, they came to Sauage Ilands (in 62. degrees, 30. minutes, threescore Leagues from the entrance) so called of some people, they found in a Canow; they were at their Tents also, and found among other things a little bagge with many small images  of men therein, and one of a woman with a child at her backe. The Tents were couered with Seales skinnes, and about them some forty Dogs ranne vp and downe, most of them muzzled, as bigge as Mungrel-Ma^^iues, of a brended blacke colour, looking almost like Wolues: these they vse to draw their sleds ouer the ice, with collars and furniture fitting, their sleds also being shod or lined with fish-bones. The people are like those in Groenland, but not so neat and ciuill, ranging vp and downe, as their fishing is in season; vncertaine where they keepe in Winter. The Master was confident in this and other places, that the floud came from the West, which Baffin saith, by the floating of the ice, he obserueth on land, to be contrarie: onely the Islands cause by their diuers points, differing Sects and Eddie. On the two and twentieth of Iune, He obserued the Longitude, hauing faire sight of the Sunne  and Moone, and found himselfe by Astronomicall account, 74. degrees, 5. minutes West from the Meridian of London: which if some studious Mariners would practise in their remote Voyages, wee should soone haue a farre more perfect Geographie. I omit their icie
 sieges, sometimes scarsly leauing them space to dip a paile of water. They called one place in 65. latitude, and 85. degrees and 20. minutes long. Cape Comfort, for the hopes they apprehended of a passage, which soone they found to be frustrate. Hence they passed to Sea-horse Cape, (so named of the plenty of Morses) and fifteene leagues thence to Notingham Iland, and thence to Digs hisAt this Ile are store of fowles called Willockes, whereof they might haue killed thousands. Iland, in all those places obseruing the floud come from the South-east, Captaine Button and Hudsons men being all deceiued, as this our Authour affirmeth: other Ilands sometimes keeping off the force of the tyde, or by eddies, causing an obscurity and their errour. We wi^l therefore leaue that spacious Sea called Buttons Bay, with the great Ilands, and some places not yet perfectly discouered, within and beyond that Strait of Hudson, and come to Baffins Bay, so discouered to be.  
This l^st yeere 1616.1616.  at the charges of the worthy Aduenturers before mentioned, in the same ship,Sir T. Smith. Sir D. Digs. M. Wostenholme. Ald. Iones, etc. by the same Master,W. Baffin. the same, both their Pilot and ours. The first land they saw, after their departure from England, was in Fretum Dauis on the Coast of Groenland, in 65. degrees 20. minutes. On the fourteenth of May, where they saw people. But they plyed to the North, till they were in 70. degrees 20. minutes. The people fled from them. Here they tooke in fresh water, but doubted the passage, because the tydes were small, not aboue eight or nine foot, and vncertayne, the floud from the South. On the six and twentieth day, they found a dead Whale floting, and got from the roofe of her mouth 160. of those synnes or Whale-bones, but could not get the rest by reason of foule weather following. On the first of Iune, they put in among diuers Ilands; the people forsooke their Seale-skin-tents and  fled; some women they found, whom they kindly intreated, giuing them pieces of Iron, for which they returned Seales skins and the fat or blubber of them: as for our meate, tasting, they would not swallow it. They called the place the Womens Ilands,Womens Ilands. in 72. degrees and 45. minutes, the floud comes from the South: and the most of their food is the flesh of Seales dryed and eaten raw: they cloth themselues with the skins, whereof they also make couerings for their Tents and Boats, dressing them very well. The Women differ in their apparell from the Men, razing their skins with sharpe Instruments, and putting thereon an indelible blacke colour, marking their faces with diuers blacke lines. They haue a kind of deuotion to the Sunne, which continually they will point vnto, and strike their hand on their brest. Crying, Ylyout. They bury their dead on the side of the Hils where they liue, which  is commonly on small Ilands, making a pile of stones ouer them, yet not so close but that the corps may be discerned the piercing ayre keeping them from stinke: their Dogges also they bury in the same manner. They came to other Ilands in 74. degrees, 4. minutes, which vse to be much frequented with people in the latter part of the yeere, as it seemeth by the houses made of stones and turfe, round like Ouens, with doores to the South; but they were not yet come, Iune the ninth. The floud ariseth not aboue fiue or sixe foot; the ebbe runnes stronger by the abundance of melted Snow.
On the fifteenth day, in the latitude of 73. degrees 45. minutes, came forty two of the Inhabitants to them in Boats, and gaue them Seales skins, and many pieces of the bone or horne of the Sea-Vnicorne, and shewed them pieces of Morses teeth. They receiued in exchange  small pieces of Iron, Glasse, Beades, and the like: thus they did foure times: the place they called Horne Sound.
On the third of Iuly, they passed by a faire Cape in 76. degrees 35. minutes, which they named Sir Dudley Digs his Cape. Twelue leagues beyond is Wolstenholme Sound, a fit place for killing of Whales. Proceeding a little further, they found themselues embayed. One place they called Whale Sound of their abundance in 77. degrees and 30. minutes. Hakluyts Iland is neere,Strange Variation of the Compasse. and Sir Thomas Smiths Sound in 78. degrees. The Compasse there varieth aboue 56. degrees to the Westward, so that a North-east and by East of the Compasse is the true North; which hath not beene obserued so much varied in any part of the World. Putting off to the West side of the Bay, they gaue names to Alderman Iones his Sound, and that of Sir Iames  Lancaster: and in their returne recouered their sicke men, by Scuruy-grasse or Cochlearia (which they found on a little Iland in great plenty) boyl^d in Beere, and eaten in Sallads with Orpine and Sorrell, and so returned home: Thus wee see, Fretum Dauis is no passage but a Bay, and vncertaine, what that of Hudson is, the most of which is discouered impassible. Yet, Hopes are not quite extinct: we must expect Gods pleasure, and future Discoueries for this passage. It seemes that most of all those Seas in the North parts beyond New-foundland are intermixed with Ilands, a Maze and Labyrinth to the Discouerer. In this Voyage and Bay they saw many of those fishes called Sea-Vnicornes, such as wee haue mentioned in Sir Martin Frobishers Nauigation: some of which fishes are twelue or sixteene foot long, the horne seeming to hold the proportion of two thirds in length to their bodies: and of these,  it seemes are those in Venice and other places, reserued as great Iewels. Greater Iewels are those Merchants and Mariners, which to the glory of our Nation, spare no cost; and feare no
 danger in these their attempts: Resolute, gallant, glorious attempts! which thus seeke to tame Nature, where she is most vnbridled, in those Northeasterly, Northwesterly and Northerly Borders (where she shewes her selfe alAs borderers are most vnruly and l^wlesse: so in these out-borders of the World, the power of Natures greatest Offi^ers, the Sun, etc. is least seene. Borderer indeed) and to subdue her to that gouernment and subiection, which God ouer all blessed for euer, hath imposed on all sensible creatures to the nature of Man, resembling in one Image and abridgment, both God and the World, consisting of a spirituall and bodily, visible and inuisible subsistence. How shall I admire your Heroike courage, yee Marine Worthies beyond all names of worthinesse? that neyther dread so long, eyther presence or absence of the Sunne; nor those foggie mysts, tempestuous winds, cold blasts, Snowes and Haile in the Ayre: nor the vnequall Seas, which might amaze  the hearer, and amate the beholder, where the Tritons and Neptunes selfe would quake with chilling feare, to behold such monstrous Icie Ilands, renting themselues with terrour of their owne massines, and disdayning otherwise both the Seas souereigntie, and the Suns hottest violence, mustering themselues in those watery Plaines, where they hold a continual ciuill warre, and rushing one vpon another, make windes and waues giue backe; seeming to rent the eares of others, whiles they rent themselues with crashing and splitting their congealed Armours: nor the riggid ragged face of the broken Lands, sometimes towring themselues in a lofty height, to see if they can find refuge from those snowes and colds that continuall beate them, somtimes hiding themselues vnder some hollow Hilles or Cliffes, sometimes sinking and shrinking into Valleyes, looking pale with snowes,  and falling in frozen and dead swounds;These things agree with the Relations of those parts, which tell of Earthquakes, breaking of Cliffes, etc. Boterus a zealous and slanderous Catholike, vseth these disgracefull speeches of this discouery. Ma pare, che la Natura si fia opposta a gli heretici, e a dissegni loro. pare. 1 lib. 5. sometimes breaking their necks into the Sea, rather imbracing the waters, then the Ayres, cruelty; and otherwhile with horrible Earthquakes, in heat of indignation shaking asunder, to shake off this cold and heauy yoke. Great God, to whom all names of greatnesse are little, and lesse then nothing, let me in silence admire and worship thy greatnesse are little, and lesse then nothing, let mee in silence admire and worship thy greatnesse, that in this little Heart of man (not able to serue a Kite for a a breake-fast) hast placed such greatnesse of spirit, as the World is too little to fill: only Thy selfe the Prototype, and Samplar of this Modell, canst with thine owne selfe, becomming all in all vnto vs, fill and more then satisfie. Thee I beseech, to prosper in this and like attempts, this Nation of ours, that as in greater light then to Others, thou hast giuen vs thy  Sonne, so with him thou wilt giue all things; euen this among other blessings that thy Virgin Truth, by Virginian Plantation, or Northerly Discouery, may triumph in her conquests of Indian infidelity, maugre the brags of that Adulteresse, that vaunteth her selfe to be the only Darling of God and Nature.



CHAP. IIII. Of Newfoundland, Noua Francia, Arambec, and other  Countries of America, extending to Virginia.

@. I. English Discoueries and Plantations in Newfoundland.
LEauing those vnknowne and frozen Lands and Seas; (although there is yet knowne no frozenThe Northerne Seas may be called frozen, in respect of the Icie Ilands, which by their freshnesse manifest themselues to proceed of fresh waters: no experience yet shewing nor reason conuincing, that the ocean (alway salt and mouing) is any where frozen: as my Learned Friend M. Brigs (a great Mathematician) also affirmeth, and Merula Cos. l. 3. c. 5. Sea, otherwise then as you haue heard) let vs draw somwhat  neerer the Sunne, gently marching, as the situation of Regions shall direct vs, lest if we should suddenly leape from one extremitie to another, wee should rather exchange then auoid danger. And here we haue by Land Saguenay, and many Countries of Canada, which the French haue stiled by a new name of New France: and by the Sea the Ilands many in number, and much frequented for their plenty of fish, commonly called Newfoundland; which name some ascribe to an Ile, others to diuers Ilands, and broken Lands which the French call Bacalos, vpon the gulfe and entrance of the great Riuer called Saint Lawrence, in Canada. This Riuer someEdw. Haies. Hak. to. 3. 9. 152. call the Strait of the three Brethren, someGi. Bot. Ben. Saint Lawrence, and othersIaq. Cart. l. 2. c. 11. Canada. It farre exceedeth any Riuer of the elder World. It beginneth, sayth Iaques Cartier, beyond the Iland of Assumption,  ouer against the high Mountaynes, of Honbuedo, and of the seuen Ilands. The distance
 from one side to the other, is about fiue and thirtie, or forty leagues. In the middest it is aboutOther say 200. two hundred fathome deepe. There are great store of Whales and Sea-horses. From the entrance vp to Hochelaga is three hundred leagues. Many Ilands are before it, offering of their good nature to be mediators betweene this haughty streame and the angry Ocean: many others all alongst his passage he holdeth in his louing vnlouely lap, washing and hugging them with his ruder imbracings. The former are vsually frequented, and were first discouered by the English, the other by the French. Of Sebastian Cabot his proceeding this way is spoken already.
Robert ThorneRob. Thorne in M. Hakluyts voiages, ^. ^. p. 21. 9 in a Treatise of his before mentioned, affirmeth that his Father, and one Master Eliot were the Discouerers of the Newfoundland: and exhorted King Henry to vndertake  the search of the Indies by the Pole, which he held to be nauigable. Vpon this motion, 1527. the King sent two ships (as Hall andM. Hall. M. Grafton. Grafton mention in their Chronicles) one of which ships was cast away about the North parts of Newfoundland; the other shaping her cou^se towards Cape Briton and the Coasts of Arambec (or as some call it N^rumbega) returned home.
Iohn Rut wrote a Discourse hereof to the Honourable Kings Grace of England (that I may borrow his owne words) wherein he declareth their coasting and the height of some places, as Cape Bas, in 52. degrees and 25. leagues; thence Cape Ras, etc. They found there eleuen Sayle of Normans, one Briton, and two Portugall Barkes fishing. Albertus de Prate, another of them, wrote another Iournall to Cardinall Wolsey. More tragicall was the successe  M. Hore. 1530 Hak. to. 3. p. 129. of Master Hores company which set our nine yeeres after in this Discouery, but by famine were brought to such extremities, that many of the company were murthered and eaten by their fellowes. And those which returned were so altered, that Sir William Buts, a Norfolke Knight, and his Lady, knew not their Sonne Master Thomas Buts one of this starued number, but by a secret marke, namely a War^, which Nature had sealed on one of his knees. The commod ties and qualities of Newfoundland, are relatedA Parkhurst Edw. Hares. Sir G. Peckham. Step. Parmenius. Richard Clarke. Christoph. Carlile. by Master Parkhurst, Master Hayes, Sir Geo. Peckham, Stephen Parmenius, Richard Clarke, Master Christopher Carlile, all whose Discourses and experiments hereof, Master Hakluyt hath collected and bestowed on the World. The North-part is inhabited, the South is desart, although fitter for habitation. Besides the abundance of Cod, heere are Herrings, Salmons, Thornbacke, Oysters and Muskles  with Pearles, Smelts and Squids, which two sorts come on shore in great abundance, fleeyng from the deuouring Cod, out of the frying-pan into the fire. It is thought that there are Buffes, and certayne, that there are Beares and Foxes, which before your face will rob you of your fish or flesh.
Before they come at Newfoundland by fifty leagues, they passe the banke: so they call certayne high ground, as a veine of Mountaynes, raysing themselues vnder the water, about ten leagues in breath, extending to the South infinitely, on which is 30. fathome water, before and after 200. Sir Hum. Gilbert tooke possession thereof, by vertue of her Maiesties Commission. Anno 1582. It is within Land a goodly Countrey, naturally beautified with Roses, sowne with Pease, planted with stately trees, and otherwise diuersified both for  pleasure and profit, And now our English Nation doe there plant and fixe a setled habitation: a chiefe Actor and Authour of which businesse is Master Iohn Guy of Bristow: who in the yeere 1608. sayled from Bristow in three and twenty dayes to Conception BayConcep. Bay in 48.M Guy his Letter to M. Slany. in Newfoundland. Of this Plantation and their wintrings, and continuance there I haue seene diuers Relations with Master Hakluyt written by Master Guy, William Colston, etc.
In the yeere 1611. in October and Nouember, they had scarsly sixe dayes frost or snow, which presently thawed, the rest of those moneths being warmer and dryer then in England: December was also faire, with some Frost, Snow, and Raine. The winde in these three moneths variable, from all parts. Ianuary and February was most part Frost to mid-March the wind most commonly Westerly, and sometimes from the North. The Sunne often visited  them with warme and comfortable rayes, chasing away the Snow and not suffering the Brookes to be frozen ouer three nights with Ice able to beare a Dogge. The Snow was neuer (except in drifts) aboue eighteene inches deepe. They had there,W. Colston. Filberds, Fish, Makerels, Foxes, in the winter: Partridges, white in the winter, in Summer somewhat like ours, but greater; they are much afraid of Rauens: They killed a Wolfe with a Mastiue and a Grey-hound. Eastons piracies were some trouble to them.
Anno 1612. They found houses of Sauages, which were nothing but poles set round and meeting in the top, ten foot broad, the fire in the middest, couered with Deeres skins. They are of reasonable stature, beardlesse, and in conditions like to those which Sir Martin Frobisher discouered: broad-faced, ful-eyed, coloured on their faces and apparell with red Oaker:  Their Boats of Barke, as in Canada, twenty foot long, foure and a halfe broad, not weighing 100. weight, made in forme of a new Moone, which carry foure men, and are by them carried
 to all places of their remoouings. Their Patent was granted 1610. for Plantation betweene forty six and fifty two, to bee gouerned by a Councell of twelue and a Treasurer. There wintered 1612. 54. men, six women and two children. They killed there, Beares, Otters, Sables: sowed Wheat, Rie, Turneps, Coleworts. Their Winter till Aprill 1613. was dry, and cleere with some frost and snow. Diuers had the Scuruy, whereto their Turneps, there sowne, were an excellent remedie, no lesse then Cartiers Tree hereafter mentioned. April was worse then the midst of Winter, by reason of East-winds which came from the Ilands of Ice, which the current bringeth at that time from the North. The same I haue seene confirmed by a letter of Thomas Dermer, one of that Colony, dated at Cupers Coue, the ninth  of September last, 1616. In other moneths, he saith, the temperature is as in England. He mentions Muske-cats and Musk-rats in those parts; the fertilitie of the soyle in producing Pease, Rie, Barly and Oates; probabilities of Metals; with promises of more ful Relations hereafter.
Master Richard Whitborne hath lately published a Book of his Voyages to Newfoundland and obseruations there, with certaine Letters also touching the new Plantations by English, therein at the charges of Sir George Caluard, written by Edward Winne, N. H. etc.


@. II.  The Voyages and Obseruations of IAQVIES CARTIER in Noua Francia.
NEere to Newfoundland in 47. degrees, is great killing of the Morse or Sea-oxe.Thom. Iamed. The Morses are said to sleepe in great troupes, and to haue one Centinel or watchman to aw^ke the rest vpon occasion: the like is said of the Seales; some call the Morse a Sea-horse. In the Ile of Ramea, one small French ship, in a small time killed fifteene hundred of them. They are as great, or greater then Oxen, the Hide dressed, is twice as thicke as a Buls hide: It hath two teeth like Elephants, but shorter, about a foot long, growing downwards out of the vpper iaw, and therefore lesse dangerous, dearer sold then Iuory, and by some reputed an An^idote, not inferiour to the Vnicornes horne. The  young ones are as good meate as Veale, which the old will defend, holding them in her armes or forefeet. And with the bellies of fiue of the said fishes (if so wee may call these Amphibia, which liue both on land and water) they make an Hogshead of traine Oyle. Their skins are short-haired like Seales; their face is like a Lions, and might more fitly haue bin termed Sea-Lions, then Sea-horses, or Sea-oxen; they haue foure feet, no eares; the hornes are about halfe an ell in length: they vse to lye on the Ice a sunning, and are soonest killed with a blow on the fore-head. Some of our English sh^ps haue attempted this enterprize for the killing of the Morse, but not all with like successe, nor with so good as reported of Cherry Iland. At Brions Iland is such abundance of Cods, that MasterCharles Leigh. Leighs company with foure hookes in little more then an houre, caught 250. of them. Neere to the same in the Gulfe of S. Lawrence,  are three, termed the Ilands of Birds: the soyle is sandy red, but by reason of many Birds on them, they looke white. The birds sit as thicke, as stones lie in a paued street: or to vse IaquesIaques Cart. 5. Cartiers comparison, as any field or Medow is of grasse. Two of these Ilands are steepe and vpright as any wall, that it is not possible to clime them. On the other, which is in 49. degrees 40. minutes, and about a league in circuit, they killed, and filled two BoatsIn an houre they might haue filled thirty Boats of Penguines and might haue laden all their ships with them without any misse. in lesse then halfe an houre. Besides them which they did eate fresh, euery ship did powder fiue or six barrels of them. There are an hundred fold as many houering about, as within the Iland. Some are as bigge as Iayes, blacke and white, with beakes like vnto Crowes: their wings are no bigger then halfe ones hand, and therefore they cannot flye high, yet are they as swift neere the water, as other Birds, they are very fat: these they called Aponatz, a lesser  kind which there aboundeth, they named Godetz: A bigger, and white, which bite like Dogs, they termed Margaulx. Although it be 14. leagues from the Mayne, yet Beares swim thither to feast with these Birds. One they saw as great as a Kow, saith Cartier, and as white as a Swan, which they did kill and eate, and the flesh was as good as of a two yeere old Calfe. About the Port of Brest, they found so many Ilets, as they were impossible to bee numbred, continuing a great space.
The Iland of Assumption,Siluest. Wyet. by the Sauages called Natiscotec, standeth in 49. degrees. The Sauages dwell in houses made of Fir-trees, bound together in the top, and set round like a Doue-house. This, as before is said, is at the entry of the R^uer into the Gulfe of Saint Lawrence. The bankes of this Riuer are inhabited of people that worship the Deuill, and sometimes  sacrifice to him their owne bloud.Botero part. ^. lib. 5. Francis the first, King of France, sent thither Iames Breton; and Henry his Sonne, Nicolas Villaegagnon: but the greatest riches they found, were the Diamonds of Canada, and those of small value for their brittlenesse. Thus Boterus,
 IaquesIaq. Cart. ^. Cartier made three Voyages into these parts. First, in the yeere 1534. Then was hee gladly welcommed of the Sauages, singing, dancing, and expressing other signes of ioy, as rubbing his armes with their hands, and then lifting him vp to Heauen, giuing all to their naked skin (though all were worse then nothing) for the trifles hee gaue them. They went naked, sauing their priuities which were couered with a skin, and certaine old skinnes they cast vpon them. Some they saw, whose heads were altogether shauen, except one bush of haire which they suffer to grow vpon the top of their crowne, as long as a Horse-tayle, and tyed vp with leather strings in a knot. They haue no dwelling but their Boats, which they turne vpside downe, and vnder them lay themselues along on the bare ground. They eate their flesh and fish almost raw, only a little heated on the coales. The next yeere Captaine  Iaq. Cart. 2. Cartier returned, and carried backe two Sauages, which hee before had carried into France to learne the language. He then passed vp to HochelagaHe wintered this time in the Country.. They found Rats which liued in the water, as bigge as Conies, and were very good meate, Hochelaga is a Citie round, compassed about with timber, with three course of Rampiers one within another, framed sharpe, about two rods high. It hath but one gate, which is shut with piles and barres. There are in it about fifty great houses, and in the midst of euery one a Court, in the middle whereof they make their fire. Before they came there, they were forced to leaue their boats behind, because of certaine fals, and heard that there were three more higher vp the streame, towards Sanguenay, which in hisIaq Cart. 3. third Voyage were discouered.
Concerning the Religion in these parts of Canada, euen amongst the Sauages wee finde  some tracts and foot-prints thereof, which neither the dreadfull Winters haue quite frozen to death, nor these great and deepe waters haue wholly drowned, but that some shadow thereof appeareth in these shadowes of Men, howsoeuer wild and sauage, like to them which giue her entertainment. This people beleeueth, saith IaquesIaq. Cart. 2. cap. 10. Cartier, in one which they call Cudruaigni, who, say they, often speakes to them, and tels them what weather will follow, whether good or bad. Moreouer, when hee is angry with them, hee casts dust into their eyes.
They beleeue that when they die, they goe into the Stars, and thence by little and little descend downe into the Horizon euen as the Starres doe, after which they goe into certaine greene fields, full of goodly, faire, and precious trees, flowres, and fruits. The Frenchmen  told them, Cudruaigni was a Deuill, and acquainted them with some mysteries of the Christian Religion, whereupon they condescended and desired Baptisme, the French excused, and promised after to bring Priests for that purpose. They liue in common together, and of such commodities as their Countrey yeeldeth, they are well stored. They wed two or three wiues a man, which, their husbands being dead, neuer marrie againe, but for their widowes liuery, weare a blacke wood all the dayes of their life, besmearing their faces with coale-dust and grease mingled together, as thicke as the backe of a Knife. They haue a filthy and detestable vse in marrying their Maydens, first putting them (being once of lawfull age to marry) in a common place, as Harlots, free for euery man that will haue to doe with them, vntill such time as they find a match. I haue seene houses as full of such Prostitutes, as the Schooles  in France are full of children. They there vse much misrule, riot, and wantonnesse.
They dig their ground with certaine pieces of wood, as big as halfe a Sword, where they sow their Maiz. The men also doe much vse Tobacco. The women labour more then the men in fishing and husbandry. They are more hardy then the beasts, and would come to our ships starke naked, going vpon Snow and Ice, in which season they take great store of beasts, Stags, Beares, Marternes, Hares, and Foxes, whose flesh they eate raw, hauing first dryed it in the Sun or smoke, and so they doe their fish. They haue also Otters, Weasils, Beauers, Badgers, Conies: Fowle and Fish great varietie: and one fish, called Adhothuis, whose bodie and head is like to a Greyhound, white as Snow. Their greatest Iewel is Chains of Esurgnie, which are shel-fishes, exceeding white, which they take on this manner. When a captiue or  other man is condemned to death, they kill him, and then cut slashes in his most fleshie parts, and hurle him into the Riuer Cornibots, whence after twelue houres they draw him, finding in those cuts these Esurgnie, whereof they make Beads and Chaines. They are excellent for stanching of bloud. Thus much out of Cartier. In the yeere 1542.M. Francis Roberual. Monsieur Roberual was sent to inhabit those parts. He saith that he built a Fort faire and strong: the people haue no certayne dwelling place, but goe from place to place, as they may find best food, carrying all their goods with them.
It is more cold in that, then in other places of like height, as Iohn Alphonse of XanctoigneIohn Alphonse of Xanctoigne. Hak. tom. 3. affirmeth, because of the greatnesse of the Riuer which is fresh water, and because the Land is vntilled and full of Woods. We may adde the cold vapours which the Sunne exhaleth in  that long passage ouer the Ocean, the abundance of Ice that commeth out of the North-seas, and the winds which blow from them, and from the cold snowie hils in the way.



@. III. Late Plantations of New-France, and Relations of the Natiues.
SAmuel ChamplainMouns. Champlein. made a Voyage to Canada 1603. and encountred with a banke of Ice eight leagues long in 45. degrees, two third parts, with infinite smaller. The Streits mouth from Cape Ray to the Cape of Saint Laurence, within the Gulfe of Canada, is eighteene leagues. He obserued a Feast made by Anadabijon  the great Sagamo, in his Cabin: in which eight or ten Kettles of meat were set on seuerall fires, sixe paces asunder: The men sate on both sides of the roome, each hauing a dish made of the barke of a tree: one appointed to diuide to euery man his portion. Before the meat was boyled, one tooke his Dogge, and danced about the Kettles from one to another, and when he came before the Sagamo, cast downe his Dogge: and then succeeded another in the like exercise. After their Feast, they danced with the heads of theirThe Irocois, with whom these Estechemins, Algoumequins, and Montainers, have warres. enemies in their hands, some singing. Their Canoas are of the barke of Birch, strengthened within with little circles of wood, eight or nine paces long, fit for actiue and passiue carriage. Their Cabins are low, like Tents, couered with the said barke, the roofe open, a foot space vncouered to let in light, with many fires in the middest; ten housholds, sometimes together: the lye vpon  skinnes one by another, and their Dogges with them.
After a certaine Feast, the Algoumequins (one of these three Nations in league) went out apart, and caused all their women and maids to sit in rankes, themselues standing behinde singing: suddenly all the women and maids cast of their Mantles of skinnes, and stripped themselues naked, not ashamed of their shame, keeping on still their Matachia (which areBeades. Pater-nosters and chaines enterlaced, made of the haire of the Porkespicke, dyed of diuers colours.) Their songs ended, they cryed with one voice, Ho, ho, ho, and then couered themselues with their Mantles which lay at their feet, and after a while renued their former songs, and nakednesse. Their Sagamo sate before the Virgins and Women, betweene two staues, whereon were hanged those enemies heads: and hee exhorted the Mountainers and  Estechemains to the like significations of ioy: which then cryed all together, ho, ho, ho. When hee was returned to his place, the great Sagamo and all his company cast off their Mantles, their priuities only remaining couered with a little skin: and tooke each what they thought good, as Matachias, Hatchets, Swords, Kettles, Flesh, etc. which they presented to the Algoulmequins. After this, two of each Nation contended in running, and the best runners were rewarded with presents.
They are well set, of Tawnie or Oliue colour, by reason of their paintings: they are lyers,Their customs. giuen to reuenge, without law. When a maid is fourteene or fifteene yeares old, she hath many louers, and vseth carnall filthinesse with whom she pleaseth, so continuing fiue or sixe yeares: and then takes whom she likes for her husband, liuing with him chastely all her life  after, except for barrennesse he forsake her. The husband is iealous, and giues presents to her parents. When one dies, they make a pit, and therein put all his goods with the corps, couering the same with earth, and setting ouer it many pieces of wood, with one stake painted red, and set vp on end. They beleeue the immortalitie of the Soule, and that the dead goe into farre Countries to make merry with their friends.
MonsieurM. Champlein.Champlein discoursed with certaine Sauages yet liuing, of whom hee learned touching their Religion, that they beleeue in one God, who hath created all things: that after God had made all things, he tooke a number of Arrowes, and did sticke them into the ground, from whence Men and Women sprung vp, which haue multiplyed euer since. Touching the Trinitie, being asked, a Sagamos or Gouernour answered,The answere of a Sagamos in cases of Religion. There was one onely  God, one Sonne, one Mother, and the Sunne, which were foure. Notwithstanding,This somewhat agreeth with the Manichean and Pythagorean errour. that God was ouer and aboue all: the Sonne was good, and the Sunne also: but the Mother was naught, and did eate them, and that the Father was not very good. Being asked, if they or their Ancestors had heard that God was come into the World: He said that he had not seene him but that anciently there were fiue men, who trauelling toward the setting of the Sun, met with God, who demanded of them, Whither goe ye? They answered, We goe to seeke for our liuing. God said, You shall finde it heere: but they not regarding, passed further: and then God with a stone touched two of them, who were turned into stones. And hee said againe to the three other, Whither goe yee? They answered, and hee replyed as at first: they yet passing further, he tooke two staues, and touched therewith the two formost, and transformed  them into staues. Asking the third man whither he went, he said, to seeke his liuing: whereupon he bade him tarry, and he did so, and God gaue him meat, and he did eat: and after he had made good cheere, he returned among the other Sauages, and told them all his tale*
 This Sagamos also told, that at another time there was a man which had store of Tobacco, and God came and asked him for his pipe, which the man gaue him, and he dranke much of it, and then brake the pipe. The man was offended hereat, because he had no more pipes, but God gaue him one, and bade him carry it to his Sagamos, with warning to keepe it well, and then he should want nothing, nor any of his. Since, the said Sagamos lost the pipe, and found famine and other distresse: this seemeth to be the cause, why they say God is not very good. Being demanded what Ceremony they vsed in praying to their God, he said that they vsed no Ceremonie, but euery one did pray in his heart, as hee would. They haue among them some Sauages, whom they call Pilotoua, who speake visibly to the Diuell, and hee tels them what they must doe, as well for warre, as for other things. And if hee should command them  to put any enterprise in execution, or to kill a man, that they would do it immediately. They beleeue also that all their dreames are true. So farre Champlein.
In the yeere 1604. Monsieur de MontsM. de Monts. (according to a Patent granted him the yeere before, for the inhabiting of Cadis, Canada, and other parts of New-France, from the fortieth degree, to the sixe and fortieth) rigged two ships, and bare with those parts that trend Westward from Cape Breton, giuing names to places at pleasure, or vpon occasion. One Port was named Saualet,Saualets two and forty voyages to Noua Francia. of a French Captain, who was there a fishing, and had made his two and fortieth voyage hither: another was named of Rossignol, whose ship was confiscated for trading there with the Sauages (a poore preferment, to leaue name to a Port by his misery) another was named Port-Moutton, and within a great Bay; they named another Port-Royall,  where after they fortified. The inhabitants of these parts were termed Souriquois. From them Westward are the people called Etechemins, where the next Port, after you are passed the Riuer of Saint Iohn, is Saint Croix, where they erected a Fort, and wintered. Threescore leagues West from thence is the Riuer Kinibeki; and from thence the Land trendeth North and South to Malabarre. Authors place in that former extention of Land betwixt East and West, a great Towne and faire Riuer, called Norombega, by the Sauages called Agguncia. These French Discouerers vtterly deny this History, affirming that there are but Cabans here and there made with Perkes, and couered with barkes of trees, or with skins: and both the Riuer and inhabited place is called Pe^^tegoet, and not Agguncia. And there can be no great Riuer (as they affirme) because the great Riuer Canada hath (like an insatiable Merchant) engrossed all  these water-commodities, so that other streames are in manner but meere Pedlers.
Armouchiquois.The Armouchiquois are a traiterous and theeuish people, next vnneighbourly neighbours to the Etechemins: they are light-footed, and lime-fingered, as swift in running away with their stollen prey, as the Grey-hound in pursuing it. Champlein testifieth, that the Armouchiquois are deformed with little heads, short bodies, armes small like a bone, as are their thighs also; their legges great and long, and disproportioned with likenesse of proportion: when they sit on their heeles, their knees are halfe a foot higher then their heads. They are valiant, and planted in the best Countrey.
M. du Point.Monsieur du Point arriued in those parts in the yeere 1605. and du Monts remoued the French Habitation to the Port-Royall, Monsieur de Pourtrincourt sailed thither in the yeere  1606. and with him the Author of the Booke called Noua FranciaMarke L'scarbot., who hath written the Rites and Customes of these Countries. Hee saith, that the Armouchiquois are a great people, but haue no adoration. They are vicious and bloudy. Both they and the SouriquoisSouriquois. haue the industry of Painting and Caruing, and doe make Pictures of Birds, Beasts, and Men, both in stone and wood, as well as the workmen in these parts. They, as is said, ascribe not Diuine worship to any thing: but yet acknowledge some Spirituall and inuisible Power. I know not by what Diuine Iustice, and Iniustice of the Diuell, it comes to passe, that God hath giuen some men vp so farre vnto the Diuels tyrannie, that he hath banished out of their hearts the knowledge and worship of the True God: and yet the nature of Man cannot be without apprehension of some greater, and more excellent Nature, and rather then want of all Religion,  they will haue a Religious-irreligious commerce with the Diuell. Yea, the more all knowledge of God is banished, the baser seruice doe Men, in doing and suffering, yeeld to the Diuell: as (to leaue other parts to their owne places) it falleth out in these Regions. The Prince and greatest Commander of Men among them, seemes by this meanes to bee the Diuels Vicegerent, and by wizardly and diuellish practices to vp-hold his owne greatnesse. So it was with Sagamos Membertou: if any body were sicke, he was sent for, he made inuocations on the Diuell, he bloweth vpon the partie grieued; maketh incision, sucketh the bloud from it: (a practice vsed in very many Countries of the Continent and Ilands of America) if it be a wound, he healeth it after the same maner, applying a round slice of Beauers stones. Some present is therefore made to him, of Venison or skinnes.  
If it be a question to haue newes of things absent, hauing first questioned with his spirit, he rendereth his Oracle, commonly doubtfull, very often false, and sometimes true. He
 rendered a true Oracle of the comming of Poutrincourt to du Pont, saying, his Diuell had told him so.
When the Sauages are hungry, they consult with Membertous Oracle, and he telleth them the place whither they shall goe: and if there be no game found, the excuse is, that the Beast hath wandered and changed place; but very often they finde. And this makes them beleeue that the Diuell is a God, and know none other, although they yeeld him no adoration. When these AoutmoinsAoutmoins. (so they call these Wizards) consult with the Diuell, they fixe a staffe in a pit, to which they tye a Cord, and putting their head into the pit, make inuocations or coniurations, in a language vnknowne to the others that are about, and this with beatings and  howlings vntill they sweat with paine. When this Diuell is come, the Master Aoutmoin makes them beleeue that hee holds him tyed by his cord, and holdeth fast against him, forcing him to giue him an answer, before he let him goe. That done, he beginneth to sing something in the praises (as it seemeth) of the Diuel, that hath discouered some game vnto them, and the other Sauages that are there, make answer with some concordance of musicke among them. Then they dance with songs in another, not vulgar, language: after which, they make a fire and leape ouer it, and put halfe a pole out of the top of the Cabin, where they are, with something tied thereto, which the Diuell carrieth away.
Memberton carried at his necke the marke of his profession, which was a purse, triangle-wise couered with their imbroidered worke, within which there was somewhat as bigge as  a Nut, which he said was his Diuell, called Aoutem. This function is successiue, and by tradition they teach their eldest sonnes the mysterie of this iniquitie. EuerySagamos signifi^th a King or Ruler. Sagamos either is, or hath his Aoutmoin.
The men and women weare their blacke haire long, hanging loose ouer the shoulder, wherein the men sticke a feather, the women a bodkin. They are much troubled with a stinging fly, for preuention whereof, they rub themselues with a certaine kinde of grease and oyles. They paint their faces with blue or red, but not their bodies.
For their marriages, they are contracted with the consent of Parents, who will not giue their Daughters in marriage to any, except he be a good hunter. The women are said to bee chaste, and the contrary seldome found: and though the husband hath many wiues, yet is  there no iealousie among them. The widowes heere, if there husbands be killed, wil not marrie againe, nor eate flesh, till their death be reuenged. Otherwise they make no great difficultie (which Cartier reporteth of Canada) to marry againe if they find a fit match. Sometimes the Sauages hauing many wiues, will giue one to their friend, if he likes her, so to disburden themselues. The women eate not with the men in their meetings, but apart. When they make feasts, they them end with dances all in a round; to which one singeth: at the end of euery song all make a loud and long exclamation: and to be the more nimble, they strip themselues starke naked. If they haue any of their enemies heads or armes, they will carry them (as a iewell) about their necks whiles they dance, sometimes biting the same.
After their Feasts they will diet themselues, liuing sometimes eight dayes more or lesse  with the smoke of Tobacco. They are in nothing laborious but in hunting. They sow but so much as will serue them for sixe moneths, and that very hardly: during the Winter they retire, three or foure moneths space, into the woods, and there liue on Acornes, Fish, and Venison. They wash not themselues at meales, except they be monstrous foule, and then wipe on their owne, or their Dogs haires. Their entertainment is with small complement: the Guest sits downe by his Host, if it be the King, takes Tobacco, and then giues the pipe to him that he thinkes the worthiest person in the company. They are dutifull to their Parents, obey their commandements, and nourish their persons in age. They vse humanitie to the wiues and children of their conquered enemies, but the men of defence they kill. Their chiefe hunting is in winter; they carry alwaies tinder-boxes with them, to strike fire when hunting  is done, or night takes them. For they follow the game sometimes three dayes together.
Their Dogs are like Foxes, which spend not, neuer giue ouer,Their beasts and huntings. and haue rackets tyed vnder their feet, the better to run on the snow. They seethe the flesh in a tub of wood, by putting stones heated red hot therein. The womens duty is to slay the Beast, and bring it home. The Ellan, Deare, Stag, and Beare, are their game. They take also with their hands Beuers, which are of a chest-nut colour, short legged, his fore-feet haue open clawes, the hinder finnes like a Goose, the tayle skaled, almost of the forme of a Sole-fish: it is the delicatest part of the Beast. The head is short and round, with two rankes of iawes at the sides; and before foure great teeth (two aboue, and two beneath) with which he cuts downe small trees. Hee builds on the brinkes of a Lake, cuts his wood therewith raiseth a Vault; and because the waters  sometimes rise, he hath an vpper story to betake himselfe to in such case: he builds it Pyramide-wise, sometimes eight foot high, and dawbs it with mud. He keeps his taile stil in the water. They take him with their hands in a frost, one fraying him on the Ice, whiles another
 seizeth on his necke. When one dies, they mourne for him long, euery Cabin his day by course: after that, they burne all his goods, and bury the body in a graue: where, when they haue placed him, euery one maketh a present of the best thing he hath: as skins to couer him, bowes, kniues, or the like.
QuebecS. Champlain. is a Streit of Canada, where is a goodly Country furnished with Okes, Cypresses, wilde Vines, Peares, Nuts, Cherries, Goose-berries, Diamonds, in the Rockes of Slate, and other profitable pleasures. They saw in forty fiue degrees a Lake fifteene Leagues long, and eight wide, with a Salt or fall not aboue three fadome, but very furious. The Sauages related to them of passages to a salt Lake, whereof they knew no end, reaching so farre Southerly, that the Sun set to the North thereof in Summer: it was foure hundred leagues  from the place where the French then were. In the Additions to Noua Francia,Additions to N F. mention is made of a Lake about threescore leagues long, with faire Ilands in it. The IroquoisThe Iroquois. haue no Townes; their dwellings and Forts are three or foure stories high, as in New-Mexico. Another lake is said to continue an hundred leagues in length, and some conceiue hope of passage to the South-Sea thereby.
The Scuruie, or Scorbuch, much consumed the French in these parts, a disease that vsually attendeth euill Diet,^l Mag. lib. 16. cap. 51. and much salt meats; which, and want of exercise conuenient, are the Harbengers of this sicknes, in long sieges and Nauigations. Cartiers company were in a little time wonderfully cured hereof by a Tree like to Sassafras. But of the French in these parts and of their doings and sufferings, see more in the fourth part of my Pilgrims, the eight and  ninth bookes, out of Marke Le'Scarbot, Sir W. Alexander, etc.



CHAP. V. Of VIRGINIA.

@. I.  The Preface, Sir WALTER RALEIGHS Plantation, and the Northerne Colony.
LEauing New-France, let vs draw neerer the Sunne to New-Britaine, whose Virgin soyle not yet polluted with Spaniards lust, by our late Virgin-Mother, was iustly called Virginia. Whether shall I here begin with Elogies or Elegies? Whether shall I warble sweet Carols in praise of thy louely Face, thou fairest of Virgins, which from our other Britaine World, hath won thee Wooers and Suters, not such as Leander, whose loues the Poets haue blazed  for swimming ouer the Straits betwixt Sestos and Abydus, to his louely Hero; but, which for thy sake, haue forsaken their Mother-Earth, encountred the most tempestuous forces of the Aire, and so often ploughed vp Neptunes Plaines, furrowing the angry Ocean, and that to make thee of a ruder Virgin, not a wanton Minion, but an honest and Christian Wife? Or shal I change my accent, and plaine me (for I know not of whom, to whom; to complaine) of those disaduentures, which these thy louely louers haue sustained in seeking thy loue? What enuie, I know not, whether of Nature, willing to reserue this Nymph for the treasurie of her owne loue, testified by the many and continuall presents of a temperate Climate, fruitfull Soile, fresh and faire streames, sweet and wholesome Aire, except neere the shore (as if her iealous policie had prohibited forreine Suters:) or of the Sauage Inhabitants, vnworthy  to embrace with their rustike armes so sweet a bosome, and to appropriate with greatest disparagement so faire a Virgin to Sauage Loues: or haply some conceiued indigniti^, that some Parents should thither send their most vnruly Sonnes, and that our Britannia should make her Virginian lap to be the voider, for her lewder and more disordered Inhabitants, whose ill parts haue made distastefull those kinder offices of other our Britaine Worthies, which else had been long since with greatest gladnesse, and the recompence of her selfe entertained: or whether it be Virginian modesty, and after the vse of Virgins, she would say Nay at first, holding that loue surest in continuance, which is hardest in obtaining: Whether any, or all of these, or what else hath hindered; hindered we haue been, and haue not yet obtained the full fruition of her Loue, and possession of her gainfull Dowry, which  yet now (more then euer before) she seemeth to promise, and doubtlesse wil quickly performe, if niggardise at home doe not hinder. And should men be niggardly in this aduenture,
 where Nabal must needs verifie his name, where keeping loseth, aduenturing promiseth so faire a purchase? Miserie of our times! that miserable men should here want what they already haue, and refuse to haue there, at no rate, abundant supply to their too miserable feares of want. Lift vp your eyes, and see that brightnesse of Virginia's beauty: which the Mountaines lift vp themselues alwayes with wild smiles to behold, sending downe siluer streames to salute her, which powre themselues greedily into her louely lap, and after many winding embracements, loth to depart, are at last swallowed of a more mighty Corriuall, the Ocean: He also sends Armies of fishes to her Coasts, to winne her Loue, euen of his best store, and that in store and abundance: the Mountaynes out-bid the Ocean, in offering the secret store-houses  of vndoubted Mines: he againe offereth Pearles: and thus while they seeke to out-face each other with their puffed bigge and swolne cheekes, who shall get the Bride; the one layes hold on the Continent and detaines the same, maugre the Oceans fury, and hee againe hath gotten the Ilands all along the Coast, which hee guardeth and keepeth with his watery Garrisons. Virginia, betwixt those two sowre-faced Suters, is almost distracted, and easily would giue entertainment to English loue, and accept a New Britan appellation, if her husband be but furnished out at first in sorts and sutes, befitting her Marriage solemnitie: all which her rich dowrie would mayntaine for euer after with aduantage.
And well may England court her, rather then any other Europaean louers in regard of his long continued amity, and first Discouerie of her Lands and Seas:An. 1497. this by Sebastian Cabot  with his English Mariners, a hundred and fifteene yeeres since, and the other by Sir Walter Raleighs charge and direction, Anno Dom. 1584.
Then first of all Christians, did Master Philips Amadas, and Master Arthur Barlow, take possession in Queene Elizabeths name. The next yeere that mirrour of Resolution,Hak. voyage tem. 3. p. 246. and d. Gaspar Ens. hist. Ind. Oc. l. 3. c. 23.Theod. de Bry. Sir Richard Greenuile, conuayed thither an English Colony, which he there left for Plantation, vnder the gouernment of Master Ralph Lane, which there continued vntill the eighteenth of Iune in the yeere following, and then (vpon some vrgent occasions) returned with Sir Francis Drake into England. Yet, had they stayed but a little longer, a ship of Sir Walter Raleighs had supplyed their necessities: and soone after Sir Richard againe repaired thither with three ships, and then also left fifteene men more to keepe possession. In the yeere 1587  a second Colonie were sent vnder the gouernment of Master Iohn White. To their succour Sir Walter Raleigh hath sent fiue seuerall times, the last byBriefe note of a Barke, etc. printed 1602. Samuel Mace of Weymouth, in March, one thousand sixe hundred and two; but he and the former performed nothing, but returned with friuolous allegations. The same yeere, Captaine Bartholmew Gosnold, and Captaine Gilbert, discouered the North parts of Virginia, of which Voyage Iohn BreretonIoh. Brereton, Gabriel Archer wrote notes thereof, and M. Gosnold himselfe in a Letter to his Father: they resided in 41. deg. 20. minutes. hath written a Treatise.
In the yeere 1603.Written by Martin Pring. Written by Tho. Canner. the Bristow men (by leaue of Sir Walter Raleigh) set forth a Voyage thither in 43. degrees. In this Expedition was Robert Salterne, which had beene the yeere before with Captaine Gosnold. They discouered Whitson-bay (so they termed it) in one and forty degrees twenty fiue minutes. The people vsed Snakes skins (of which some were  six foot long) for Girdles: they were exceedingly rauished with the Musicke of a Gitterneboy, dancing in a ring about him: they more feared two English Mastiues then twentie men. They had such Boats as before are mentioned, seuenteene foot long, foure broad, of Birchbarke sowed with Osyers, the seames couered with Rozen, almost as sweet as Frankincense, carrying nine men standing vpright, and yet not weighing aboue threescore pound. They brought one of them to Bristoll. This yeere Captaine Gilbert set forth againe for Virginia: at Meuis they laded twenty tuns of Lignum vitae: hee had foure more were slaine by the Sauages. And in the yeere 1605. Captaine George Weymouth made thither a prosperous Voyage, and discouered threescore miles vp a most excellent Riuer. His Voyage was set forth in print byIames Rosier. Iames Rosier.
 After this followed the plantation by the present Aduenturers, for the foundation of a New Britan Common-wealth: and the East andTheir Parents prescribe that they plant not within 100 miles of each other: and containe from 30. deg. to 45. West parts of England ioyned in one purpose of a two-fold Plantation, in the North and South parts of Virginia. Of the North parts our Method requires first mention. Mawooshen was many yeeres together visited by our men, extending betweene 43. and 45. degrees, 40. leagues in bredth, and 50. in length. They found therein nine Riuers, Quibiquesson, Pema^^id, Ramassoc, Apanawapaske, Apaumensele, Aponeg, Sagadahoc, Ashamahaga, Shawokotoc. Sagadahoc is in 43. degrees, it is a mile and halfe at the mouth, holding the same bredth a dayes iourney, and then makes a sound three dayesThe Sauages reckon thus by dayes iourney. iourney broad, in which are sixe Ilands: it hath two branches, the one from the Northeast 24. dayes iourney, the other North-west 30. dayes iourney. At the heads  are two Lakes the Westermost 8. dayes iourney long and foure wide, the Eastermost halfe so large. This is Bashabaes his dominion. The TarentinesChristopher Fortescue. country is in 44. deg. two third parts, where the Sauages tell of a Rock of Allum, neere the Riuer of Sasnowa. CaptainTho. Hanham. M. Chalenge made a voiage hitherward the same yeere, but was taken by the Spaniards. T. Hanham

Tho. Hanham. M. Chalenge made a voyage hi^herward the same yeere, but was taken by the Spaniards. Thomas Hanham sayled to the Riuer of Sagadahoc 1606. He relateth of their beasts, doggs like wolues, of colours blacke, white, red, grisled: red Deere, and a beast bigger, called the Mus, etc. of their fowles, fishes, trees: of some Oare proued to be siluer. Bashabes hath many vnder-Captaines, called Sagamos: their houses built with Withs, and couered ouer with Mats, sixe or seuen paces long. He expresseth also the names of their twelue Moones or moneths: as Ianuary Mussekeshos, February Gignokiakeshos, etc.
An. 1607. was settled a Plantation in the Riuer Sagadahoc, the ships called the Gift, and the Mary and Iohn,Iames Dauies. being sent thither by that famous English Iusticer Sir Iohn Popham and others. They found this coast of Virginia full of Ilands, but safe. They chose the place of their Plantation at the mouth of Sagadahoc, in a Westerly Peninsula: these heard a Sermon, read  their Patent and Lawes, and built a Fort. They sailed vp to discouer the Riuer and Countrey, and encountred with an Iland where where was a great fall of water, ouer which they haled their Boat with a Rope, and came to another fall, shallow, swift, and vnpassable. They found the Countrey stored with Grapes white and red, good Hops, Onions, Garlicke, Okes, Walnuts, the soile good. The head of the Riuer is in forty fiue and odde minutes. Cape Sinieamis in 43. deg. 30. min. a good place to fortifie. Their Fort bare name of Saint George. Fortie fiue remained there,Io. Eliot. G. Pop. Let. to S. I. Gilbert and E. S. Captaine George Popham being President, Raleigh Gilbert Admirall. The people seemed affected with our mens deuotions, and would say, King IAMES is a good King, his God a good God, and Tanto naught. So they call an euill spirit which haunts them euery Moone, and makes them worship him for feare. Hee commanded them not to dwell  neere, or come among the English, threatning to kill some and inflict sicknesse on others, beginning with two of their Sagamos children, saying he had power, and would doe the like to the English the next Moone, to wit, in December.
The pepleRal. Gilbert. told our men of Canibals,These seems to be the deformed Armouchiquois made in the telling more dreadfull. neere Sagadahoc, with teeth three inches long, but they saw them not. In the Riuer of Tamescot they found Oysters nine inches in length: and were told that on the other side there were twice as great. On the 18. of Ianuary they had in seuen houres space, thunder, lightning, raine, frost, snow, all in aboundance, the last continuing. On February the 5. the President died. The Sauages remoue their dwellings in Winter neerest the Deere. They haue a kinde of shooes a yard long, fourteene inches broad, made like a Racket, with strong twine or sinewes of a Deere; in the mids is a hole wherein  they put their foot, buckling it fast. When a Sagamos dyeth, they blacke themselues, and at the same time yerely renue their mourning with great howling: as they then did for Kashurakeny, who died the yeere before. They report that the Canibals haue a Sea behinde them. They found a Bath two miles about, so hote that they could not drinke it. Master Patteson was slaine by the Sauages of Nanhoc, a Riuer of the Tarentines. Their short CommonsEdward Hartley. caused feare of mutiny. One of the Sauages, called Aminquin, for a straw hat and knife giuen him, stript himselfe of his cloathing to Beuers skinnes, worth in England 50. shillings, or three pound to present them to the President, leauing onely a flap to couer his priuities. He would also haue come with them for England. In winter they are pooreOther notes ap. Hak. and weake, and do not then company with their wiues, but in Summer when they are fat and lusty. But  your eyes wearied with this Northerne view, which in that Winter communicated with vs in extremitie of cold, looke now for greater hopes in the Southerne Plantation, as the right arme of his Virginian body, with greater costs and numbers furnished from hence.
But first let me tell you that by some lately these Northerne Parts are stiled by the Name of New-England, as being supposed in the same Latitude with Noua Albion on the South Sea, discouered by Sir Francis Drake, hauing New France on the North, and the Southern Plantation of Virginia on the South; New Spaine, New Granado, New Andalusia, being in the same Continent. A Map and Discouerie hereof was set forth this last yeere by Captaine Iohn Smith, with new English Names exchanged for the Saluage. It lyeth betwixt 41. degrees, and 45. minutes. The harsh Names of the habitations of those parts, I forbeare  to recite: the commodities are expressed by that Author. First for fish, (let not any thinke this contemptible, when, by his report, the Hollanders reape from three kinds, Herring, Cod, and Ling, fifteene hundred thousand pound yeerely; herevpon principally founding their greatnesse by Sea and Land.) In March, Aprill, May and halfe Iune here is Cod in abundance; in May, Iune, Iuly, and August, Mullet and Sturgeon, whose Roes doe make Caularie and Puttargo. Their store of Herrings they compare to the haires of their heads. In the end of August, September, October and Nouember you haue Cod againe to make Corfish or Poore-Iohnt, wice as good as in New-found-land, where their fishing also is chiefely but in Iune and Iuly. Mullets are here taken by Nets, (which at Cape Blanke are hooked) and twice as large. He addes store of Red-berries called Alkermes, Muske-Rats, Beuers, Otters, Martins,  Blacke Foxes, probabilities of Mines, and manifold commodities of the soile, the particulars whereof I referre to the booke it selfe, together with the arguments for a Plantation
 there. There also you may reade his Obseruations and Discoueries, Anno 1614. with the successe of sixe ships that went the next yeere, and his disasters by French Pirats, andSee the examination of D. Baker, and others of his company. They tooke one prize worth 200000. crownes, which was after split, the Captaine and halfe his company drowned. English perfidie. This present yeere 1616. eight voluntarie ships went thither to make further tryall: and hereafter we hope to haue English Colonies renued, in this Northerly Plantation newly called New-England.


 @. II. Of the Southerne Plantation and Colonies; and many causes alledged of the ill successe thereof at the first.
CAptaine Bartholomew Gosnold, hauing long sollicited many of his friends, at last preuailed with some Gentlemen, as Master Edward Maria Wingfield,Richard Pots. Tho. Studley, etc. Captaine Iohn Smith, and diuers others, with the helpe of some Noblemen and Merchants, his Maiestie granting Commission for establishing Councels to direct here, and to gouerne and execute there; so that December 19. 1606. they set saile, and after long contending with contrarie windes, and the windy inconstancie of some of the company that  would haue returned for England before they had saluted their desired Port, they were by a storme forced into the same vnexpected; where, after some harme by assault of the Sauages, on the 13. of May, Master Wingfield was chosen President, their fort contriued, and the fals soone after discouered. Sixe weekes being thus spent, Captaine Newport returned with the ships, and Captaine Smith (before held in much iealousie) was by the paines of Mr Hunt the Preacher reconciled, and admitted of the Councell, a hundred being left there for the Plantation.
Within ten dayes after the departure of this moueable Tauerne, as they called it, a more sauage enemy then the Sauages had assaulted them, and scarcely ten left vntouched with sicknesse, through want of conuenient lodging and diet, of which from May to September fifty  dyed. Wingfield was deposed, and Ratcliffe established in his place, and by the industrie of Smith, Iames Towne was builded, the Sauages supplying their necessities: they failing, Captaine Smith sought trade abroad; others at home, intending a returne in the Pinace for England, by his vnexpected returning were forced to stay or sinke, which action cost the life of Captaine Kendall. Soone after, the like plot of the President,M. Wingfield writes that one Read a Smith, escaped hanging by accusing Kendall, who was shot to death: and that Smith and he had followed if Newport had not come. and Captaine Archer was discouered, and by him againe suppressed. The Winter approaching, the Riuers afforded them plenty of Cranes, Swannes Geese, Ducks, with which, and Pease, wilde Beasts, and other land-commodities they dayly feasted. But in the discouerie of Chickahamine Riuer, George Casson was surprised, and Smith with two others; were beset with two hundred Sauages, his men slaine, and himselfe in a quagmire taken prisoner; but after a moneth he procured himselfe  not onely libertie, but great admiration amongst them, and returning, once more stayed the Pinace from flight, and the Fort from being abandoned.
The Treasurer and Councell, meane-while carefull to supply their wants, sent two ships with neere a hundred men: Capt. Newport arriued safely, Captaine Nelson with the other ship by force of windes was driuen to shift as hee could, elsewhere. Now the Sauages enchanted by Smiths relations of God, Nature, and Art, were in manner at his command, till the ambition of some (by giuing foure times as much for their commodities as he appointed, seeking to seeme of so much greater magnificence and authoritie) made them prize their commodities dearer. Newport (whom Smith had called father, and extolled with Powhatan the Emperour) went with solemnitie to visit him, sending Smith before, who after his manner  of State, gaue himEd. Wingfield, Newp. iourney to Powhatan: he told him of the S. seas, and ships, etc. royall entertainment; sitting vpon his bed of Mats, his pillow of leather embroidered with pearle and white beads, attired with a robe of skins, large as an Irish mantle; at his head and feet sate a handsome yong woman, on each side his house twenty others, their heads and shoulders painted red, with a great chaine of white beades about their necks; before those sate his chiefest men in like order in his Arbor-like house. Newport gaue him a boy, for whom Powhatan gaue him Namontacke his seruant, which was after brought into England. Powhatan wittily cheated our men, and offering so much corne as they gaue copper, said he could eate that, not this.Tho. Sauage: he adopted also Smith and Scriuener (Newports sonnes) his grandchildren. Disc. of Chesap. See Pots his collections. c. 6. Their gettings in this voyage, other commodities, and their townes, were casually consumed by fire: and the ship staying fourteene weekes, spent most of that prouision for the reliefe of the Colony: and by the bitternesse  of that great Frost 1607. aboue halfe took their deaths. Wingfield and Archer were sent for England. Being busied in the Spring to rebuild their towne. Nelson arriued with his lost Phoenix (so they supposed his ship) and dealt honestlier then they report of the former
 Mariners. The second of Iune 1608. Smith left the Fort to discouer the Bay of Chesapeack: in the way, wanting of conuenient watering places, they were so thirstie, as they would haue refused two Barricoes of gold for one of water: and they arriued at Iames Towne in September, where they found some sicke, many dead, and the President prisoner: which place by election of the Councell and request of the company was bestowed on Smith.
Captaine Newport returned with rich presents of Bason, Ewer, Bed, Cloathes, with a Crowne for Powhatan, which made him ouer-value himselfe: some Poles and Dutch which were sent to make Pitch and Tarre, Glasse mils and Sope-ashes, proued after treacherous. Powhatan minding murther and villany, at once sixteene of our men were beset with seuen hundred, which by the policy of Smith (seasing on Opechancanough their King) was preuented,  and turned to their enriching with their commodities: and amongst other they vsed poison, which wrought not. After, Smith tooke the King of Paspaheigh prisoner, which forced the Sauages to peace. Thus haue we a little while beheld Tragicall, more then shewes, on this Virginian Theatre, those things which were well intended, being ill peruerted, and their greatest aduantages arising from casuall disaduantages: diuersitie of emulations beclowding that morning starre, a disastrous Comet, shining rather with fierie gleames of ciuill broiles and brawles in that Hemisphere, then comfortable illumination and influence to the common good.
The Sauages were now in good termes with the English; their Plantation at Iames Town, where they had built a Church and many houses, in some reasonable manner flourished: the  countrey was with great paines and perils of the President further discouered; their Swine, Hens, and other prouision nourished; and some quantitie of many commodities, as Furres, Dies, Minerals, Sassafrasse, Sturgeon, and other things sent hither, in testimonie of their industry and successe. And Virginia grew now in such request,New life of Virginia. that nine ships were furnished with the better part of fiue hundred men, to inhabite there, in the yeere one thousand sixe hundred and nine, the gouernment being deuolued to the L. de la Ware.
Sir Thomas Gates was appointed Lieutenant Generall; Sir George Summers Admirall of Virginia, and were sent to reside there as Gouernours of the Colony. But the Sea-uenture, wherein the two Knights, and Captaine Newpott, with a hundred and fifty persons, sayled, after long conflict with the two angry elements, was sent to bee imprisoned in Bermuda,  where betweene two Rocks the ship split, the people escaping to Land. In the meane timeEx lit. multarum. three of the other shipsA Catch perished at Sea in a Hericano: the other came thither, but in the returne two of them (in one of which Capt. W. King was Master) perished on Vshant. had landed their men in Virginia, some of whomRatliffe, Martin, Archer. were such as had been the emolous and enuious corriuals of the President, which they then began to shew: and to second the same, a greater hurt by Gun-powder befell him, which forced him for his recouerie to set sayle for England, after hee had liued there three yeeres, maintaining himselfe and his that time principally, with such food as the Countrey yeelded. He saith, he left behinde at his returne fiue hundred men and women, three Ships, seuen Boats, two hundred expert Souldiers, thirtie nine of their Weroances or Kings, as Subjects and Contributers to the English; so farre subiect, that at his command they haue sent their subjects to Iames Towne, to receiue correction at his appointment for wrongs done; and their Countries were  free to the English for trauell or trade. But Necessitie forced him to leaue the Countrey, which it forced the other appointed Gouernours not to finde. Hinc illa lachrymae. Hence proceeded the disorder and confusion which after happened amongst them. A great bodie was heere, which acknowledged no head, and therefore grew vnweldie and distempered. Some sought for rule ouer others, which were ouer-ruled by vnruly passions of Ambition, and faction in themselues: others sought their ease, except sometimes they were ouer-busie in diseasing others, and deuouring that which others had carefully laboured for. Ruine seiseth on the Church. Rapine makes prey and spoile of the goods, Rauine deuoureth their beasts, Famine consumeth the men, Iniuries make the Indians their enemies; two of the ships perish vpon Vshant, and one man alone was left to bring home newes of their  perishing: the rest returne laden with Letters of discouragement, painting out Famine, Sedition, and other Furies, which had broken loose amongst them, in the blackest colours: which were sealed with report of the losse of their Admirall, to make vp the measure of mischiefe.
All this did not daunt the Noble Spirit ofLord de la Ware. that resolute Lord, appointed Lord Gouernour, who in the beginning of April, one thousand sixe hundred and ten, set sayle from the coast of England, and on the ninth of Iune arriued safely at the disfortified Fort in Virginia, where he found the present State like to the BoxeNat. Com. Mytholog. l. 4. c. 6. Hygin. fab. 142. of Pandora, who being endowed with manifold good gifts (each of the gods bestowing one on her) was sent with a boxe full of euils to Prometheus, who refused the offer, but by Epimetheus was opened, whereby all  euils were suffered to fly out, Hope onely remaining, which he shut fast in the bottome. And thus was it with this Virginian Pandora, enriched with the best offerings of Natures
 bounty, but by Epimethean carelesnesse, all euils had now dispersed themselues, and made the Virginian Colony a stage of Misery: onely Hope remayned. But alas, euen that also proued sicke and was ready to giue vp the Ghost, in the dangerous sicknesse, which befell that NobleRelation to the Councell of Virginia by the Lord de la Ware. 1611. Lord, which forced him after eight moneths sicknesse, to returne for England againe. He shipped himselfe indeed for Meuis, an Iland in the West Indies, famous for wholsome Bathes, but by Southerly winds was compelled to change his purpose, and at last to make home: hauing left Deputie Gouernour Captaine George Percie, a Gentleman of honour and resolution, with vpward of two hundred persons.
Almightie God that had thus farre tried the patience of the English, would not suffer  them to be tempted aboue that they were able: and therefore in his secret Prouidence, before any knowledge was here had of his Lordships sicknesse, had ordayned Sir Thomas Dale should be furnisht out with a good supply of three ships, men, cattell, and many prouisions* all which arriued safe at the Colony the tenth of May, 1611. He by his Letters, and the Lord Gouernour by his Relations, did animate the Aduenturers; the one protesting himselfe willing and readie to lay all that hee was worth vpon the Aduenture of the action, rather then so honourable a worke should faile, and to returne with all conuenient expedition, if their friendly endeuours would therein second his resolutions: the otherSir Th. Dales Letter to the Committies. writing that foure of the best Kingdomes in Christendome, put all together, may no way compare with this Countrey, either for commodities or goodnesses of soyle. This sparke kindled in their hearts  such constancie of zeale and forwardnesse, that they furnished out Sir Thomas Gates (who had happily returned with the rest from Bermudas) with six ships, 300. men, and a hundred Kine, with other Cattle, Munition, and prouision of all sorts.
Sir Thomas Dale hauing newes that it was a Fleet of enemies, prepared himselfe and the rest to an encounter, but it ended with a common ioy, in the shaking of hands, and not of Pikes. Lawes are now made (for lawlesnesse had marred so much before) for the honour of God, frequenting the Church, obseruation of the Sabbath, reuerence to Ministers, obedience to superiours, mutuall loue, honest labours; and against Adultery, Sacriledge, wrong and other vices, Harbengers of Gods wrath and mans destruction. The Colony consisted of seuen hundred men of sundry Arts and Professions (few of them sicke) which hauing left the Fort at  Cape Henry, fortified and kept by Captaine Dauies, and the keeping of Iames Towne, to that Noble and wel-deseruing Gentleman, Master George Perole, is remoued vp the Riuer fourescore miles further beyond Iames Towne, to a place of higher ground, strong and defencible by nature, with good Ayre, plenty of Springs, much faire and open grounds, freed from Woods, and wood enough at hand. Here they burnt brickes, cut downe wood, and euery man fals to somewhat: they haue built, they say, competent houses, the first story all of bricke, that euery man may haue his lodging and dwelling by himselfe, with a sufficient quantity of ground allotted thereto. Here also they were building an Hospitall with fourescore lodgings and beds already sent, for the sicke and lame, as the Booke, called the New life of Virginia, relateth. Master Whitaker in his Letter and Booke from Henrico, 1612. testifieth the health and  welfare of the Colonie. Samuel Argal in the yeere 1613. affirmed likewise that hee found the state of Virginia farre better then was reported. In one Voyage they had gotten 1100. bushels of Corne: they found a slow kind of Cattle, as bigge asAluaro Nunez speaketh of such Kine in Florida, which come hither from the North. Kine, which were good meate: and a medicinable sort of earth. They tooke Pokohuntis (Her true name was Matokes, which they con^ealed from the English, in a superstitious feare of hurt by the English if her name were knowne: she is now Christened Rebecca. Powhatans dearest daughter) prisoner, a matter of good consequence to them, of best to her, by this meanes being become a Christian, and married to Master Rolph, an English Gentleman.
Thus I haue beene bold somewhat largely to relate the proceedings of this Plantation, to supplant such slanders and imputations as some haue conceiued or receiued against it, and to excite the diligence and industry of all men of ability, to put to their helping hand in this Action, so Honourable in it selfe, Glorious to God in the furtherance of his Truth, and beneficiall  to the Common-wealth, and to the priuate purses of the Aduenturers, if the blooming of our hopes be not blasted with our negligence.
As for the want of successe hitherto, Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda putet. Reason should preuaile with Men; leaue sense and euent of things as an argument for Beasts. That reason which sheweth Virginia's more then possibilities and probabilities, doth also point out the causes of those ill Successes:Aboue 20. causes alleaged of ill successe in this Plantation.Difficilia quae pulchra. Discontents at Sea; Ignorance of the Country, and of their Language; Diuision in the Councell; Commanders (some of them) not skilfull Souldiers, nor forward Aduenturers; Care to relade the Ships before they could prouide Houses of Victuals; Ambition; Cruelty; Neglect of the Seasons for Fish, and Land-commodities; Brackish slimy Water at Iames Fort; Riot; Sloth; False information in England; Sending  ill People that consumed the rest with idlenesse; Want of Authority to punish them; That kind of Aristocraticall Authority first established, occasion of their Quarrels; Iniuries to and from the Saluages, and yet a necessity of their vse and helpe; Sicknesse caused by the grosse
 and vaporous Aire and soyle about Iames Towne, and drinking water; The theeuish trucke and exchange which some secretly held with them; The treachery of Fugitiues; Falshood of the Sauages; and the Many many faults (as they report) of Mariners in priuate truckings and night marts, both with our Men and Sauages; Their long stay and spending the Colonies reliefe; besides Extraordinary casualties of fire, cold, shipwracke; and (if wee beleeueOuied. gen. hist c. 13. l. 2. toste veng^^o dall'aere del paese destati a suscitare nouita and discordie, e cosa propria nelle Indie, etc. Ouiedo, and obserue the like amongst the Spaniards) the very Aire of the Indies seemes to be of inclination and disposition to contentions, which easily ruine and dissolue the greatest and best enterprises; that I speake not of the Deuils malice to Christian hopes. Experience hath now made men wiser, both to preuent and remedie these euils, and to order their proceedings accordingly. And although Fame fils not our eares with so often and many Virginian  rumors, as aforetimes, yet we know that still waters are deepest, and wee cannot but hope that those worthy Virginian-ConsulsSir T. Gates. and Sir T. Dale. cunctando restituunt rem, rather with carefull prouidence and watchfull diligence working sure, then with humerous hastinesse, laying foundations to a leisurely repentance; seeking more the common good there, then to be the common talke heere. Once, they there maintayne themselues now a long time without the wonted charge to the Company, and diuers of our Nobility and Gentry doe now (as after a long slumber) while we are writing these things, againe bethinke them of this Virginian Plantation, whereunto the profitable Neighbour-hood of the Summer Iles, or Bermudas may be good furtherance. God Almighty prosper both, that the Word may goe out of Bermuda, and the Law of the Lord from Virginia, to a truer conuersion of the American World, then  hitherto Our Humorists, or Spanish insolencies haue intended.


@. III. Of the Soyle, People, Beasts, Commodities and other Obseruations of Virginia.
FOr the description of the Countrey, Master Hakluyt from Others Relations in his third Volume of Voyages hath written largely of those parts, discouered for Sir Walter Raleigh. Concerning the later, Captaine Iohn Smith, partly by word of mouth, partly by his Map thereof in print, and more fully by aSince printed at Oxford. Manuscript, which hee courteously communicated to mee, hath acquainted mee with that whereof himselfe with great perill and paine had beene the Discouerer, being in his discoueries taken Prisoner, as is before said, and escaping their fury, yea receiuing much honour and admiration amongst them, by reason of his Discourses to them of the motion of the Sunne, of the parts of the World, of the Sea, etc. which was occasioned by a Diall then found about him. They carried him Prisoner to Powhatan, and there beganne the English acquaintance with that sauage Emperour.
The summe of his obseruation in that and other Discoueries since, concerning the Countrey, is this: Virginia is situate betweene 34. and 44. degrees of Northerly latitude; the bounds whereof on the East side are the great Ocean, Florida on the South, on the North Noua Francia: the Westerne limits are vnknowne. But that part which began to bee planted by the English Southerne Colony, in the yeere 1606. is vnder the degrees, 37. 38. and 39. The temperature agreeth with English bodies, not by other meanes distempered. The SummerAl. Whitaker saith, not so hot as Spaine, nor Winter so cold as in England. is hot as in Spaine, the Winter cold as in France and England: certaine coole Brizes doe asswage the vehemency of the heate. The great Frost in the yeere 1607. reached to Virginia, but was recompenced with as milde a Winter with them the next yeere. And the Winter Anno 1615.Master Rolph. was as cold and frosty one fortnight as that.
There is but one entrance by Sea into this Country, and that at the mouth of a very goodly Bay. The Capes on both sides were honoured with the names of our Britanian hopes, Prince Henry, and Duke Charles. The water floweth in this Bay neere two hundred miles, and hath a channell, for a hundred and forty miles of depth, betwixt seuen and fifteene fathome; of breadth, ten or fourteene miles. At the head of the Bay, the Land is Mountaynous, and so runneth by a Southwest Line: from which Mountaynes proceed certaine Brooks, which after come to fiue principall Nauigable Riuers. The Mountaynes are of diuers composition, some like Mil-stones, some of Marble: and many pieces of Chrystall they found throwne downe by the waters, which also wash from the Rockes such glistering Tinctures, that the ground in some places seemeth gilded.
The colour of the earth in diuers places resembleth Bole-Armoniac, terra sigillata, and other such apparances: but generally is a blacke sandy molde. The Riuer next to the mouth
 of the Bay is Powhatan, the mouth whereof is neere three miles broad: it is Nauigable an hundred miles: falls, rocks, shoalds, prohibite further Nauigation: hence Powhatan their greatest King hath his Title. In a Peninsula on the Northside thereof is situate Iames Towne.
The people inhabiting which haue their Weroances, are the Kecoughtans, which haue not past twenty fighting men. The Paspaheghes, haue forty. Chichahamania, two hundred. The Weanocks, an hundred. The Arrowhatocks, thirty. The Place called Powhatan, forty. The Appamatusks, threescore. The Quiyonghcohanocks fiue and twenty. The Warraikoyacks, forty. The Naudsamunds, two hundred. The Chesapeacks, an hundred. The Chickahamanians  are not gouerned by a Weroance, but by the Priests. No place affordeth more Sturgeon in Summer (of which at one draught haue beene taken threescore and eight) nor in Winter more Fowle. Fourteene miles from Powhatan is the Riuer Pamaunke, nauigable with greater Vessels, not aboue threescore and ten miles. Toppahanok is nauigable an hundred and thirty miles, Patawomeke, an hundred and twenty. To speake of Powtuxunt, Bolus, and other Riuers on the East side of the Bay, likewise, of diuers places which receiued name by some accident, as Fetherstones Bay: so called of the death of one of ours there happening, and the like: or to mention the numbers which euery people can make, would exceed our scope, and the Readers patience. Captaine Smiths Map may somewhat satisfie the desirous, and his Booke now printed, further. This the Captaine saith, that hee hath beene in many places of Asia and  Europe, in some of Africa and America, but of all, holds Virginia by the naturall endowments, the fittest place for an earthly Paradise. Alexander Whitaker the Preacher at Henrico,Alex. Whitaker, now Preacher at Virginia. writes, that at the mouth of Powhatan, are the Forts of Henrico and Charles, two and forty miles vpward is Iames Towne, and threescore and ten miles beyond that the new Towne of Henrico, ten miles higher the fals (where the Riuer falleth downe betweene many minerall Rockes:) twelue miles beyond, a Chrystall Rocke, wherewith the Indians head their Arrowes: three dayes iourney from thence is a Rocke or Hill found couered ouer with a rich siluer Ore. Our men that went to discouer those parts, had but two Iron Pickaxes with them, and those so ill tempered, that the points turned againe at euery stroke; but tryall was made of the Ore, with argument of much hope. Sixe dayes iourney beyond this Mine, runs  a ridge of Hils, beyond which, the Indians report, is a great Sea, which (if it bee true) is the South Sea. At Henrico they are exceeding healthfull, and more then in England.
Master Thomas HariotHak. vol. 3. pag. 267.Theod. de Bry. part. 1. America. hath largely described the Commodities which the Water and Earth yeeld (set forth also in Latine with exquisite Pictures by Theodore de Bry) besides the relations of Brereton and Rosier, and others. There is a Grasse which yeeldeth silke, beside store of Silke-wormes. Hempe and Flaxe surpassing ours in growth and goodnesse, exceeded by a new found stuffe of a certaine sedge or water-flagge, which groweth infinitely, and with little paines of boyling yeeldeth great quantitie of sundry sorts of Skeines of good strength and length, some like silke, and some like Flaxe, and some a courser sort, as Hempe.
There is also a rich veine of Allum, of Terra Sigillata, Pitch, Tarre, Rozen, Turpentine,  Sassafras, Cedar, Grapes, Oyle, Iron, Copper, and the hope of better Mines, Pearle, sweete Gummes, Dyes, Timber, Trees of sweet wood for profit and pleasure, of which kinde haue beene discouered fourteene seuerall kinds. Neither is it needfull that heere I relate the Commodites of Virginia for food in Fowles, Beasts, Fishes, Fruites, Plants, Hearbes, Berries, Graines, especially their Maiz, which yeeldeth incredible recompence for a little labour. One Acre of ground will yeeld with good husbandry two hundred Bushels of Corne. They haue two Roots:Cap. Smith M. S. the one for Medicinall vse to cure their hurts, called Weighsacan, the other called Tockahough, growing like a flagge, of the greatnesse and taste of a Potato, which passeth a fiery purgation before they may eate it, being poyson whiles it is raw. Yet in all this abundance our men haue had small store but of want, and no fire nor water could purge that poyson  which was rooted in Some, to the hinderance of the Plantation.
The chiefe Beasts of Virginia are Beares, lesse then those in other places, Deere like ours,M. Whitaker and M. Ham^r mention also Lion. Aronghcun much like a Badger, but liuing on trees like a Squirrell: Squirrels, as big as Rabbets, and other flying Squirrels, called Assepanicke, which spreading out their legs and skins, seeme to flye thirty or forty yards at a time. The Opassom hath a head like a Swine, a tayle like a Rat, as bigge as a Cat, and hath vnder her belly a bagge, wherein she carrieth her yong. Their Dogges barke not. Their Wolues are not much bigger then our Foxes. Their Foxes are like our siluer-haired Conies, and smell not like ours. Mussascus is otherwise as our Water-Rat, but smelleth strongly of Muske: Master Whitaker saith, they yeeld Muske as the Musk-Cats doe. Their Vetchunquoys are wild Cats. Their vermine destroyed not our Egges and  Pullen: nor were their Serpents or Flyes any way pernicious. They haue Eagles, Hawkes, wild Turkeyes, and other Fowle, and Fish, which here to repeate, would to some nice fastidious stomacks breed a fulnesse, though with some of their Countrimen in Virginia, they would haue beene sauoury sometimes and dainty.

They are a peopleTho. Hariot. clothed with loose Mantles made of Deeres skins, and aprons of the same round about their middles, all else naked: of stature like to vs in England. They vse to paint themselues and their children, he is the most gallant which is most monstrous. Their women imbroder their legges, hands, etc. with diuers workes, as of Serpents, and such like, with blacke spots in the flesh.
Their houses are made of small Poles, made fast at the top, in round forme, as is vsed in many Arbours with vs; couered with Barkes or Mats, twice as long as they are broad. They are exact Archers, and will with Arrowes kill Birds flying, Fishes swimming, Beasts running: one of ours by them hath beene shot thorow the body, and bothM. George Percie writeth that one with an Arrow of an ell longth shot thorow a Target, which a Pistoll could not pierce. his armes thereby fastened and pierced. They speake of men two hundred yeeres old and more, as Master Wingfield reporteth.  Their Bowes are of tough Hasill, the strings of Leather, Arrowes of Canes or Hasill, headed with stones or hornes, and artificially feathered. They are heartlesse, if they see defence to frustrate their Arrowes.


@. IIII. Of the present estate of Virginia, and the English there residing.  
THe last of May 1616. Sir Thomas Dale (that worthy Commander, and best establisher of the Virginian Plantation) came from thence into England, to procure and further the common good: partly by conference with Him, and chiefly by a Tractate and Relations of Master Rolph, the Husband of Pokahuntas, which came ouer with him, I haue learned, what here I deliuer you. The English doe now finde this Countrey so correspondent to their constitutions, that it is more rare to heare of a mans death in Virginia, then in that proportion of people in England. That Aristocraticall Gouernment by a President and Councell,Twelue in all. is long since remooued, and those hatefull effects thereof together: Order and diligence haue repayred, what confusion and idlenesse had distempered. The men  haue beene employed in Palazading, and building of Townes, impaling grounds to keepe their Cattle from ranging, and to preserue their Corne; and a Peace concluded betwixt the English and Indians:Peace betwixt ours and the Sauages. For howsoeuer they could well before defend themselues and their Townes from them, yet not easily their Corne and Cattle. This peace hath yeelded many benefits, both opportunity of lawfull purchase of a great part of the Country from the Natiues, freely and willingly relinquishing and selling the same for Copper, or other Commodities (a thing of no small consequence to the conscience, where the milde Law of Nature, not that violent Law of Armes, layes the foundation of their possession) and quiet enioying thereof, yeerely planting and reaping without impediment* fowling, hunting, fishing, trauelling, as securely as in England; Plenty and Health attending their Peace and Industry.  They haue Indian Wheate, called Mays, Pease and Beanes, and other the naturall Commodities; English Wheate, Pease, Barley, Turneps, Cabbages, Carrots, Parsneps, Herbes and Flowres for pleasure and vse, with other things as good as the best made English ground can yeeld. And that you may know what two mens labours with Spade and Shouell onely can manure in one yeere, they refused fifty pounds offered for their Crop. Hempe, Flaxe, Tobacco, (which with a little better experience in the curing, would be as good as any in America) Fish, Fowle, Deere and other Beasts, I need not mention. Sir Thomas Dale (whose Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, Iustice in the well ordering and gouerning the English Virginian affaires, I cannot sufficiently honour) obserued two seasons for the taking of Fish, the Spring, and the Fall, himselfe taking no small paines in the triall: at one hale with a Saint,  he caught fiue thousand; three hundred of which were as bigge as Cod, the least of the residue a kind of Salmon Trowt, two foot long: Yet durst he not aduenture on the maine Skul: for breaking his Net. Likewise two men with Axes and such like weapons haue taken and killed neere the shore, and brought home forty as great as Cod in two or three houres space. And whereas heretofore wee were constrayned yeerely to buy Corne of the Indians, which brought vs into base esteeme with them: now they seeke to vs, come to our Townes, sell theThey can dresse Leather finely and quickly, but it will not hold our wet. skins from their shoulders (which are their best garments to buy Corne. Yea, some of their petty Kings haue this last yeere borrowed foure or fiue hundred bushels of Wheat; for payment whereof this Haruest they haue Mortgaged their whole Countries, some of them not much lesse in quantitie then a whole Shire in England: So that Famine, the quondam  deuourer of our Nation, is famished, and in it selfe deuoured.
The places inhabited by the English are six, Henrico and the limits, Bermuda Nether Hundred,
 West and Sherley Hundred, Iames Towne, Kequoughton, Dales Gift. The inhabitants are; Officers,Habitations Office^s. Labourers, Farmers. The first haue charge and care ouer both the latter, watching and warding for their preseruations in the due execution of their employments and businesse. These are bound to maintaine themselues and their families with food and raiment by the industrie of them and theirs. The LabourersLabourers. are of two sorts: some employed onely in the generall workes, fed and cloathed out of the store. Others are speciall Artificers, as Smiths, Shoomakers, Carpenters, Tailors, Tanners, etc. which worke in their professions to the Colony, and maintaine themselues with food and apparell, hauing time limited them to till and manure the ground. The FarmersFarmers. liue at most ease, yet by their good endeuours  bring much plenty to the Plantation. They are bound by Couenant, both for themselues and their seruants, to maintaine his Maiesties right and title in that kingdome, to watch and ward in the townes where they are resident; to doe one and thirtie dayes seruice for the Colony, when they shall be called thereunto; to maintaine themselues and theirs with food and raiment; to pay yeerely for themselues and each man-seruant two Barrels and a halfe a piece, of their best Indian wheat (this amounts to twelue bushels and a halfe English measure) that no Farmer nor other shall plant Tobacco (knowne to be a vendible commoditie) except he yeerely manure for himselfe; and euery man-seruant two acres of ground with corne, and then to plant as much as they please. Also the Company haue already sent a ship to Virginia with prouision of cloathing, houshold-stuffe and other necessaries, to establish a  Magazine there; to be bought at easie rates in bartar and exchange for their commodities, to a mutuall benefit of both parts.
I cannot heere omit the Christian care of his Maiestie, worthy the Defender of the Faith, in prouiding charitable collections and contributions in England,Letters Patents for collect. for the erecting and maintaining of a Colledge in Virginia to be a Seminarie and Schoole of education to the Natiues in the knowledge and perfection of our Religion, which I beseech Almightie God to prosper with answerable successe. They haue likewise brought thence children of both sexes here to be taught our language and letters, which may proue profitable instruments in this designe. As for the English there now residing (likely to bee much encreased by good supplyes now in sending) at HenricoHenrico. and in the Precincts, which is seated on the  North side the Riuer, ninety and odde miles from the mouth thereof (which somewhat differs from the number before mentioned) and within fifteene or sixteene miles of the Fals, being our furthest habitation within land, are eight and thirtie men and boyes: of which two and twenty Farmers: Captaine Smal^y Commander in the absence of Iames Dauies (who now is returning) Master William Wickham Minister. At Bermuda Nether HundredBermuda Nether Hundred. (seated on the South side the Riuer, which almost encompasseth it, and with a pale on a short necke of land boundeth this peninsula) are a hundred and nineteene. These are incorporated to Bermuda Towne, which is made a Corporation, according to certaine Orders and Constitutions. Captaine Yeardly Deputy gouernour liues most heere: Master Alexander Whitaker is Minister. West and Sherley HundredW. and Sh. Hundred. is three or foure miles lower on the North  side the Riuer: here are twenty fiue men commanded by Captaine Maddeson, employed onely in planting and curing Tobacco to the publike benefit. Lower by thirty seuen miles is Iames Towne,Iames towne. where are fifty men vnder Captaine Francis West, Brother to the L. La Ware, and (in his absence) commanded by Lieutenant Sharp; Master Buck Minister. At KequoughtonKequoughton. thirty seuen miles lower, neere the mouth of the Riuer are twenty. Capt. Webbe commander, Master Mays Minister. Dales-GiftDales Gift. is vpon the Sea neere Cape Charles, where are seuenteene vnder Lieutenant Cradock; their labour to make salt, and catch fish. The numbers of Officers and Labourers are two hundred and fiue. The Farmers eighty one, besides sixty fiue women and children, in euery place some: in all three hundred fifty one persons. These I haue thus particularly related as a witnesse to after-Ages of their little (but now  hopefull) proceedings after ten yeeres habitation; which as Iacobs little family in Egypt, and Gedeons small Armie, lesse then that which the Father of the Faithfull mustered in his owne houshold, I hope and pray, may grow into Townes, Cities, and Christian-English Churches, in numberlesse numbers, to the glory of God, and honour of our Nation. Euen in all the greatest workes of God, and exploits of Men, the beginnings are ordinarily slow and small. How many of the foure hundred and thirtie yeares were almost, if not more then halfe spent, when Iacob was but a little Family, and those in a strange land, there suddenly growing vnder the Crosse, into a multitude and great people? From her Village-foundation, how did Rome peepe and creepe forth by degrees vnto the height of Maiestie? So may wee say of the Spanish Plantations in this American continent,  from contemptible and troublesome beginnings, to their present Splendor. Nor are our hopes lesse, if our hearts bee sincere, and minde, as wee professe the propagation of Christianitie. As for their transported Cattell, there were the last of May of Buls, Steeres,
 Cowes, Heifers, Calues, a hundred forty and foure. Horses three, and as many Mares, Goates and Kids two hundred and sixteene. Hogges wilde and tame not to bee numbred, and great plenty of Poultry.



CHAP. VI. Of the Religion and Rites of the Virginians.


@. I. Of the Virginian Rites, related by Master HARIOT.
NOw for the manners and Rites of the people, thus hath Master Hariot reported. They beleeue that there are many gods, which they call Mantoac, but of different sorts and degrees: one onely chiefe and great God, which hath bin from all eternity. Who, as they affirme, when he purposed to make the world, made first other gods of a principall Order, to bee as meanes and instruments to be vsed in the Creation, and Gouernment to follow; and after, the Sunne,  Moone, and Starres, as petty gods, and the instruments of the other Order more principall.
First, they say, were made Waters, out of which by the gods was made all diuersitie of Creatures, that are visible or inuisible. For Mankinde, they say, a Woman was made first, which by the working of one of the gods, conceiued and brought forth children. And in such sort they say they had their beginning: But how many yeeres or ages haue passed since, they say, they can make no relation: hauing no letters, nor other meanes to keep records of times past, but onely tradition from Father to Sonne. They thinke that all the gods are of humane shape, and therefore they present them by Images, in the formes of men, which they call Kewasowock: one alone is called Kewas. Them they place in Houses or Temples, which they call Machicomuck, where they worship, pray, sing, and make many times offerings vnto  them. In some Machicomuck we haue seene but one Kewas, in some two, in other three. They beleeue the immortalitie of the Soule: that after this life, as soone as the soule is departed from the body, according to the workes it hath done, it is either carried to heauen the habitacle of Gods, there to enioy perpetuall blisse and happinesse: or else to a great pit or hole, which they think to be in the furthest parts of their part of the World toward the Sun-set, there to burne continually. This place they call Popogusso. For the confirmation of this opinion, they tell tales of men dead and reuiued againe, much like to the Popish Legends.
Thus they tell of one, whose graue the next day after his buriall was seene to moue, and his body was therefore taken vp againe: who reported, that his soule had beene very neere the entring into Popogusso, had not one of the gods saued him, and giuen him leaue to  returne againe, and teach his friends how to auoid that terrible place. They tell of another, which being taken vp in that manner, related, that his soule was aliue while his body was in the graue, and that it had trauelled farre in a long broad way, on both sides whereof grew most delicate pleasant Trees, bearing more rare and excellent fruits, then euer he had seene before, or was able to expresse: and at length came to most braue and faire houses, neere which he met his father, that had been dead before, who gaue him great charge to goe back againe, and shew his friends what good they were to doe, to enioy the pleasures of that place, which when he had done, he should after come againe.
What subtiltie so euer be in their WeroancesTho. Hariot. Hak to. 3. p. 277. These people of Sir W. Ral. his discouerie are somewhat more to the South, then the present English Colonie. and Priests, the vulgar are hereby very respectiue to their Gouernours, and carefull of their manners; although they haue also in criminall  cases, punishments inflicted according to the qualitie of the offence. This I learned by speciall familiaritie with some of their Priests, wherein they were not so sure grounded, but that they lent open eare to ours, with doubting of their owne.
TheWeroance is a chiefe Lord, or pettie King, which sometime hath but one Towne: and none that we had dealing with, had aboue eighteen Townes vnder him. Priests in Secota haue their haire on the crowne like a Combe, the rest being cut from it: onely a fore-top on the forehead is left, and that Combe. They haue a garment of skins peculiar to their function. They are great Wisards.
Our artificiall Workes, Fire-workes, Gunnes, Writing, and such like, they esteemed the workes of Gods, rather then of Men, or at least taught vs by the Gods. They bare much respect to our Bibles.Tho. de Bry in Pictur. When the Weroans was sicke, he sent vs to pray for him. Some were of opinion that we were not mortall, nor borne of Women, but that wee were men of  an old Generation many yeeres past, then risen againe to immortalitie: some would likewise seeme to prophecie, that there were more of our Generation yet to come, to kill theirs,
 and take their places; which were now in the Aire inuisible, and without bodies, and that they by our entreatie did make men to die which had wronged vs.
They haueFirst voyage to Virginia. Hak to. 3. p. 249. their Idoll in the innermost roome of their house, of whom they tell incredible things. They carrie it with them when they goe to the warres, and aske counsell thereof, as the Romans did of their Oracles. They sing songs as they march towards the battell, in stead of Drummes and Trumpets: their warres are bloudy, and haue wasted much of their people.
A certaine King called Piemacum, hauing inuited many men and women of the Secotans to a Feast, whiles they were merry, and praying before their Idol, came vpon them and slew  them. WhenM. Rolph. Lan. Hak. to. 3. p. 261. one of their Kings had conspired against the English, a chiefe man about him said, that we were the seruants of God, and not subiect to be destroyed by them: and that we, being dead men, could doe more hurt then while we were aliue. They vse to solemnize certaine months-minds, in their Sauage manner, for any great personage dead. IamesJames Rosier. Rosier, from the relation of Owen Griffin, an eye-witnesse, thus tels of their ceremonies. One among them, the eldest as hee iudged, riseth right vp, the other sitting stil: and looking about, suddenly cryed with aloud voice, Baugh, Waugh: then the women fall downe, and lye vpon the ground: and the men all together answering the same, fall a stamping round about the fire, with both feet, as hard as they can, making the ground shake, with sundry out-cries, and change of voice and sound. Many take the fire-sticks and thrust them into the earth: and  then rest a while. Of a sudden they begin as before, and continue so stamping, till the yonger sort fetched from the shore many stones, of which euery man tooke one, and first beat vpon them with their fire-sticks, then with the stones beat the earth with all their strength. And in this manner they continued about two houres. After this ended, they which had wiues, tooke them apart, and withdrew themselues seuerally into the wood. This seemed to be their euening deuotion.
When theyTheod. de Bry Icone 17. 18. and seq. haue obtained some great deliuerance from danger, or returne from warre, they obserue a publike and solemne reioycing by making a great fire, encompassed with the men and women promiscuously, all of them with Rattles in their hands, making a great noise.
 They hold one time in the yeere Festiuall, and then they meet together out of many Villages, euery one hauing a certaine marke or Character on his backe, whereby it may be discerned whose Subiect he is. The place where they meet is spacious, and round about are set posts, carued with the resemblance of a Nuns head: In the mids are three of the fairest Virgins louingly embracing and clasping each other: about this liuing Center, and artificiall Circle, they dance in their Sauage manner.
Their Idoll called Kiwasa, is made of wood foure foot high, the face resembling the Inhabitants of Florida, painted with flesh-colour, the brest white, the other parts blacke, except the legges, which are spotted with white; he hath Chaines or strings of Beads about his necke.
 This Idoll is in Socota, as it were the keeper of the dead bodies of their Kings. In their Temples are houses of publique deuotion, they haue two, three, or more of them, set in a darke place. The dead bodies of their Weroances are kept on certaine Scaffolds nine or ten foot high, this Kiwasa their guardian being placed with them: and vnderneath dwelleth a Priest, which night and day there numbreth his deuotions.


@. II. Obseruations of their Rites by Captaine SMITH and others.

BVt let vs take view of our last Colonies obseruations. Capt.Newes from Virginia, and a M. S. of Captaine Smith. Smith was taken by the Virginians, and while hee stayed amongst them, obserued these their Magicall Rites. Three or foure dayes after his taking, seuen of their P^iests in the house where he lay, each with a Rattle, (setting him by them) began at ten of the clock in the morning to sing about a fire, which they enuironed with a circle of meale, at the end of euery song, (which the chiefe Priest began, the rest following) laying downe two or three graines of Wheat: and after they had laid down sixe or seuen hundred in one circle (accounting their songs by Graines, as the Papists their Orisons by Beads) they made two, or three, other circles in like manner, and put at the end of euery song, betwixt euery two, or three, or  fiue Graines, a little sticke. The High Priest disguised with a great skinne, his head hung round with little skins of Weasils, and other Vermine, with a Crownet of Feathers, painted as vgly as the Diuell, at the end of each song vseth strange and vehement gestures, casting
 great Cakes of Deere-suet, and Tobacco into the fire: thus till sixe of the clock in the euening, they continued these howling deuotions, and so held on three dayes. This they pretended to doe, to know if any more of his Country-men would arriue, and what hee there intended. They so fed this our Author, that he much mis-doubted, that he should haue been sacrificed to the Quoyoughquosicke, which is a superiour Power they worship, then the Image whereof a more vgly thing cannot be described. To cure the sicke, a certaine man withTheir Rattles are of Gourds or Pompion rindes: of which they haue their treble, tenor, base, etc. a lit^le Rattle, vsing extreme howlings, shouting, singing, with diuers anticke and strange behauiours ouer the patient, sucketh bloud out of his stomacke, or diseased place.
Not much vnlike to that rattling deuotion of their exorcising Priests, (at least in absurditie) was that entertainmentM. S. by W. S. which Powhatans women gaue the same Captaine then being  free, and President of the company, at Werowocomoco; where thirtie of them came out of the woods naked, onely couered behinde and before, with a few greene leaues, their bodies painted, but with some difference each from other: the Leader of these Nymphs resembled both Actaeon and Diana, hauing on her head a faire paire of Stagges hornes, and a quiuer of arrowes at her backe, with Bow and Arrowes in her hand: The rest followed all horned alike, weaponed with vnlike instruments: these (as if they had beene the infernall guard, comming with Cerberus to welcome Proserpina to her Palace) rushed from the trees with hellish shouts and cryes, dancing about a fire, which there was made for that purpose: and after an houre thus spent, they departed.
Then did they solemnly inuite him to their lodging, where he was no sooner come, but all  rounded about him with tedious kindnesse, crying,How could he chuse. Loue you not me? This salutation ended, which Pan and all his Satyres would haue accepted, they feasted him with plenty and varietie, some singing and dancing wh^les others attended: and at last led him with a firebrand, in stead of a Torch, to his lodging.
When theyCapt. Smith. intend any wars, the Weroances or Kings consult first with the Priests and Coniurers. And no people haue there beene found so sauage which haue not their Priests, Gods, and Religion. All things that are able to hurt them beyond their preuention, they after their sort adore, as the Fire, Water, Lightning, Thunder, our Ordnance, Peeces, Horses: Yea, I haue heard Captaine Smith say, that they seeing one of the English Bores in the way, were striken with awfull feare, because he brisled vp himselfe and gnashed his teeth, and took him  for the god of the Swine; which was offended with them.
The chiefe god they worship is the Diuell, which they call Okee.Okee, or Okeeus. They haue conference with him, and fashion themselues vnto his shape. In their Temples they haue his Image ill-fauouredly made,One of these painted on a Toadstoole (fit shrine for such a deitie) was by A. Whitak. sent into England. painted, adorned with Chaines, Copper, and Beads, and couered with a skinne. By him is commonly the Sepulchre of their Kings; whose bodies are first bowelled, then dryed on a hurdle, and haue about the ioynts chaines of Copper, Beads, and other like trash; then lapped in white skinnes, and rowled in mats, and orderly entombed in arches made of mats, the remnant of their wealth being set at their feet. These Temples and Bodies are kept by their Priests. For their ordinarie burials, they digge a deepe hole in the earth with sharpe stakes, and the corps being wrapped in skins and mats, with their iewels, they  lay them vpon sticks in the ground, and couer them with earth. The buriall ended, the women hauing their faces painted with blacke coale and oyle, sit foure and twenty houres in the houses mourning and lamenting by turnes, with yellings and howlings. Euery Territory of a Weroance hath their Temples and Priests. Their principall Temple is at Vttamussack in Pamaunk, where Powhatan hath a house vpon the top of certaine sandie hils in the woods. There are three great houses filled with Images of their Kings and Diuels, and Tombes of their Predecessors. Those houses are neere threescore foot long, built, after their fashion, Arbour-wise. This place is in such estimation of holinesse, that none but the Priests and Kings dare enter: yea, the Sauages dare not passe by in Boats, without casting Copper, Beads, or somewhat into the Riuer.  
Heere are commonly resident seuen Priests: the chiefe differed from the rest in his ornaments: the other can hardly be knowne from the common people, but that they haue not so many holes at their eares to hang their Iewels at. The High-Priests head-tire is thus made: They take a great many Snakes skinnes stuffed with Mosse, as also of Weasils and other vermines skins, which they tye by their tayles, so that all the tayles meet on the top of their head like a great tassell. The faces of their Priests are painted as vgly as they can deuise: in their hands they haue Rattles, some Base, some Treble:
Their deuotion is most in songs, which the chiefe Priest beginneth, the rest following: sometime he maketh inuocations with broken sentences, by starts and strange passions, and at euery pause the other giue a short grone. It cannot be perceiued that they haue any  set Holy-dayes: onely, in some great distresse of want, feare of enemies, times of triumph, and of gathering their fruits, the whole Countrey, Men, Women, and Children, assemble
 to their solemnities. The manner of their deuotion is somtimes, to make a great fire, all singing and dancing about the same with Rattles and shouts, foure or fiue houres: sometime, they set a man in the middest, and dance and sing about him, he all the while clapping his hands, as if he would keepe time: after this, they goe to their Feasts. They haue certaine Altar-stones, which they call Powcorances, standing from their Temples, some by their houses, others in the woods and wildernesses; vpon which they offer bloud, Deere-suet, and Tobacco. This they doe when they returne from the warres, from their huntings, and on other occasions. When the waters are rough in stormes, their coniurers runne to the waters sides, or passe in their boats, and after many hellish out-cries and inuocations, cast Tobacco, Copper,  Pocones, or such trash into the water, to pacifie that god whom they thinke to be very angry in those stormes. Before their dinners and suppers, the better sort will take the first bit, and cast it into the fire, which is all the grane they are knowne to vse. In some part of the Countrey they are said (which since is found false) to haue yeerely a sacrifice of children: such a one was performed at Quiyoughcohanock, some ten miles from Iames Towne in this manner: Rapahannock,Will. White. Werowance made a Feast in the woods: the people were so painted, that a Painter with his pensill could not haue done better. Some of them were blacke like Diuels, with hornes and loose haire, some of diuers colours. They continued two dayes dancing in a circle of a quarter of a mile, in two companies, with antick tricks, foure in a ranke, the Werowance leading the dance; they had Rattles in their hands; all in the middest had black hornes  on their he^ds, and greene boughes in their hands: next them were foure or fiue principall men diuersly painted, which with bastinadoes beat forward such as tired in the dance. Thus they made themselues scarce able to goe or stand. When they met together, they made a hellish noise, and euery one flinging away his bough, ranne (clapping their ha^ds) vp into a tree, and tare it to the ground, and fell into their order againe: thus they did twice. Fourteene well-fauoured children, or (if you had rather heareCapt. Smith. Captaine Smith) fifteene of the properest yong Boyes, betweene ten and fifteene yeeres of age, they painted white: H uing brought them forth, the people (saith he) spent the forenoone in dancing and singing about them with Rattles: in the afternoone they put these children to the root of a tree, all the men standing to guard them each with a Bastinado of Reeds bound together, in his hand,  Then doe they make a lane betweene them all along, thorow which there were appointed fiue yong men (White cals them Priests) to fetch these children. Each of these fetched a child, the guard laying on with their B^stinadoes, while they with their naked bodies defend the children to their great smart. All this time the women weepe and cry out very passionately, prouiding mosse, skinnes, mats, and dry wood vnknowne to what purpose. When the children are in this manner fetched away, the guard teares downe trees, branches, and boughes, making wreathes for their heads, or bedecking their haire with the leaues. What else was done with the children was not seene, but they were all cast on a heape in a Vall^y, as dead, where was made a great feast for all the company.
William WhiteWilliam White. relating this Rite, saith, That they remoued them from tree to tree three  times, and at last carried them into a Valley where the King sate; where they would not suffer our men to see, but feasted there two houres. On a sudden all arose with cudgels in their hand, and made a lane, as is before said, and the children being laid downe vnder a tree (to their seeming) without life, they all fell into a ring againe, and danced about the children a good space, and then sate downe in a circle about the tree. Raphanna in the mids, caused burdens of wood to be brought to the Altar, made of poles set like a steeple, where they made a great fire, which our men thought, but were deceiued, was to sacrifice their children to the Diuell (whom they call Kewase) who, as they report, suckes their bloud. They were vnwilling to let them stay any longer. They found a woman mourning for yong Paspiha, sacrificed at the Towne of Rapahanna: but this Paspaiha is now aliue, as Mr Rolph hath since  related to me: and the mourning of the women is not for their childrens death, but because they are for diuers moneths detained from them, as we shall after see. Yea, the Virginians themselues, by false reports might delude our Men, and say they were sacrificed when they were not. For euen still, they are very inconstant (it is Mr Rolphs report) in all that they speake of their Religion: one denying that which another affirmeth, and either not knowing, or nor willing that others should know their diuellish mysteries. And hence perhaps it was, that (as Captaine Smith addeth) a Werowance being demanded the meaning of this sacrifice, answered, that the children were not all dead, but that the Oke or Diuell did sucke the bloud from their left brest, who chanced to be his by lot, till they were dead, but the rest were kept in the wildernesse by the yong men, till nine Moones were expired, during  which time, they must not conuerse with any, and of these were made their Priests, and coniurers, This Sacrifice they held to be so necessarie, that if they should omit it, their Oke or Diuell, and their other Quiyoughcosughes, or gods, would let them haue no Deere, Turkies,
 Corne, or Fish; and who would besides make a great slaughter amongst them. They thinke that their Werowances and Priests, which they also esteeme Quiyoughcosughes, when they are dead, doe goe beyond the Mountaines towards the setting of the Sunne, and euer remaine there in forme of their Oke, hauing their heads painted with Oyle and PoconesPocones is a small Roote, which dried and beat into powder, cut ^ thred: they vse it for swellings, aches, and painting. finely trimmed with feathers, and shall haue Beades, Hatchets, Copper, and Tobacco, neuer ceasing to dance and sing with their Predecessors. The common-people, they suppose, shall not liue after death. Some sought to conuert them from these Superstitions: the Werowance of Quiyoughcohanock was so farre perswaded, as that he professed to beleeue that our God exceeded theirs, as much as our Guns did their Bowes and Arrowes: and many times did send to the President many presents, entreating him to pray to hisIn that extremitie of miserie w^ich ours since sustained I haue been told that both the Sauages and Fugitiues would obiect our want, and their plenty, for theirs, and against our Religion. God for raine, for his God  would not send him any.
William White reporteth these their ceremonies of honouring the Sunne. By breake of day, before they eate or drinke, the men, women, and children aboue ten yeeres old, runne into the water, and there wash a good space, till the Sunne arise, and then they offer sacrifice to it, strewing Tobacco on the land or water: the like they doe at Sun-set. Hee also relateth that one GeorgeThe cruell death of George Casson. Casson (before mentioned) was sacrificed, as they thought, to the Diuell, being stripped naked and bound to two stakes, with his backe against a great fire: then did they rip him, and burne his bowels, and dryed his flesh to the bones, which they kept aboue-ground in a by-roome. Many other of our men were cruelly and treacherously executed by them, though perhaps not sacrificed; and none had been left, if their ambushes and treasons  had taken effect. Powhatan thus inuitedDeclaration of Vi gin a. Captaine Ratliffe and thirty others to trade for corne, and hauing brought them within his ambush, murthered them.
Alexander Whitaker saith, That theirPriests in Virg^nia. Priests (whom they call Quiokosoughs) are Witches, of whom the people stand in great awe. The manner of their life is Heremite-fashion, in woods, in houses sequestred from the common course of men, where none may come, or speake with them, vncalled. They take no care for victuals; for all such necessaries are set in a place neere his Cottage for his vse. If they would haue raine, or haue lost any thing, he at their request coniureth, and often preuaileth. He is their Physician if they bee sicke, and sucketh their wounds. At his word they make warre and peace, and doe nothing of moment without him. Master Rolph affirmes that these Priests liue not solitarily, and in other  things is of another opinion, which perhaps our former Author at his first comming, might haue by relation of others.
The Wirowance of Acawmacke told our men of a strange accident: two children being dead and buried, being reuiewed by the parents, seemed to haue liuely and cheerefull countenances, which caused many to behold them, and none of the beholders escaped death.


@. III. Of the Sasquesahanockes, with other, and later obseruations of  the Virginian Rites.
THe Sasquesahanockes are a Gyantly people, strange in proportion, behauiour, and attire, their voice sounding from them, as out of a Caue; their attire of Beares skins, hanged with Beares pawes, the head of a Wolfe, and such like iewels: and (if any would haue a spoone to eate with the Diuell) their Tobacco pipes were three quarters of a yard long, carued at the great end with a Bird, Beare, or other deuice, sufficient to beat out the braines of a Horse (and how many Asses braines are beaten out, or rather mens braines smoaked out, and Asses haled in by our lesse Pipes at home?) the rest of their furniture was sutable. The calfe of one of their legges was measured three quarters of a yard about, the rest  of his limbes proportionable. With much adoe restrained they this people from worshipping our men. AndDiscouerie of Chesipeack, 1608. when our men prayed (according to their dayly custome) and sung a Psalme, they much wondered: and after began in most passionate manner to hold vp their hands to the Sunne, with a Song, then embracing the Captaine, they began to adore him in like manner, and so proceeded (notwithstanding his rebuking them) till their song was ended: which done, one with a most strange action and vncomely voice began an Oration of their loues. That ended, with a great painted Beares skinne they couered the Captaine, another hung about his necke a chaine of white Beades. Others laid eighteene Mantles at his feet, with many other ceremonies, to create him their Gouernour, that hee might defend them against the Massa-womekes, their enemies. As these are very great, so the Weighcocomocoes  are very little.
I may also heere insert the ridiculous conceits which some Virginians hold, concerning
 their first originall, as I haue heard from the relation of an English Youth,Cap. Argols Boy, his name was Henry Spilman. which liued long amongst the Sauages: that a Hare came into their Countrey and made the first men, and after preserued them from a great Serpent: and when two other Hares came thither, that Hare for their entertainment killed a Deere, which was then the onely Deere that was, and strewing the haires of that Deeres hide, euery haire proued a Deere. He said they worshipped towards a certaine Hoope or Sphere doubled a crosse, which was set vpon an heape of stones in their houses. They had a house without the Towne for the Women, in the time of their naturall sicknesse to keepe in, where no men might come.
But of their opinions and ceremonies in Religion, who fitter to be heard then a Virginian,  an experienced Man and Counseller to Opochancanough their King and Gouernour in Powhatans absence? Such is Tomocomo,Tomocomo. at this present in London, sent hither to obserue and bring newes of our King and Country to his Nation; some othersI was thus told by Sir Thomas Dale. which haue beene heere in former times, being more silly, which hauing seene little else then this Citie, haue reported much of the Houses, and Men, but thought we had small store of Corne or Trees: the Virginians imagining that our men came into their Countrey for supply of these defects. This Man therefore, being landed in the West parts, found cause of admiration at our plenty in these kinds, and (as some haue reported) began to tell both Men and Trees, till his Arithmetike fayled. For their numbring beyond an hundred is imperfect, and somewhat confused. Of Him (Sir Thomas Dales man being our Interpreter) I learned, that their Okeeus doth often  appeare to them in His House or Temple: the manner of which apparition is thus. First, foure of their Priests or sacred Persons (of which he said he was one) goe into the House, and by certaine words of a strange Language (which he repeated very roundly in my hearing, but the Interpreter vnderstood not a word, nor doe the common people) call or coniure this Okeeus, who appeareth to them out of the Aire, thence comming into the House; and walking vp and downe with strange words and gestures, causeth eight more of the principall persons to be called in, all which twelue standing round about him, he prescribes to them what hee would haue done. Of him they depend in all their proceedings, if it bee but in a hunting Iourney,Sometimes when they are preparing to hunt, he wil by some knowne signe manifest himselfe, and direct them to game: they all with great alacritie acknowledging that signe, and following. who by winds or other awefull tokens of his presence, holds them in a superstitious both feare and confidence. His apparition is in forme of a personable Virginian, with  a long blacke locke on the left side, hanging downe neere to the foot. This is the cause why the Virginians weare these sinister lockes; which some thinke (I haue heard Sir Thomas Dale and Master Rolph of that opinion) was first by our Men in the first Plantation, little aboue thirty yeeres since, borrowed from these Sauages: (a faire vnlouely generation of the Louelocke, Christians imitating Sauages, and they the Deuill) this Virginian so admiring this Rite, that in arguing about Religion, he obiected to our God this defect, that hee had not taught vs so to weare our haire. After that he hath stayed with his twelue so long as he thinkes fit, he departeth vp into the ayre whence he came. Tomocomo auerred that this was Hee which made Heauen and Earth; had taught them to plant so many kinds of Corne; was the Author of their good; had prophesied to them before of our mens comming; knew all our Countrey;  whom he made acquainted with his comming hither, and told him that within so many moneths he would returne: but the Deuill or Okeeus answered, that it would bee soThis proued true, contrary to Tomocomos minde, being desirous to returne in the first ship which is gone alreadie. many more: neyther at his returne must he goe into that house, till Okeeus shall call him. He is very zealous in his superstition, and will heare no perswasions to the truth; bidding vs teach the Boyes and Girles (which were brought ouer from thence) Hee being too olde now to learne. Being asked, what became of the soules of dead men, he pointed vp to Heauen; but of wicked men, that they hung betweene Heauen and Earth? This Tomocomo hath Matachanna one of Powhatans Daughters to wife. The vulgar are held in great awe by their Ignorance; and when any of them haue got a good Deere, some of the greater will pretend Okeeus his name, and cause it to be brought to His House, and then share it at their pleasure.  They hold it a disgrace to feare death: and therefore when they must dye, doe it resolutely; as happened to one which had robbed the English, and by Powhatan (vpon complaint made to Him) was fetched sixscore miles from the place where he lurked, and by this Tomocomo, in the presence of the English executed, his braines being knocked out, shewing no signe of feare or dismayednesse. They vse to make Blacke Boyes once in fourteene or fifteene yeeres generally, for all the Country (this hapned the last yeere, 1615.) when all of a certaine age, that haue not beene made Blacke BoyesBlacke Boyes. before, are initiated in this Ceremonie. They vse to make some at other times by themselues, as before is shewed of Rapahannok out of Captaine Smith, and Master White, which then mistooke it for a Sacrifice. Some foure moneths after that Rite they liue apart, and are fed by some appointed to carry them their foode:Master Rolph. they  speake to no man, nor come in company, seeme distracted (some thinke by some Deuillish apparition scarred; certaine, to oblige them to that Deuillish Religion as by a Hellish Sacrament of the Deuils institution) and will offer to shoot at such as come nigh them. And when
 they come into company, yet are for a certaine time of silent and strange behauiour, and will doe any thing neuer so desperate that they shall be bidden; if they tell them they shall bee old men if they goe not into the fire, they will doe it. There is none of their men but are made Blacke Boyes at one time or other. Let vs obserue these things with pitty and compassion, and endeuour to bring these silly soules out of the snare of the Deuill, by our prayers, our purses, and all our best endeuours. This may be added; that their young people haue in manner no knowledge, and the vulgar little, of their Religion. They vse also to beguile them with their Okee, or Image of him in their houses, into whose mouth they will put a Tobacco pipe kindled, and one behind that Image drawes the smoke, which the siluer vulgar and children thinke to be done by their God or Idoll.  
They haueVirginia. Voyage 1606. M. S.M. George Percy a certaine herbe called Weysake, like Liuerwort, which they chew and spit into poysoned wounds, that are thereby healed in foure and twenty houres. In finding out their medicinall Roote (it is the Relation of Master George Percie) six of them hold together by the armes, and so goe singing, and withall searching: and when they haue found it, sit downe singing, crossing the Root with their hands for a good space, then gather, chew, and spit. He thus describeth their dances; One stands in the middest, singing and clapping hands; all the rest dance about him, shooting, hollowing, stamping with antike gesture, like so many Deuils, their feet alwayes (and only) agreeing in one stroke. Landing at Kecoughtan, the Sauages entertayned them with a dolefull noyse, laying their faces to the ground, and scratching the Earth with their nayles. The Werowance of Rapahanna, met them, playing on  a Flute of a Reed, with a Crowne of Deeres haire coloured red, fashioned like a Rose, with a Chaine of Beads about his necke, and Bracelets of Pearle hanging at his eares, in each eare a Birds claw. The women are of a modest proud behauiour; with an Iron, pounce and raze their bodies, legges, thighes, and armes, in curious knots and pourtraytures of Fowles, Fishes, Beasts, and rub a painting into the same, which will neuer out. The Queene of Apametica was attired with a Coronet beset with many white bones, her eares hanged with Copper, a Chaine thereof six times compassing her necke. The Maids shaue their heads all but the hinder part: the Wiues weare it all of a length: the Men weare the left locke long, as is said already, sometimes an ell, which they tye when they please in an artificiall knot, stucke with feathers, the right side shauen. The King of Paspahey was painted all blacke, with  hornes on his head like a Deuill. He testifieth of their hard fare watching euery third night, lying on the bare cold ground, what weather soeuer came, and warding the next day, a small Can of Barley sodden in water, being the sustinance for fiue men a day: their drinke brackish and slimy water. This continued fiue moneths.
The VirginiansCap. Smith. are borne white: their haire blacke, few haue beards, and they plucke out the haires which would grow: the women with two shels are their Barbers: they are strong, nimble, and hardy, inconstant, timorous, quicke of apprehension, cautelous, couetous of Copper and Beads; they seldome forget an iniury, and seldome steale from each other, lest the Coniurers should bewray them, which it is sufficient that these thinke they can doe. They haue their Lands and Gardens in proper, and most of them liue of their labour.  The cause of their blacknesse Master Rolph ascribes to their Oyntments which in their smokie Houses they vse; euen as Bacon with vs is so coloured: this within doores they vse against the fire, abroad against the Sunne, Master Wingfield sayth,Ed. Mar. Wingfield. they would bee of good complexion, if they would leaue painting (which they vse on their face and shoulders.) He neuer saw any of them grosse,Some of them are found such. or bald: they would haue beards, but that they pluck away the haires: they haue one wife, many Loues, and are also Sodomites. Their elder women are Cookes, Barbers, and for seruice; the younger for dalliance. The women hang their children at their backes, in Summer naked, in Winter vnder a Deere-skin. They are of modest behauiour. They seldome or neuer brawle: in entertayning a stranger, they spread a mat for him to sit downe, and dance before him. They weare their nailes long to flay  their Deere: they put Bow and Arrowes into their Childrens hand before they are sixe yeeres old.
In each eare commonly they haue three great holes, whereat they hang Chaines, Bracelets or Copper: some weare in those holes a small Snake coloured greene and yellow, neere halfe a yard long, which crawling about his necke, offereth to kisse his lips. Others weare a dead Rat tied by the taile. Their names are giuen them according to the humour of the Parents. Their women they say are easily deliuered: they wash in the Riuers their young Infants to make them hardie. The women and children doe the houshold and field-worke, the men disdayning the same, and only delighting in fishing, hunting, warres, and such manlike exercises: the women plant, reape, beare burthens, pound their Corne, make baskets,  pots, bread, and doe their Cookery and other businesse. They easily kindle fire by chasing a dry pointed sticke in a hole of a little square piece of wood.

Powhatan had aboue thirty Commanders, or Wirrowances vnder him, all which were not in peace only, but seruiceable in Captaine Smiths Presidencie, to the English, and still, as I haue beene told by some, that haue since beene there they doe affect him, and will aske of him. Powhatan hath three Brethren, and two Sisters, to whom the Inheritance belongeth successiuely, and not to his or their Sonnes till after their death, and then the eldest Sisters Sonne inheriteth. He hath his treasure of Skins, Copper, Pearles, Beades, and such like, kept in a house for that purpose, and there stored against the time of his buriall. This House is fifty or threescore yards long, frequented onely by Priests. At the foure corners of this House stand foure Images as Sentinels, one of a Dragon, another of a Beare, a third of a Leopard, and the  fourth of a Gyant. He hath as many women as he will, which when he is weary of, he bestoweth on whom he best liketh. His Will, and Custome are the Lawes. He executeth ciuill punishments on Malefactors, as broyling to death, being incompassed with fire, and other tortures. The other Werowances, or Commanders (so the word signifieth) haue power of life and death, and haue some twentie men, some fortie, some an hundred, some many more vnder their command. Some were sent to inquire for those, which were left of Sir Walter Raleighs Colonie, but they could learne nothing of them, but that they were dead. Powhatan was gone Southwards when our men came last thence; some thought for feare of Opochancanough his younger Brother, a man very gracious, both with the people and the English, iealous lest Hee and the English should conspire against him, thinking that he will  not returne; but others thinke hee will returne againe. His second Brother is decrepi^ and lame. His age is not so great as some haue reckoned: the errour arisingMaster Rolph. from the Virginian computation of yeeres; they reckoning euery Spring and euery Fall seuerall yeeres. So did Tomocomo at his comming into England, marke vp his time, accounting each day, and (because they sayled in the night, when hee thought they would haue anchored by the shore) each night another day.



CHAP. VII. Of Florida.

@. I. Of the Acts of the Spanish and French in Florida: And of the Soyle and Cities.
NExt to Virginia towards the South is situate Florida,Florida with i long. Oriel. Theat. so called, because it  was first discouered by the Spaniards onExped in Flor. ap. T. de Bry. Palme Sunday, or as the mostGiraua, etc. interprete, Easter day, which they call Pasqua Florida: and not, as Theuet writeth, for the flourishing Verdure thereof. TheGomara hist. Gen. Ep. 45. Oniedo, l. 16. c. 11. first finder, after their account, was Iohn Ponce of Leon, in the yeere 1512. but wee haue before shewed, that Sebastian Cabota had discouered it in the name of King Henrie the Seuenth of England. This Region extendeth to the fiue and twentieth degree. It runneth out into the Sea with a long point of Land, as if it would eyther set barres to that swift current which there runneth out, or point out the dangers of these Coasts to the hazardous Mariners.
Into the Land it stretcheth Westward vnto the borders of New Spaine, and those other  Countries which are not fully knowne: otherwhere it is washed with a dangerous Sea, which separateth Chichora, Bahama, and Luca^a from the same. Iohn PonceGomara and Caluet^. aforesaid, hearing a rumour of a prodigious Well, which (as the Poets tell of Medea) would make old men become young againe, plaid the yongling to goe search it sixe monethes together, and in that inquiry, discouers this Continent: and repayring into Spaine, obtayneth this Prouince with the title of Adelantado. He returned with a Nauy and band of Souldiers, but at his landing was so welcomed by the Floridians, that many of his men were slaine, and himselfe wounded vnto death.Benzo, l ^. Pamphilo de Naruaes had no better successe: hee entred Florida, 1527. Aluaro Nunnez called Capo di Vacca or Cabe^a de Vaca, and some of his company, after long captiuitie, escaped.
Pamphilo carried with him sixe hundred men: about the Riuer of Palmes his ships were wracked, and most of the Spaniards drowned. A few escaped drowning, but twelue fell mad, and like Dogges sought to woorrie each other. Scarcely tenne returned into Spaine.
 These comming to Mexico, reported that they had restored three dead men to life. I rather beleeue, saith Benzo, that they killed foure quicke men.
Don Ferdinando de SotoThe Expedition of Soto, is, by Mr Hakluyt set forth in English being written by a Por^ugal Gentleman of Elnas, employed therein. It was Anno 1538. enriched with the spoiles of Atibaliba King of Peru, in which action he was a Captain and Horseman, heere found place to spend that which there hee had gotten. For hauing obtained the gouernment of Florida, and gathered a band of sixe hundred men for that Expedition, in it he spent fiue yeares searching for Minerals, till hee lost himselfe. Iulian Samado, and Ahumada made sute for the like grant, but could not obtaine it. Fryer Luys de Beluastro, and other Dominicks had vndertaken, by the way of preaching, to haue reduced the Floridians to Christianity, and the Spanish obedience, and were sent at the Emperours charge: but no sooner set foot on shore, then hee and two of his companions  were taken by the Sauages, and cruelly slaine and eaten, their shauen scalpes being hanged vp in their Temple for a monument. This hapned in the yeere 1549. In the yeere 1524. Francis the first, the French King, had sent IohnIohn de Verraz. ap. Hak to. 3 de Verrazano hither, but, because hee rather sought to discouer all along the Coast, then to search or settle within Land, I passe him ouer. In the yeere, 1562. That Worthy of France,Of his life there is a speciall booke. Chastillon, Champion of Religion, and of his Countrey, sent Captaine Iohn Ribault, to discouer and Plant in these parts, which his Voyage and Plantation is written by ReneRene Laud. ap. Hak. Laudonniere, one employed therein. Hee left Capt. Albert there with some of his company, who built a Fort called Charles Fort: but this Albert was slaine in a mutiny by his Souldiers, and they returning home, were so pursued by Famine, the Pursuiuant of Diuine Iustice, that after their Shooes and Leather Ierkins eaten  (their drinke being Sea-water, or their owne Vrine) they killed and ate vp one of their owne company. Laudonniere was sent thither againe to inhabite, Anno 1564. and the next yeere Ribault was sent to supply his place.
But vncouthHe was reliued by Si Iohn Hawkins. great bounty. Famine had so wasted and consumed the French, before his arriuall, that the very bones of most of the Souldiers pierced thorow their starued skinnes in many places of their bodies, as if they would now trust the emptie hands no longer, but would become their owne Purueyers, and looke out for themselues. And yet, better it is to fall into the hands of God, then of mercilesse men: Famine being but a meere Executioner to Gods Iustice, but these executing also a Diuellish malice. Such were the Spaniards, who were sent thither vnder the conduct of Don Pedro Melendes, which massacred all of euery sexe and age,  which they found in the fort: and Ribault being cast by shipwracke on the shore, and receiued of Vallemandus the Spaniard, with promises of all kindnesse, was cruelly murthered with all his company, except some few which they reserued for their owne employments. The manner of it is at large handled byLaudonn. ap. Hak. Laudonniere,Iaques Morgues, ap. Theod. de Bry Amer. part. 2. by Morgues, byNic. Challusius Diepensis editus Latine per Caluetonem. Challusius, which were as brands by diuine hand plucked out of the Spanish combustion. The Petition or Supplication putSupplicatio ap. Caluet. and ap. Theod. de Bry. vp by the Orphanes, Widowes, and distressed kindred of that massacred number to Charles the Ninth, mentioneth nine hundred, which perished in this bloudy deluge.
The Spaniards hauing laid the foundations of their habitation in bloud, found it too slippery to build any sure habitation thereon. For their cruelties both to the French and Floridians  were retorted vpon themselues, in the yeere 1567. byDom. de Gorgues ap. Hak. com. 3. Monsieur Dominique de Gorgues, and his Associates, assisted by the Natiue inhabitants, and Florida was left destitute of Christian Inhabitants. Thus hath Florida beene first courted by the English, wooed by the Spanish, almost wonne by the French, and yet remaines a rich and beautifull Virgin, waiting till the Neighbour Virginia bestow on her an English Bridegroome, who as making the first loue, may lay the iustest challenge vnto her.
Her riches are such, thatCabez. de Vaca. ap. Hak in Ep. Dedic. in his Virginia richly valued. Cabeza de Vaca, who was one of Naruaes wracked companie, and Sotos Corriuall in this Floridian sute, and had trauelled thorow a great part of the In-land) affirmed to Charles the Emperour, that Florida was the richest Countrey of the World, and that he had therein seene Gold and Siluer, and Stones of great value. Besides  there is great varietie ofGaspar. Ens lib. 3. Botero. part. 1. l. 5. Trees, Fruits, Fowles, Beasts, Beares, Leopards, Ounces, Wolues, wilde Dogges, Goats, Hares, Conies, Deere; Oxen with woolly hydes, Camels backs, and Horses manes. Sir Iohn Hawkins his second Voyage, published by Master Hakluyt, mentioneth Vnicornes hornes amongst the Floridians, which they weare about their necks, whereof the French-men obtained many pieces: and that they affirme, there are many of those beasts with one horne, which they put into the water before they drinke. Haply, this might be a tale of the French, to sell such pieces deare to the Engl^sh, or the horne of some other beast, or of the Sea-Vnicorne. Our Discourse hath most right vnto their Rites. For their many Cities, the manner of their building, the manners of their Inhabitants, I would not bee so long. MorguesAmerica part. 2. de Bry. hath let vs see them in the Pictures.  
They wall or impale them with posts fastned in the ground, the circle as of a Snaile, comming within that point where it began, and leauing a way but for two men to enter; at either
 end of that double empaling or entrance, stand two Watch-towres, one within, the other without the Citie, where Watch-men alway are set for defence: their houses are round: their apparell nakednesse, except a beasts skin, or some ornament of Mosse about their secret parts. They paint and raze their skins with great cunning; the smart makes them sicke seuen or eight dayes after; they rubbe ouer those rased workes, with a certaine herbe, which coloureth the same, so as it cannot be done away. They paint their faces, and their skins cunningly (this Morgues a Painter being Iudge) euen to admiration. They let the nailes on their toes and fingers grow long: they are tall, nimble comely.



@. II. Of their Customes, Manners and Superstitions.
THey warreLaudonniere. alway one Country vpon another, and kill all the men they can take; the women and children they bring vp: they cut off the haire of the head together with the skin, and dry it, to reserue the same as a monument of their valour. After their returne from the warres, if they be victorious, they make a solemne Feast, which  lasteth three dayes, with Dances and Songs to the honour of the Sunne. For the Sunne and Moone are their Deities. Their Priests are Magicians also, and Physicians with them. They haue many Hermaphrodites, which are put to great drudgerie, and made to beare all their carriages. In necessitie they will eate coales, and put sand in their Pottage. Three moneths in the yeere they forsake their houses, and liue in the Woods: against this time they haue made their prouision of victuall, drying the same in the smoke. They meete in consultation euery morning in a great common house, whither the King resorteth and his Senators, which after salutation, sit downe in a round. They consult with the Iawas or Priest. And after this they drinke Cassine, which is very hote, made of the leaues of a certaine Tree, which none may taste that hath not before made his valour euident in the Warres. It sets  them in a sweat, and taketh away hunger and thirst foure and twentie houres after. When a King dyeth, they bury him very solemnely, and vpon his graue they set the Cup wherein he was wont to drinke: and round about the graue they sticke many Arrowes, weeping and fasting three dayes together without ceasing. All the Kings which were his friends, make the like mourning: and in token of their loue, cut off halfe their haire (which they otherwise weare long, knit vp behind) both men and women. During the space of sixe Moones (so they reckon their moneths) there are certaine women appointed which bewayle his death, crying with a loud voyce thrice a day, at morning, noone, and euening. All the goods of this King are put into his house, which afterwards they set on fire. The like is done with the Goods of the Priests, who are buried in their Houses, and then both House and Goods  burned.
The womenMorgues. Icon. 18. 19. that haue lost their Husbands in the Warres, present themselues before the King, sitting on their heeles, with great lamentations suing for reuenge, and they with other Widowes spend some dayes in mourning at their husbands graues, and carry thither the Cup wherein he had wont to drinke: they cut also their haire neere the eares, strewing the same in the Sepulchre, There they cast also their weapons. They may not marry againe till their haire be growne that it may couer their shoulders.
When any is sicke, they lay him flat on a forme, and with a sharpe shell rasing off the skin of his forehead, sucke out the bloud with their mouthes, spitting it out into some Vessell. The women that giue sucke, or are great with child, come to drinke the same, especially if  it be of a lusty young man, that their milke may be bettered, and the child thereby nourished, may be stronger.
RibaultIcon. 8. at his first being there, had fixed a certaine Pillar of stone, engrauen with the Armes of France on a Hill in an Iland, which Laudonniere at his comming found the Floridians worshipping as their Idoll, with kisses, kneeling, and other Deuotions. Before the same lay diuers Offerings of fruits of the Country, Roots (which they vsed eyther for food or Physicke) vessels full of sweet Oyles, with Bowes and Arrowes. It was girt about with Garlands of Flowres, and boughes of the best trees, from the top to the bottome. King Athore himselfe performed the same honour to this Pillar, that hee receiued of his Subiects. The King Athore was a goodly personage, higher by a foot and halfe then any of the French,  representing a kind of Maiestie and grauitie in his demeanure. He had married his owne Mother, and had by her diuers Children of both sexes; but after she was espoused to him, his Father Satourioua did not touch her.

ThisIcon. 11. Satourioua when he went to warre, in the presence of the French vsed these Ceremonies: The Kings his coadiutors sitting around, hee placed himselfe in the midst, at his right hand had a fire, and at his left two vessels full of water. Then did hee expresse indignation and anger in his lookes, gesture, hollow murmurings, and loud cryes, answered with the like from his Souldiers: and taking a woodden dish, turned himselfe to the Sunne, as thence desiring victorie, and that as he now shed the water in the dish, so he might shed the bloud of his Enemies. Hurling therefore the water with great violence into the Ayre, and therewith besprinkling his Souldiers, he said, Doe you thus with the bloud of our Enemies: and powring the water which was in the other vessell on the fire, So (saith hee) may you extinguish your foes, and bring backe the skins of their heads. OutinaIcon. 12. or Vi^na another  King was an Enemie to this Satourioua: he in his expedition which hee made against his Enemies (wherein he was assisted by the French) consulted with this Magician about his successe. He espying a Frenchmans Target, demandeth the same, and (in the mids of the Armie) placeth it on the ground, drawing a circle fiue foote ouer about it, adding also certaine notes and characters: then did he set himselfe vpon the Target, sitting vpon his heeles mumbling I know not what, with variety of gestures about the space of a quarter of an houre: after which he appeared so transformed into deformed shapes, that he looked not like a man, wreathed his limbes, his bones cracking, with other actions seeming supernaturall. At last he returnes himselfe as it were weary and astonished, and comming out of the Circle, saluted the King, and told him the number of their Enemies and place of their encamping, which  they found very true. This King was called Helata Outina, which signifieth, a King of Kings, and yet had but a few hundreths of men in his Armie, which heIcon. 14. conducted in their rankes, himselfe going alone in the mids. They dry the armes and legges, and crownes of their Enemies which they haue slaine, to make solemne triumph at their returne, which they doe, fastning them on Poles pitched in the ground, the men and women sitting round about, and the Magician with an Image in his hand, mumbling curses against the Enemie: ouer-against him are three men kneeling, one of which beateth a stone with a club, and answereth the Magician at euery of his imprecations, the other two sing and make a noyse with certaine Rattles.
They sow or set their Corne rather, as in Virginia: and haue two Seed-times, and two  Haruests, which they bring into a publike Barne or common Store-house, as they doe the rest of their victuals, none fearing to be beguiled of his Neighbour. Thus doe these Barbarians enioy that content, attended with sobrietie and simplicitie, which wee haue banished together out of our Coasts: euery one distrusting or defrauding others, whiles eyther by miserable keeping, or luxurious spending; he (which isAuarus malus omnibus, sibi pessimus. Seneca. bad to all) is worst to himselfe. To this Barne they bring, at a certaine time of the yeere, all the Venison, Fish, and Crocodiles, (dryed before in the smoke for the better preseruation) which they meddle not with, til need forceth them, and then they signifie the same to each other. The King may take thereof as much as he will. This prouision is sent in baskets on the shoulders of their Hermaphrodites, which weare long haire, and are their Porters for all burthens.  
They hunt Harts after a strange manner: for they will put on a Harts skinne, with the legges and head on, so that the same shall serue them to stalke with, and they will looke thorow the eye and the holes of the Hide, as if it were a Vizor, thereby deceiuing their Game, which they shoot and kill, especially at the places, where they come to drinke. Their Crocodiles they take in a strange manner. They are so plagued with these beast, that they keepe continuall watch and ward against them, as other-where against their Enemies. For this purpose, they haue a watch-houseIcon. 26. by the Riuers side, and when hunger driues the beast on shore for his prey, the Watchmen call to men appointed: they come tenne or twelue of them, bearing a beame or tree, the smaller end whereof they thrust into the mouth of the Crocodile (comming vpon them gaping for his prey) which being sharpe and rough, cannot  be got out, and therewith they ouer-turne him, and then being laid on his backe, easily kill him. The fleshN. Chaluf. c. 3. tasteth like Veale, and would be sauoury meate, if it did not sauour so much of a Muskie sent. Their sobrietieIcon. 2. 8. lengtheneth their liues, in such sort that one of their Kings told me, saith Morgues, that he wasLaudon. saith 250. but he saw them not himselfe, as this our Author did: this man gaue two Eagles to the French, perhaps they reckon euery yeere two, as in Virginia. three hundred yeeres old, and his Father, which there he shewed me aliue, was fiftie yeeres elder then himselfe: when I saw him, mee thought I saw nothing but bones couered with skinne. His sinewes, veines, and arteries, (sayth Laudonniere, in description of the same man,) his bones and other parts appeared so cleerely thorow his skinne, that a man might easily tell them, and discerne the one from the other. He could not see, nor yet speake without great paine. Monsieur de Ottigni demanding of their age, the younger of these two called a company of Indians, and striking twice on his  thigh, laid his hands on two of them, hee shewed that they were his Sonnes: and striking on their thighes, he shewed others which were their Sonnes, and so continued till the fift
 generation. And yet it was told them, that the eldest of them both might by the course of Nature liue thirtie or fortie yeeres more.
They haue a diuellishMorgues. Icon. 34. custome, to offer the first-borne male-children to the King for a sacrifice. The day of this dismall Rite being notified to the King, he goeth to the place appointed, and sits downe. Before him is a blocke two foot high, and as much thicke, before which the mother of the child sitting on her heeles, and couering her face with her hands, deploreth the death of her sonne. One of her friends offereth the child to the King: and then the women which accompanied the mother, place themselues in a Ring, dancing and singing, and shee that brought the child, stands in the mids of them with the child in her  hands, singing somewhat in the Kings commendation. Sixe Indians stand apart, and with them the Priest with a Club, wherewith after these ceremonies, he killeth the child on that blocke: which was once done in our presence.
AnotherIcon 35. religious Rite they obserue about the end of Februarie: they take the hide of the greatest Hart they can get (the hornes being on) and fill the same with the best hearbs which grow amongst them, hanging about the hornes, necke, and bodie, as it were Garlands of their choisest fruits. Hauing thus sowed and trimmed it, they bring the same with songs and pipes, and set it on a high tree, with the head turned toward the East, with prayers to the Sunne, that hee would cause the same good things to grow againe in their land. The King and his Magician stand neerest the tree and begin, all the people following with  their Responds. This done, they goe their wayes, leauing it there till the next yeere, and then renue the same ceremonie.
RibaultR. Laudon. at his first comming had two of the Floridians aboord with him certaine dayes, who, when they offered them meat, refused it, giuing them to vnderstand, that they were accustomed to wash their face; and to stay till sun-set before they did eate: which is a ceremonie common in all those parts. They obserue a certaine Feast called Toya, with great solemnitie. The place where it is kept, is a great circuit of ground, swept and made neat by the women the day before: and on the Feast day they which are appointed to celebrate this Feast, come painted and trimmed with feathers, and set themselues in order. ThreeThese three are Iawas which are pri^sts, magicians and physicians. others in differing painting and gestures follow with Tabrets, dancing and singing in a lamentable  tune, others answering them. After that they haue sung, danced, and turned three tim^s, they fall to running like vnbrideled Horses, through the midst of the thicke Woods: the Indian Women continuing all the day in weeping and teares, cutting the armes of the yong Girles with Muskle-shels, with hurling the blood into the Ayre, crying out three times, He Toya. Those that ranne through the Woods returne two dayes after, and then dance in the midst of the place, and cheere vp those which were not called to the Feast. Their dances ended, they deuoure the meat, for they had not eate in three dayes before. The Frenchmen learned of a boy, that in this meane-while the Iawas had made inuocation to Toya, and by Magicall Characters had made him come that he might speake with him, and demand diuers strange things of him, which for feare of the Iawas he durst not vtter.
 To prouoke them vnto reuenge against their enemies, they in their Feasts haue this custome: There is a Dagger in the roome, which one taketh, and striketh therewith one that is thereunto appointed, and then places the Dagger where he had it, and anon renueth the stroke, till the Indian falling downe, the women, Girles, Boyes, come about him, and make great lamentation, the men meane-while drinking Cassine, but with such silence, that not one word is heard: afterwards they apply Mosse warmed, to his side to heale him. Thus doe they call to minde the death of their Ancestors slaine by their enemies, especially when they haue inuaded, and returne out of their enemies Countrey without the heads of any of them, or without any Captiues.



@. III. Of the more In-land parts of Florida, discouered by NVNEZ.
BVt let vs take view of the more Southerly and Westerly parts of Florida beyond the point. Of Pamphilo Naruaes his vnfortunate Expedition ye haue heard.Ramus vol. 3. The whole history written by one of his company, Aluaro Nunez, is extant in Ramusius, out of which I haue inserted such things as I hold most fit. As their landing in Cuba at la Trinita a tempest by land and sea assailed them, so furious, that it ouerthrew all the houses and Churches, making them to fly with no lesse feare of the Trees falling on them, and holding  sixe or seuen together, lest the wind should haue lifted them into the aire: they heard also (or feare so phantasied) the noise of bels, cryes, flutes and other instruments making this dreadfull musicke, to which the hils, trees, and houses thus danced: and after found
 one of the ship-Boats vpon the trees; the ships being perished. The first towne in Florida they came to, was Apalachen, which had not aboue fortie small low cottages, so built by reason of continuall tempests. From thence they trauelled to Aute, by the way encountring a Giant-like people, with bowes as big as ones arme, eleuen or twelue spannes long, wherewith they shot both exactly and forcibly, piercing good armours. A long time they held on an vnprofitable march, till many of them were slaine or consumed by sicknesse and famine, which made them bethinke them of building vessels there, to transport them. But their hard hap pursued them at Sea, and besides outward tempests, assaulted them with one inward (more implacable) of thirst, which forced them to drinke the sea-water, and that so greedily that some died therewith presently. Neither would the Sea continue this hospitalitie (howsoeuer  in hospitall) but hauing satisfied himselfe in the persons of some, and goods of all, betrayed the rest to the barbarous Indians, through many Nations of which they trauelled with as hard disaduentures as euer Virginia yeelded, euen when it was at worst; and let out most clamorous excepters bee Iudges. Cold, which then attended the Winter, was exceeding sharpe, and they naked: and yet Famine was more terrible then cold, which made fiue of their companie eate vp each other, till only one remayned. And no maruell; for famine which will be a traueller and soiourner in all places, hath seemed to fixe his habitation in these, and to hold all the nations adioyning vnder his lawlesse law, and tyrannicall subiection.
The first Indians theyThey called this place Malsatto. met with, had one, and some, both of their teats bored thorow; in the hollow whereof (with no little gallantry) they weare a Reede, two spans and a halfe  long, and two fingers thicke: and likewise for greater brauerie, weare another lesse Reede thorow their nether lip. They liued in these parts two moneths (which was the season of certaine rootes growing vnder the water, which they then liued on) at other times in other places, with fish, and what they can finde. When one of them hath a sonne dead, all of the kinred and people mourne for him a yeere, at morning and noone, and then burie him. These exequies they obserue to all but the old folkes, of which they hold no such account, as hauing alreadie liued out their time. They haue amongst them Physicians or Prists, whose dead bodies they burne with great solemnitie, and make powder of the bones, which the kinsmen a yeere after drinke. These may haue more wiues, the rest but one. When any brother or sonne is dead, those of that house in three months space, seeke not abroad for their foode, though they die of famine, leauing that care to their kinsfolkes and neighbors, which sometimes  almost starue their cures. The Physicians vsed to heale with breathing on the sicke, and touching them, they beleeuing, that if stones and herbs haue such facultie being applyed, much more Man, as a more excellent creature: they would needes haue these Spaniards such Physicians, who (if you beleeue them) did many cures with great admiration, but could not cure their Famine and captiuitie in many yeeres.
This ourAl. Nunez. his peregrination thorow many sauage Nations. Author fled from these to the Queuenes and Marianes, which three moneths in the yeere leaue their former habitations, to goe seeke a kind of fruit called Tune, of the bignesse of an egge, blacke, and of good taste. These are festiuall moneths to these fastiuall nations eating and drinking the iuyce of these Tune, yea, many months afore comforting their present famine, and pacifying their croking entrailes, with hope of the approaching  Tune-season: and thus with words they solaced Aluaros impatient hunger sixe months before he could thus indeed satisfie it. Their houses are Mats vpon foure Arches, shifted euery second or third day, to seeke foode. They sowe nothing, hauing as well a dogs ease, as hunger, yea, (like some of Duke Humfreys gallant guests) they set a good face on the matter and passe the time in mirth and dancing, when somtimes their teeth dance not in foure daies together. They doted so superstitiously on their dreames, that vpon this dreame-warning, they would kill their sonnes, and without so much, would leaue their daughters to be deuoured of beasts, lest (said they) they should grow vp (as the times then were) by marriages with them, to increase the number of their enemies. They haue two or three kindes of bad Rootes, and sometime Fish, or Venison, but all rare. They eate Ants egs, Wormes, Serpents  Frogs, Earth, Wood, Dung of wilde beasts, and keepe the Bones of Fishes and Serpents, to grinde, and eate afterwards. Their women and olde men are put to beare their burthens and drudgeries. They are molested with three sorts of flies, whose biting leaues a seeming leprie: they vse smokie fires in their roomes, almost with the price of their eyes, sauing their skins: others carrie fire-brands in their hands, and therewith set all things as they passe, on fire, both to preuent them, and to hunt their game into fittest places for their taking the same. They haue Kine as big as in Spaine, with small hornes and long haire, 400. leagues alongst the countrey.
Much like was the state of the Canagadi, Camoni, Auauares, Malicones and other Floridian nations. These keepe no reckoning of time by the Sunne or Moone, but (like Plautus  his Parasite) by the bellie, which is Magister artis in obseruing the seasons of their fruits
 and fish. They tell strange things of an euill Spirit, which in fearfull apparitions did astonish them, and cut their flesh. All these Indians haue a custome, not to lye with their wiues after they know them once conceiued, till two yeares after their deliuerie, and their mothers giue them suckeGreat suck-bigges. (he saith) till they be twelue yeeres old, and are able to get food for themselues: which they did because of the famine in those parts, whereby they would otherwise haue died. If any sicken by the way, they leaue him there to die, except he hath a father or brother which wil carry him (in this their fleeting habitation) on their necks. They vpon any discontent, diuorce themselues and marry to others, except they haue had children together: and in mutuall contentions they come to buffets and bastinadoes, till wearinesse,  or their wiues part them: but neuer deale with deadly weapons, and sometimes separate themselues and their families, till time waste away their indignation, and then returne: yet are the fierce and politike in warre.
These Nations, and the Susolas, Comos, Camoles, Quitones, and other Names of Barbarisme, vse Tobacco, and a drinke made of the leaues of certaine trees boiled with water, and put vp into certaine vessels, which they drinke as hot as they can endure, crying meane-while, Who will drinke? And when the women heare this cry, they suddenly stand still, without stirring any way, although they be laden; they beleeuing that if any woman should then moue her selfe, some euill thing would enter into the drinke, whereof they must die soone after: and therefore if any such accident happen, they cast all away; and  likewise if a woman passe by whiles they are brewing it, if the vessell be vncouered. When the women haue their naturall fluxe, they must be their owne Cookes, but for no body else. They haue some Men married to other Men, being attired in habit of Women,Sodomites. and performing onely womanly offices. In some places as they passed, their Physicians (which commonly are in sauage Nations, Magicians and Priests) had rattles of Gourds, which they suppose to come from heauen, and to haue great vertue, none other daring to touch them. Some vsed for boiling wild Gourds, not by putting fire vnder, but by heating stones continually in the fire, and putting them into the liquor till it seethe. Some people on the Mountaines, for a third part of the yeere eate nothing but a powder made of straw. In some places were trees of such venemous qualitie, that the leaues thereof in standing waters would poison  whatsoeuer dranke thereof. Some acknowledged a certaine man in heauen called Aguar, who gaue them raine and all good things. All these people, as he passed with a Negro and two others, (after he had escaped some of his first Masters which held him in hard slauerie) held them for children of the Sunne, and therefore receiued them with great reuerence, and festiuall pompe, and conueyed them still to the next nation Westward towards the South Sea, till they came to Spaniards: alwayes vsing to rob those people to whom they deliuered them of their little wealth, which departed from the same with the greater content, because they serued the next people (and so successiuely) with like sawce. They found some rich Sables of muskie sent, and Emeralds. They were out in this Expedition and captiuity, ten yeeres before they could recouer Spaine, from 1527. to 1537.



@. IIII. Other Obseruations of Florida.
THese things following, OrteliusOrtel. Theat. saith, he had from his Nephew Caelius Ortelius, by the relation of an eye-witnesse: The King giueth, or selleth rather, to euery man his wife. If a woman commit adulterie, she is bound to a tree, her armes and legges, stretched out all day, and sometimes whipped. A woman, three houres after she is deliuered  of a child, carries the Infant to the Riuer to wash it. They obserue no discipline in their families with their children. They haue fleas, which bite so eagerly, that they leaue a great deformitie like a leprie after. They haue winged Serpents, one of which I saw, saith,Challus. exped. in Florid. cap. 3. Nicolaus Challusius, the wings whereof seemed to enable it to fly a little height from the ground. The Inhabitants were very carefull to get the head thereof, as was thought, for some superstition. BoteroBotero. Rel. part. 1. l. 5. saith, that they haue three sorts of Harts, and of one of them make the same commodities which we doe of our Kine, keeping them tame, and milking them. The Spaniard hath three Garrisons on the coast of Florida, S. Iacomo, S. Agostino, and S. Philippo.
They areGasp. Ent. l. 3. much addicted to venery, and yet abstaine from their wiues after conception knowne. WhenDiscouerie of Florida and Virginia richly valued. Ferdinando Soto entred Florida, he there found amongst the Indians  one Iohn Ortiz a Spaniard, which by the subtiltie of the people, vnder colour of deliuering a Letter which they had fastened to a cleft Cane, was taken, and liued twelue yeeres with them. Vcita the Lord of the place made him his Temple-keeper, because that by night the
 wolues came and carried away the dead corps. Hee reported that these people are worshippers of the Deuill, and vse to offer vnto him the life and bloud of their Indians, or of any people that they can come by: and when he will haue them doe that sacrifice vnto him, hee speaketh vnto them, and tels them that he is a thirst, and enioynes them this sacrifice. They haue a Prophecie, That a white people should subdue them; wherein the French and Spanish haue hitherto failed in their attempts. Soto hauing in his greedy hopes neglected the many commodities he might haue enioyed, to finde greater, was brought to such dumps, that h^^ thereon sickened, and after died. But before he tooke his bed, he sent to the Cacique of Quigalta, to tell him that he was the Child of the Sunne, and therefore would haue him repaire to him: he answered, That if he would dry vp the Riuer, he would beleeue him. And when  he was dead, because he made the Indians beleeue that the Christians were immortall, the Spaniards sought to conceale his death. But the Cacique of Guachoya busily enquiring for him, they answered, that he was gone to heauen, as many times he did, and had left another in his place. The Cacique thinking he was dead,Benzo. lib. 2. commanded two yong and well proportioned Indians to be brought thither, saying, it was their custome to kill men, when any Lord died, to wait on him by the way: which their cruell courtesie the Spaniards refused, denying that their Lord was dead. One Cacique asked Soto what he was, and why hee came thither? He answered, that he was the sonne of God, and came to teach them knowledge of the Law. Not so, saith the Cacique, if God bids thee thus to kill, steale, and worke all kind of mischiefe.  
For their credulitie in like case, Laudonniere telleth, that a strange and vnheard-of lightening hapned within a league of their Fort, which consumed in an instant 500. acres of meadow, being then greene, and halfe couered with water, together with the foules that were therein. It continued burning three dayes together, and made the Frenchmen thinke, that for their sakes the Indians had set fire on their dwellings, and were gone to some other place. But a certaine Paracoussy, which is one of their petty Kings or Caciques, sent to him a Present, beseeching him to command his men that they should shoot no more towards his dwelling, thinking that the Ordinance had caused all this, which occasion he vsed to his owne good, by arrogating that to himselfe which he saw their simplicitie conceiued of him. Within two dayes after this accident, fell such an heat, that the Riuer (I thinke) was ready  to seethe: and in the mouth of the Riuer were found dead therewith, fishes enow to haue laden fifty Carts, whereof issued by putrifacton much sicknesse.
Calos is neere the Cape of Florida. The King thereof made his subiects beleeue, that his Sorceries and charmes were the cause that made the earth bring forth her fruit,Laudon. was told this of certain Spaniards which liued in those parts. and that he might the easier perswade them, he retired himselfe once or twice a yeere to a certain house, accompanied with two or three of his friends, where he vsed inchantments. If any man offered to see what he did, it cost him his life. Euery yeere he offereth a man in the time of Haruest, which was kept for that purpose, and taken of such Spaniards as had suffered shipwrack on that Coast.
They which further desire to know the riches and commodities of these Countries, may  resort to the Authors in this Chapter mentioned. Sir Francis Drake, in the yeere 1586. besides his worthy exploits in other places, tooke the Forts of S. Iohn, and Saint Augustine; whence he brought Pedro Morales, and Nicholas Burgoignon, whose relations concerning that Countrey Master Hackluit hath inserted among other his painfull labours.
Dauid IngramDauid Ingram. ap. Hak. tom. 3. Edit. 1. reported many strange things which he saith he saw in these parts, Elephants, Horses, and beasts twice as big as Horses, their hinder parts resembling Greyhounds; Buls with eares like Hounds; beasts bigger then Beares, without head or necke, but hauing their eyes and mouthes in their brests: and another beast, (C^rberus) he cals him C^lluchio, which is (saith he) the Deuill in likenesse of a Dogge, and sometimes of a Calfe, with many other matters, wherein he must pardon me, if I be not too prodigall of my Faith. He tels also  of punishment of adultery by death, the woman cutting the adulterers throat, and the neerest kinsman, hers, after many prayers to the Colluchio, and a further punishment, in that they haue no quicke bodie buried with them, to attend them into the other world, as all others haue. But they that list to beleeue, may consult with the Author. Anthony Goddard, (another of Ingrams company, left by Sir Iohn Hawkins) going another way, at Panuco yeelded himselfe to the Spaniards: with whom was Miles Philips, and Iob H^rtop, whose discourses of their disaduentures with the Spaniards and Indians, Master Hakluit hath published: and hath Goddards also written.





CHAP. VIII. Of the Countreys situate Westward from Florida and Virginia towards the South-Sea.

@. I. Of Cibola, Tigues, Quiuira, and Noua Albion.

WE haue hitherto discouered those parts of this Northerne America, which trend along the North Sea, which the English and French Nations haue most made knowne vnto vs: further Westward the mid-land countreys are not so well knowne; yet following our Spanish guides, wee here present them from their relations to your view. When as Cortez had conquered Mexico (as after followeth to be related) he was made Admirall of the South-Seas, but the gouernment of Mexico and New Spaine was, with the title of Vice-roy, giuen to Antonio de Mendoza. These two, partly in emulation of each others glory, partly in hope of enriching themselues, sought to discouer vnknowne Lands; the one by Sea; the later both by Sea and Land.
 The Viceroy sentIn his letter to the Emperour. ap. Hak to 3. and Ramus. as he himselfe testifieth, Francis Vasquez de Coronado, and Frier Marco de Nisa, with Stephen a Negro by land: out of whose relations we haue inserted that which concerneth our purpose. MarkeMarco de Nisa his relation. the Frier, and Stephen set forth with certaine Indians in this Discouerie: and Stephen going before, came to Ceuola, as Marke related, where hee was slaine: the Frier followed with his Indian guides, and passed thorow one place where was small store of Victuall, because it had not there rained, as the Inhabitants affirmed in three yeares space. The Indians call him Hayota, that is, a man come from Heauen. Hee passed on further, led by the same of Ceuola, which with other sixe Cities were reported to be vnder the gouernment of one Lord, and to haue houses of stone, consisting of diuers stories, where were many Turqueses, with many other strange reports of their Markets, multitudes, and  wealth. But because the Frier came not there for feare of the Negros entertainment, let vs listen toF. Vasquez his relation. Francis Vasquez, who came, saw, and ouercame. An 1540. He went with his Army from Culiacan, which is 200. leagues from Mexico, and after a long and tedious iourney, he at last arriued in this Prouince, and conquered (almost with the losse of himselfe) the first Citie of the seuen, which he called Granado. Twice he was striken downe with stones from the wall, as he offered to scale the same: He saith that their houses were of foure or fiue stories or lofts, to which they ascended on ladders; and that they had Cellers vnder the ground, good, and paued. But those seuen Cities were small Townes, all standing in the compasse of foure leagues, all called by that generall name of Ceuola, or Cibola, and none of them particularly so called, but hauing other peculiar names, they were of like building. In this Towne which  he conquered, stood 200. houses, walled about, and 300. others not walled. The Inhabitants had remoued their wiues and wealth to the Hill. Hee reporteth of beasts there, Beares, Tygres, Lions, and Sheepe as bigge as horses, with great hornes, and little tayles, Ounces also, and Stagges. That which the Indians worshipped (as farre as they could learne) was the Water, which, said they, caused the Corne to grow, and maintained their life. Hee found there a garment excellently embroidered with needle-worke. Vasquez went hence to Tiguez, to Cieuic, and to Quiuira, asF. Lop. c. 212. 213. and 214. Lopez de Gomara reporteth. This way is full of crooke-backed Oxen. Quiuira is in 40. degrees, and the Countrey is temperate. They saw Ships in the Sea, which bare Alcatoazes, or Pelicans of Gold and Siluer in their Prowes, laden with Merchandise: which they tooke to be of China or Cathay.
 The men in these parts cloath and shoo themselues with leather: they haue no bread of any kind of graine: their chiefe food is flesh, which they often eate raw, either for custome, or for lacke of wood. They eate the fat as they take it out of the Oxe, and drinke the bloud hot (which of our buls is counted poison) and the flesh they warme (for they seethe it not) at a fire of Oxe-dung. They rather may be said to rauin, then to eate it: and holding the flesh with their teeth, cut it with rasors of stone. They goe in companies as the Scythian Nomades, Tartarian floords, and many other Nations, following the seasons and best pasturings for their oxen. These OxenOxen of Quiuera. are of the bignesse and colour of our Buls, but their hornes are not so great. They haue a great bunch vpon their shoulders, and more haire on their fore-part, then on the hinder: and it is like wooll. They haue, as it were, a horse-mane on their backe  bone, and much haire, and very long from their knees downwards. They haue great tufts of haire on their foreheads, and haue a kinde of beard vnder their chins and throats. the males haue very long tayles, with a great knob or flocke at the end: so that in some
 respect they resemble a Lyon, in other the Camels, Horses, Oxen, Sheepe, or Goats. They push with their hornes, and in their rage would ouertake and kill a horse; for the horses fled from them, either for their deformitie, or because they had neuer seene the like. The people haue no other riches: they are vnto them meat, drinke, apparell: their Hides also yeeld them houses, and ropes; their bones, bodkins: their sinewes and haire, threat: their horns, mawes, and bladders, vessels: their dung, fire: the Calues-skins, budgets, wherewith they draw and keepe water.
Gomara also mentioneth their sheepe, which they so call, because they haue fine wool and hornes: they are as bigge as horses; their hornes weigh fifty pound weight a piece. There are also Dogs which will fight with a Bull, and will carry fifty pound weight in Sacks, when  they goe on hunting or when they remoue from place to place with their heards.
The winter is long and sharpe, with much snow in Cibola, and therefore they then keepe in their Cellers which are in place of Stoues vnto them. In the height of thirty seuen degrees, at Tiguez, the cold was so extreme, that the horses and men passed ouer the Riuer vpon the Ice. They there tooke a towneTaking of Tiguez. after fiue and forty dayes siege, but with much losse, and little gaine. For the Indians killed thirty horses in a night: and in another slue certaine Spaniards; sent Ouando vp into the countrey (they could not tell whether for sacrifice or for the shew) and wounded fifty horses: they drunke snow in stead of water: and seeing no hope to hold out, made a great fire, and cast therein all they had of worth, and then went all out to make way by force; where they were all in manner slaine, but not vnreuenged, forcing  some Spaniards to accompany them into the Regions of Death, and wounding many more both men and horses. The Snow continueth in these parts halfe the yeere. Quiuira is more Northerly, and yet more temperate. The Spaniards returned to Mexico in the end of the yeare 1542. to no small griefe of Mendoza, who had spent in this expedition six thousand Duokats. Some Friers stayed, but were slaine by the people of Quiuira, onely one man escaped, to bring newes to Mexico.
Sir Francis Drake sailed on the other side of America to forty degrees of Northerly Latitude, and with cold was forced to retire, although the Sunne followed him all the way from Guatulco hither (which he sailed from the 6. day of April, to the 5. day of Iune) as if that most excellent and heauenly Light had delighted himselfe in his societie, and acknowledged him  for his Son, more truely then the Spaniards (whereof anon we shall heare) or thatOuid. Metamorph. lib. 2. Phaeton of the Poets, not able to compasse this compassing iourney: once, hee was so good a Scholler and learned the Suns instruction so well, that he followed him in a watery field, all that his fiery circle, round about this earthly Globe, carried with the mouing winde (as it were airie wings) new stars, Ilands, Seas, attending and admiring the English colours: and first ofMagellanes Victo^y (so was his ship called) had won this victory, but lost her Generall. any Generall, loosed the girdle of the world, and encompassing her in his fortunate armes, enioyed her loue. But I lose my selfe while I find him: and yet excellent names, I know not how, compell men to stand awhile, and gaze with admiration, if not with adoration. This our English KnightSir Francis Drake.Hak. tom. 3. landed on this coast in thirty eight degrees, where the inhabitants presented themselues vnto him, with presents of feathers, and kalls of Net-worke, which hee required  with great humanitie. The men went naked, the women knit loose garments of bull-rushes about their middles. They came a second time, and brought feathers, and bags of Tobacco; and after a long Oration of one that was Speaker for the rest, they left their bowes on a hil, and came downe to our men: the women meane-while remaining on the hill, tormented themselues, tearing the flesh from the cheekes, whereby it appeared that they were about some sacrifice. The newes being further spred, brought the King thither, which was a man of goodly stature: many tall men attended him: two Embassadours with a long Speech of halfe an houre, signified his comming before. One went before the King with a Scepter or Mace, wherein hanged two Crownes with three chaines: the Crownes were of knit-worke, wrought artificially with diuers coloured feathers, the chaines of a bony substance.  The King followed cloathed in Cony-skinnes: the people came after, all hauing their faces painted with white, blacke, and other colours, euery one bringing his present, euen the very children also. The Scepter-bearer made a lowd speech of halfe an houre, taking his words from another, which whispered the same vnto him, which with a solemne applause being ended, they came all downe the hill in order without their weapons: the Scepter-bearer beginning a Song and dancing, wherein all the rest followed him. The King and diuers others, made seuerall Orations or Supplications to the Generall, to become their King: and the King with a Song did set the Crowne on the Generals head, and put the chaines about his necke, honouring him by the name of Hioh. The common sort leauing the King and his guard, scattered themselues, with their Sacrifices, among our people, taking  view of all, and to such as best pleased their fancy, which were the youngest, offered their Sacrifices, with weeping, scratching and tearing their flesh, with much effusion of bloud. The
 English misliked their deuotions, and directed them to the liuing God: they shewed againe their wounds, whereunto the other applyed paysters and lotions. Euery third day they brought their Sacrifices, till they perceiued that they were displeasing. And at the departure of the English, they (by stealth) prouided a Sacrifice, taking their departing very grieuously. They found heards of Deere feeding by thousands, and the Country full of strange Conies, headed like ours, with the feet of a Want, and taile of a Cat, hauing vnder their chins a bagge, into which they gather their meate when they haue filled their body abroad. There is no part of this Earth, wherein there is not some speciall likelihood of Gold or Siluer. The Generall named the CountryNoua Albion. Noua Albion.



@. II. Of New Mexico and Cinaloa.
IN the yeere 1581.History of China by Fr. Juan Gonsalez de Mendosa. Augustine Ruiz, a Frier, learned by the report of certaine Indians called Conchos, that toward the North there were certaine great Towns, not hitherto to discouered by the Spaniards: whereupon, he, with two other companions of his owne Order, and eight Souldiers, went to seeke these parts, and  to preach vnto them. They came vnto the Prouince de los Tiguas, two hundred and fiftie leagues Northwards from the Mynes of Saint Barbara, where one of the Friers was slaine by the Inhabitants. This caused the Souldiers to returne backe, but the Friers stayed still behind. The Franciscans fearing the losse of these their Brethren, procured Antonio de EspeioAn. de Espeio. Nouemb. 1512. to vndertake this Iourney, with a company of Souldiers. Hee passing the Conchos, the Passaquates, the Toboses, came to the Patatabueyes, which is a great Prouince, and hath many Townes, their Houses flat roofed, and built of lime and stone, their streets orderly placed. The people are of great stature, and haue their faces, armes, and legges razed and pounced: HereNew Mexico were many Lakes of salt-water, which at a certaine time of the yeere waxeth hard, and becommeth very good salt. The Caciques kindly entertayned them with  victuals and other presents, especially hides, and Chamois skins very well dressed, as well as those of Flanders: And passing many dayes Iourney further Northwards, they came where the Houses were foure stories high, well built, and in most of them, Stoues for the Winter season. The men and women weare Shooes and Boots with good soles of Neats Leather, a thing not elsewhere to be seene in the Indies. In this Prouince they found many Idols, which they worshipped: and particularly they had in euery House an Oratory for the Deuill, whereinto they ordinarily carry him meate: and (as the Papists erect Crosses vpon high wayes) so haue this people certaine high Chappels, very well trimmed and painted, in which they say the Deuill vseth to take his ease, and to recreate himselfe as hee trauelleth from one Towne to another. In the Prouince of Tiguas there were sixteene Townes, in one  of which the Friers aforesaid were slaine. Sixe leagues from thence was the Prouince Los Quires, which worship Idols as their Neighbours: they saw there certaine Canopies, wherein were painted, the Sunne, Moone, and many Stars. It is in 37. degrees and an halfe. Hence they passed, keeping still their Northerly course, and found a Prouince called Cuuames, where were fiue Townes, one of which was Chia, which contained eight Market places, the houses were playstered and painted with diuers colours: they presented them curious Mantles, and shewed them rich Metals. Beyond this they came to the Ameies, and fifteene leagues thence, to Acoma, which is situate vpon a Rocke: and hath no other entrance but by a Ladder, or paire of staires, hewne in the same Rocke: all their water was kept in Cisternes. They passed hence to Zuny, which the Spaniards call Cibola, and there found three Spaniards,  left by Vasquez forty yeeres before, which had almost forgotten their owne Language. Westward from hence they came to Mohotze, where were exceeding rich Mynes of Siluer, as likewise in some of the other. These parts seeme to incline toward Virginia.
Martin Perez a Iesuite writeth of these Inland parts, from Cinaloa 1591. that the flies about the Mountaine Tepesuan (in 23. degrees) are so troublesome, as no beast can abide there: the Cimmechi are warlike Indians. Some Spaniards kept there, which heard Masse scarsly once in a yeere. The Prouince of Cinaloa is watered with eight Riuers. The soyle fertile and ayre wholsome: extending three hundred miles Northwards, and within two dayes Iourney of new Mexico. The people weare many Earings in fifty holes which they make for that purpose, so that they are forced to sleepe with their faces vpwards. The women  are clothed beneath the waste, aboue naked. Both they and the men weare long haire tied vp on knots, with Corals and shels therein: They are a handfull higher then the Spaniards, valiant, vse poysoned Arrowes, peaceable at home, terrible in warre, they haue many
 Languages. Some of them haue familiaritie and commit abominable sinnes with the Deuill. They vse Polygamy, and thinke it not vnseemely to vse the Mother, Sister, Daughter, as furthering domesticke peace. Thus respect they affinity, but of Consanguitie are very Religious. They correct not their children. Their Marriages are solemnized after consent of Parents on both sides, with dances; the consummation is stayed till fit age of the parties, to whom they then leaue a House and houshold. They obserue a custome to make Gentlemen or Knights, giuing a Bow, and then setting him to fight with a Lion or wild beast, the death of which is the life of their Gentilitie. When one adopteth another, a stake is thrust into his throat, causing him to vomit all in his belly, and (as it were) his former birth together. They are great Gamesters, their play like that of Dice: in which they carry themselues very  patiently without swearing or wording, and yet will lose the clothes from their backes, and goe home naked. If any be dangerously sicke, a Graue is digged and stands open, in which they bury him presently being dead, or else burne him together with his House and stuffe, and there couer the ashes: sprinkling the Sepulchre with certaine dust, whereof they make a drinke, and eate and drinke themselues drunke.
L. T. Toletus.Ludouicus Tribaldus Toletus in his Letter to Master Hakluyt 1605. writeth of one Iohn Onnate, who in the yeere 1599. trauelled fiue hundred leagues from the Old, to New Mexico. He sent his Nephew to Acoma (a Towne strongly fortified by Nature) to trucke with them, whom they deceitfully slue with his six companions. Onnate in reuenge, takes and kils the Indians and fires their dwellings: forced a great City to sweare obedience to the  King of Spaine, and another Citie also greater then the former. They built a Towne named Saint Iohns: found Mynes of Gold and Siluer: hunted the heards of Cibola. In the yeere 1602. he made another Expedition to the Lake of Conibas, on the banke whereof was a Citie seuen leagues long, and two in breadth, the houses built scattering with Hils and pleasant Gardens betweene. The Inhabitants all had fortified themselues in the Market place which was very large: the Spaniards departed without assault. Neere California were found large Hauens, before vnknowne; and the Spaniards determined to build Forts.
Now that wee haue heard of the In-land Discoueries by the Spaniards, and that Noua Albion of Sir Francis Drake, let vs take some view of the Spanish Nauigation on  these Coasts.


@. III. The Discoueries of VLLOA and ALARCHON, on the Coasts of the South Sea.
COrtes the Conquerour of Mexico sentFran. Vlloa apud Ramus. and Hak, vol. 3. Francis de Vlloa with a Fleet for Discouerie, in the yeere 1539. from Acapulco, which came to Santa Cruz in California.  They sayled ouer the Gulfe, and came to the Riuer of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, where they beheld, on both sides, a goodly Country. I am loth to hold on with them in their Voyage, lest I saile from my scope, and leaue the offended Reader behind me. Here they found in their course burning Mountaynes, which cast vp fire, ashes, and smoke in great quantitie. They encountred with a cruell storme, and being almost out of hope, they saw, as it were, a Candle vpon the shrowdes of the Trinitie (one of their ships) which the Mariners said was Saint Elmo, and saluted it with their Songs and Prayers. This is the darknesse of Popery, to worship a naturall light: yea that which hath little more then beeing, and is an imperfect Meteor, is with them more perfect then Humane, and must participate in Diuine worship. Without the Gulfe of CaliforniaCalifornia. they found store of great fish, which  suffered themselues to be taken by hand: also they saw weedes floating on the Sea, fifty leagues together, round, and full of gourds, vnder them were store of fish, on them store of fowle: they grow in fifteene or twenty fathome depth. They caught with the^r Dogges, a beast very fat, haired like a Goat, otherwise resembling a Deere: in this, neither, that it had foure Dogges like vnto a Cow full of Milke. But because they had little dealing with the Inhabitants, I leaue them, and will see what FernandoFer. Alarchon. Alarchon can shew vs of his Discouerie. Hee was set forth by Antonio de Mendoza, the Vice-roy, in the yeere of our Lord 1540. with two ships. He came to the bottome of the Bay of California, and there found a mighty Riuer, which ranne with such furious violence, that they could scarce saile against it. Here leauing the ships with some of his company, hee passed vp with some Peeces of  Ordnance, and two Boats: and so drawing the Boats with halsers, they made vp the Riuer called Buena Guia: they were incountred with the Indian Inhabitants, who forbade them
 landing: but Alarchon hurling his weapons downe, and pulling out certaine wares to giue them, appeased their fury, and caused them also to lay downe their weapons, and receiue of him some trifles which he gaue them. Two leagues higher many Indians came and called to him: these were decked after a strange manner, some had painted their faces all ouer, some halfe way, others had Vizards on with the shape of faces: they had holes in their nostrils, whereat certaine pendants hung; others ware shels, hauing their eares full of holes, with bones and shels hanging thereat. A^l of them ware a Girdle about their waste, whereunto was fastned a bunch of Feathes which hung downe behind like a taile: they carried with them bags of Tobacco. Their bodies were traced with cole, their haire cut before, hung downe  long behind. The women ware bunches of Feathers before and behind them. Th^re were foure men in womens apparell. Alarchon perceiued by signes, that the thing they most reuerenced, was the Sunne, and therefore signified vnto them, that he came from the Sunne; whereat they maruelled, and tooke curious view of him with greater reuerence then before; brought him abundance of food first flinging vp part of euery thing into the Aire, and after, turning to him to giue him the other part; offering in their armes to carry him into their Houses, and doing else whatsoeuer he would haue them. And if any stranger came, they would goe and meet him, to cause him to lay downe his weapons, and if he would not, they would breake them in pieces. Hee gaue the chiefe of them small Wares. They needed not pray them to helpe draw the Boat vp the streame, euery one laboured to get hold of the  Rope: otherwise it had beene impossible to haue gotten vp against the Current. Hee caused Crosses to be made and giuen them, with instruction to honour them, which they did with extasie of blind z ale, ki^ling them, and lifting them vp, euery one comming for them till he had not paper and stickes enow for that purpose.
And as he passed further, he met with one which vnderstood his Interpreter, and asked of him many questions, to which he answered, that he was sent of the Sunne; which the other doubting, because the Sunne went in the Skie, he said that at his going downe and rising, he came neere the Earth, and there made him in that Land, and sent him hither to visit this Riuer and the People, and to charge them not to make further warres one vpon another. But why saith the Indian, did he send you no sooner? he answered, Because before he was but a  child. A long Dialogue thus passed betwixt them, the issue whereof was that the Indians cryed out, they would all receiue him for their Lord, seeing hee was the childe of the Sunne, and came to doe them good. This vse did hee make of their superstitious obseruation of the Sunne, which they worshipped because he made them warme (said they) and caused their crop to grow, and therefore of all things which they eate, they cast a little vp into the aire to Him. They warre one vpon another (a thing common to all Sauages) for small occasions: the eldest and most valiant guided the Armie (for in some places they had no Lord;) and of those which they tooke in the Warre, some they burned, and from some they plucked out the hearts, and ate them. Alarchon caused a Crosse to be made of Timber, commanding his owne people to worship it, and leauing it with the Indians, with instructions euery morning  at the Sunne-rise to kneele before it. This they tooke with great deuotion, and would not suffer it to touch the ground, vntill they knew by questioning, how deepe they should set it, with what composition of gesture to worship it, and the like curiosities of Paganish Christianitie. He was told, that this Riuer was inhabited by three and twenty Languages, that they married but one woman to one man, that Maides before Marriage conuersed not with men, nor talked with them, but kept at home and wrought; Adultery was death; they burned the dead; Widdowes stayed halfe a yeere or a whole yeere before they married againe. Euery Family had their seuerall Gouernour; other Ruler they had none. The Riuer vsed at some times to ouerflow the bankes. These people told Alarchon, that in Ceuola they had many blue stones, or Turqueses, which they digged out of a Rocke of stone, and  when the Gouernours dyed, all their goods were buried with them: that they eate with Napkins, many wayting at Table: that they killed the Negro before mentioned, because he said he had many Brethren, to whom they thought he would giue intelligence, and therefore killed him. An old man told him the names of two hundred Lords and people of those parts. This old man had a Son clothed in womans attire, of which sort they had foure: these serued to theSodomites. Sodomiticall lusts of all the vnmarried young men in the Country, and may not themselues haue to deale with any woman. They haue no reward for this beastiall trade, but haue libertie to goe to any House for their food: when any of them dye, the first Sonne that is borne after, succeeds in their number.
As for the more Northerly parts, both within Land, and the supposed Strait of Anian,  with other things mentioned in Maps, because I know no certaintie of them, I leaue them. The way by Sea from these parts to the Philippinas, two of our owne Nation haue passed, whose Voyage,Linschoten also in his third Booke largely treateth of the course of these and other Nauigations. as also that exact description of the same, by Francisco de Gualle, a Spanish
 Captaine and Pilot, Master Hakluyt hath related; who hath in these, and other labours of like nature, deeply ingaged himselfe for his Countries good, and of his Countrimen meriteth an euerlasting name; and to me hath beene as Admirall, holding out the light vnto me in these Seas, and as diligent a guide by Land (which I willingly, yea dutifully, acknowledge) in a great part of this my long and wearisome Pilgrimage. And his helpes in the second Edition, haue much more obliged me (that I say not thee) vnto his laborious Collections; for which our English Nauigations, both for the memoriall of passed, incouragement of present, and instructions to the future, are (as to Neptunes Secretarie and the Oceans Protonotary) indebted beyond recompence: whereby he beingHe dyed this last Winter, 1616. dead (whiles we write these things) yet speaketh. And although in this third Edition I could not obtaine like kindnesse  from him, I know not how affected or infected with emulation or iealousie; yet shall his Name liue whiles my Writings endure, as without whose helpes and industrious Collections, perhaps I had neuer troubled the World in this kind. And this is my Epitaph in his memory; who hath yet a better, his owne large Volumes being the best and truest Titles of his Honour: and if some Iuno Lucina would helpe to bring forth the Posthume Issue of his Voyages not yet published, the World should enioy a more full Testimony of his paines in that kind.



CHAP. IX. Of New Spaine, and the conquest thereof by HERNANDO CORTES.

@. I. Of the first Discouerie by CORTES and others.  
NOw are we safely arriued out of the SouthThe Spaniards call all that the South Sea, which is on the further side of America. Sea, and North vnknowne Lands, where we haue wildered our selues, and wearied the Reader in this great and spacious Country of New Spaine. New Spaine is all that which lyeth betweene Florida and California, and confines on the South, with Guatimala and Iucatan; how it came to be so called, asketh a long Discourse, concerning the Conquest thereof by Cortes, whose History is thus related.
HernandoGomara his third part, of the Conquest of the West Indies, translated into English by T. Nicolas.Cortes was borne at Medellin in Andulozia, a Prouince of Spaine, Anno 1485. When he was nineteene yeeres old, he sayled to the Iland of Saint Domingo, where Ouando the Gouernour kindly entertayned him. Hee went to the conquest of Cuba in the yeere  1511. as Clerke to the Treasurer, vnder the conduct of Iames Velasques, who gaue vnto him the Indians of Manicorao, where he was the first that brought vp Kine, Sheepe and Mares, and had heards and flockes of them: and with his Indians hee gathered great quantitie of Gold, so that in short time he was able to put in two thousand Castlins for his stocke, with Andres de Duero a Merchant. At this time Christopher Morante had sent (An. 1517.) Francis Hernandes de Cordoua, who first discouered Yucatan, whence he brought nothing (except the relation of the Country) but stripes: whereupon Iames Velasques in the yeere 1518. sent his Kinsman Iohn de Grijalua, with 200. SpaniardsOf this Voiage, Reade P. Martyrs fourth Decade: and Gomara part. 1. and of all which followes in this Chapter.P. Mart. Dec. 5. Com. vbi supra. and Cortes his owne large Narration to the Emperour. Ap. Ramus. Vol. 3. in foure ships: hee traded in the Riuer of Tauasco, and for trifles returned much Gold, and curious workes of Feathers. Idols of Gold, a whole harnesse or furniture for an armed man of Gold thin beaten, Eagles, Lions,  and other pourtratures found in Gold, etc. But while Grijalua deferred his returne, Velasques agreed with Cortes to be his partner in the Discouerie, which hee gladly accepted, and procured licence from the Gouernours in Domingo, and prepared for the Voyage.
Velasques afterward vsed all meanes to breake off, in so much that Cortes was forced to engage all his owne stocke, and credit, with his friends in the Expedition, and with fiue hundred and fiftie Spaniards in eleuen Ships, set sayle the tenth of February 1519. and arriued at the Iland of Acusamil. The Inhabitants at first fled, but by the kinde entertainment of some that were taken, they returned, and receiued him and his with all kinde Offices.
They told him of certaine bearded men in Yucatan, whither Cortes sent; and one of them  Geronimo de Aguilar came vnto him, who told him, that by shipwracke at Iamaica, their Caruell being lost, twentie of them wandred in the boat without sayle, water, or bread,
 thirteene or fourteene dayes, in which space the violence of the Current had cast them on shoare in a Prouince called Maij^, where, as they trauelled, seuen died with famine; and their Captayne Valdinia and other foure were sacrificed to the Idols by the Cacike, or Lord of the Countrie, and eaten in a solemne banquet, and hee with sixe other were put into a coope or cage to be fatned for another Sacrifice. But breaking prison, they escaped to another Cacike, enemie to the former, where all the rest died, but himselfe and Gonsalo Guerrer a Mariner. Hee had transformed himselfe into the Indian Cut, boring his Nose full of holes, his eares iagged, his face and hands painted; married a wife, and became a Captaine of name amongst the Indians, and would not returne with this Aguilar.
Cortes with this new Interpreter passed vp the Riuer Tauasco, called of the former Discouerer, Grijalua; where the Towne that stood thereon, refusing to victuall him, was taken and sacked. The Indians here with enraged, assembled an Armie of fortie thousand, but Cortes by his Horse and Ordnance preuayled, the Indians thinking the Horse and Rider had beene but one Creature, whose gaping and swiftnesse was terrible vnto them, whereupon they submitted themselues. When they heard the Horses ney, they had thought the Horses could speake, and demanded what they said: the Spaniards answered, These Horses are sore offended with you, for fighting with them, and would haue you corrected: the simple IndiansIndian simplicitie. presented Roses and Hens to the beasts, desiring them to eate and to pardon them.
Cortes purposed to discouer Westward, because he heard that there were Mynes of Gold,  hauing first receiued their Vassalage to the King his Master, to whom (hee said) the Monarchie of the Vniuersall did appertaine. These were the first Vassals the Emperour had in New Spaine. They named the Towne, where these things were done, Victorie, before called Potonchan,Potonchan called Victorie. contayning neere fiue and twenty thousand Houses, which are great, made of Lime, and Stone, and Bricke, and some of mudwals and rafters, couered with Straw; their dwelling is in the vpper part of the House, for the moystnesse of the Soyle. They did eate mans flesh sacrificed.
The Spaniards sailed further Westward, and came to Saint Iohn de Vlhua, where Teudilli, the Gouernour of the Country, came to him with foure thousand Indians. He did his reuerence to the Captaine, burning Frankincense (after their custome) and little strawes, touched  in the bloud of his owne bodie: and then presented vnto him Victuals, and Iewels of Gold, and other curious workes of Feathers; which Cortes requited with a Collar of Glasse, and other things of small value. A woman-slaue giuen him at Potonchan, vnderstood their Language, and she with Aguilar, were his Interpreters. Cortes professed himselfe the Seruant of a great Emperour, which had sent him thither, whose power is so highly extolled, that Teudilli maruelled, thinking there had beene no such Prince in the World, as his Master and Souereigne the King of Mexico, whose Vassal he was named, Mutezuma. To him he sent the representations of these bearded Men, and their Horses, Apparell, Weapons, Ordnance, and other Rarities, painted in Cotton-clothes, their ships and numbers. These painted Cottons he sent by Posts, which deliuered them from one to another with such celeritie, that in a  day and night the message came to Mexico, which was two hundred and ten miles distant.Spanish incurable sicknesse. Cortes had demanded, whether Mutezuma had Gold? Teudilli affirmed, and Cortes replyed, That hee and his fellowes had a Disease of the heart, whereunto Gold was the best remedie.
Mutezuma sent him many Cotton-clothes of diuers colours, many Tuffes of Feathers, two Wheeles, the one of Siluer, with the signe of the Moone, and the other of Gold, made like the Sunne; which they hold for Gods, and giue vnto them the colours of the Metals most like them. Each Wheele was two yards and a halfe broad. These with other parts of the Present were esteemed worth twenty thousand Duckets. Mutezuma also professed ioy, to heare of so great a Prince, and so strange people, and promised prouision of all necessaries;  but was very vnwilling that Cortes should come to see him, as he pretended. Yet Cortes persisted in that his desire of seeing Mutezuma, that hee might further acquaint himselfe with the knowledge of those parts.
The silly Indians hauing neuer seene such strange sights, came daily to the Campe to see them: and when they heare the Ordnance discharged, they fell downe flat, thinking the Heauens had falne: the ships they thought were the God of the Ayre, called Quezalcouolt, which came with the Temples on his backe, for they daily looked for him. Amongst the rest, or rather aloofe off from the rest, were certaine Indians of differing habit, higher then the other, and had the gristles of their Noses slit, hanging ouer their mouthes, and Rings of Iet and Amber hanging thereat: their nether lips also bored, and in the holes Rings of  Gold and Turkesse-stones, which weighed so much, that their lips hung ouer ther chinnes, leauing their teeth bare. This vglinesse, they accounted gallantry,Note for Fashion^monger^ and such vncouth deformity to be the only brauery. And thou Gallant, that readest and deridest this madnesse of
 Fashion, if thine eyes were not dazeled with lightnesse (light I cannot cal it) of selfe-reflected Vanitie, mightest see as Monster-like fashions at home, and a more fashionly Monster of thy selfe; thy Clothes and Othes, thy Gestures and Vestures, make thy naked Deformitie worse then their thus deformed nakednesse: both indeed seeme to haue receiued some Hellish Character (if there may be bodily representation) of that olde Serpent in these new Fashions, striuing who shall shape himselfe, neerest to that mishapen vglinesse, wherein the Indianiagges himselfe out of humane lineaments, the other swaggers himselfe further out of all Ciuill and Christian Ornaments. But these Fashion-mongers haue made mee almost out of my fashion, and to forget my selfe, in remembring their forgetfulnesse.
These Indians of this New-cut, Cortes caused to come to him, and learned that they  were of Zempoallan,Zempoallan. a Citie distant thence a dayes Iourney, whom their Lord had sent to see what Gods were come in those Teucallis, that is Temples (so, it seemeth, that they called the ships:) which held no conuersation with the other Indians, as being not subiect to Mutezuma, but onely as they were holden in by force. He gaue them certaine toyes, and was glad to heare that the Indians of Zempoallan, and other their Neighbors were not wel affected to Mutezuma, but readie, as farre as they durst, to entertaine all occasions of war with him. He sayled from thence to Panuco,Panuco. and passed the Riuer farther, till he came to a little Towne, where was a Temple, with a little Towre, and a Chappell on the top ascended by twentie steps, in which they found some Idols, many bloudie Papers, and much Mans bloud, of those which had beene sacrificed; the blocke also whereon they cut open  those Sacrifices, and the Razors made of flint, wherewith they opened their brests, which strucke the Spaniards with some horrour and feare. They passed a little further, and there hauing taken possession, in the Emperours name, of the whole Country, they founded the Towne De la vera Crux. CortesVera Crux. resigning his authoritie, and Officers being elected; and lastly all with generall consent appointing Cortes their Captaine.


@. II. CORTES his Expedition to Mexico, and entertainment  by MVTEZVMA.
COrtes went forward to Zempoallan, where hee was solemnely receiued and lodged in a great House of Lime and Stone, whited with Playster, that shined in the Sunne, as if it had beene Siluer; so did the Siluer-conceits of the Spaniards imagine, the desire of that Metall hauing made such an impression in their imagination, that they told Cortes before he came at it, they had seene a House with wals of Siluer. Here, and at Chiauiztlan, Cortes incited them to rebell against Mutezuma, and to become seruants to the Spaniards, which they did: and hee vnder-hand so wrought, that Mutezuma  tooke him for his friend.
All his intent was to fish in troubled waters, and to set them both by the eares, that hee might watch opportunitie to benefit himselfe. His owne people rebelled, some of whom he chastised with the halter and the whip for example to the rest: and after caused all his sh^ps to be sunke closely, that they should not minde any returne. Hee left an hundred and fifty men for the guard of the new Towne, vnder Pedro de Henrico, and with foure hundred Spaniards, fifteene Horses, and sixe Peeces of Artillery, and 1300. Indians, they went from Zempoallan, and came to Zaclotan, the Lord whereof was Olintler the subiect of Mutezuma, who to testifie his ioy, and to honour Cortes, commanded fifty men to be sacrificed, whose bloud they saw, new and fresh.
They carried the Spaniards on their shoulders, sitting on Beeres, such as whereon they vse  to carry dead men. He bragged as much of the power of Mutezuma, as the Spaniards of their Emperour. Hee said hee had thirty Vassals, each of which was able to bring into the field an hundred thousand men of warre,Bloudy Sacrifices. and sacrificed twenty thousand men yeerely to the Gods: in this he somewat exceeded; the other was true, although some yeeres, the Sacrifices also were thought to amount to fifty thousand. This Towne was great, and had thirteene Temples, in each of which were many Idols of stone, of diuers fashions, before whom they sacrificed Men, Doues, Quailes, and other things with great perfumes and veneration. Here Mutezuma had fiue thousand Souldiers in Garrison. Cortes passed from thence to Mexico by the Frontiers of Tlaxcallon, which were enemies to Mutezuma, whom he might easily haue ouercome, but reserued, partly for the exercise of his subiects to the  war: partly for the Sacrifices to his Gods.
These ioyned an hundred and fifty thousand men against Cortes, taking him for Mutezuma's
 friend: and yet euery day sent him Guinny-cocks and bread, partly to espy his strength, and partly in a brauery, lest their glory should bee obscured in the conquest of men already starued. But when in many skirmishes and fights they could not preuaile against that handfull of Spaniards, they thought they were preserued from harme by inchantments: and sent him three presents with this message; that if he were that rigorous god which eateth mans flesh, he should eate those fiue slaues which they brought him, and they would bring him more: if he were the meeke and gentle God, behold Frankinsence, and Feathers: if he were a mortall man, take heere Fowle, Bread, and Cherries. At last they made peace with him, and submitted their Citie to him. Their Citie Tlaxcallan was great,Tlaxcallan a great Citie. planted by a Riuers side,  which issued into the South-Sea. It had foure streets, each ot which had their Captain in the time of Warre. The gouernment was an Aristocratie, hating Monarchy no lesse then tyranny. It had eight and twenty Villages, and in them an hundred and fifty thousand housholds, very poore, but good warriours. They had one market-place so spacious, that thirty thousand persons in a day came thither to buy and sell by exchange: for money they had none.
Mutezuma had sent before to Cortes, and promised tribute to the Emperour, whatsoeuer should be imposed; onely he would not haue him come to Mexico. And now he sent againe, that he should not trust that new friendship with the beggerly Nation of Tlaxcallan, and they againe counselled him not to aduenture himselfe to Mutezuma. Cortes held his determination for Mexico, and being accompanied with many of the Tlaxcantlexas, he went to  Chololla,Chololla. a little from whence Mutezuma had prepared an Army to intrap him in the way; but he finding the treacherie, it redounded vpon the Cholollois, the same day they had thought to haue executed the same vpon him. For this end they had sacrificed ten children, fiue males, and as many females, three yeares old, to Quezalcouatl their god, which was their custome when they began their Warres. He out-going them in their owne art of subtiltie, intrapped their Captaines in Councell, and sent his Armie to spoile the Citie, where were slaine thousands. There were twenty Gentlemen, and many Priests which ascended vp to the high Towre of their Temple, which had an hundred and twenty steps, where they were burned, together with their gods and Sanctuary.
This City had 20000. Housholds within the Wals, and as many in the Suburbs.Store of Temples and deuotions. It shewed  outward very faire and full of Towres, for there were as many Temples as dayes in the yeere, and euery one had his Towre. The Spaniards counted 400. Towres. It was the Citie of most deuotion in all India, whither they trauelled from many places far distant in Pilgrimage. Their Cathedrall Temple was the best and highest in all New-Spain, with 120. steps vp to it. Their chiefe god was Quezalcouatl, god of the Aire, who was (they say) founder of their City being a Virgin, of holy life and great penance. He instituted fasting, and drawing of bloud out of their eares and tongues, and left precepts of Sacrifices. Hee neuer ware but one garment of Cotton, white, narrow, and long, and vpon that a Mantle, beset with certain red crosses. They haue certaine greene stones which were his, and are kept for great relikes: one of them is like an Apes head. Eight leagues from Chololla is the hill Popocatepec,Popocatepec a burning Hill. or  smoke-hill, which the earth seemeth to haue erected as a Fort to encounter and assault the Aire: now with smoky mists endeuouring to choake his purer breath, another while with violent flames, and naturall fire-works threatning to ioyne league with his elder and superiour brother to disinherit him: sometimes with showres of Ashes and embers, as it were, putting out the eyes, and sometimes with terrible and dreadfull thunders, rending the eares of that Airie Element; alwayes (such is the euent of warre) hurting and wasting it selfe, to indamage the enemy. The Indians thought it a place of Purgatory, whereby tyrannicall and wicked Officers were punished after their death, and after that purgation passed into glory. The Spaniards aduentured to see it, but two onely held on their journey, and had there been consumed, had they not by a Rock bin shadowed fro^ the violent eruption of the fire which  then hapned. It chanced that the Earth, weary it seemeth of the Warre, as hauing spent her store and munition, agreed on a truce which continued ten yeares: but in the yeere 1540. it brake forth into more violent hostilitie then before, quaking and renting it selfe with vnbridled passion: and whereas the Aire had alwayes a snowy Garrison about her high tops and frontiers, to coole and quench her fiery showres, yet these did but kindle a greater flame, the ashes whereof came to Huexozinco, Quelaxcopon, Tepiacac, Chololla and Tlazcallan, and other places, ten, or as some say fifteene leagues distant, and burned their herbs in their Gardens, their fields of corne, trees and cloathes that they laid a drying. The Vulcan, Crater, or mouth whence the fire issued, is about halfe a league in compasse. The Indians  kissed their garments (an honour done vnto their gods) which had aduentured themselues to this dreadfull spectacle.
Cortes drawing neere to Mexico, MutezumaMutezumas Religion. feared, saying, These are the people which our gods said should come and inherit this Land. Hee went to his Oratory, and there shut
 vp himselfe alone, abiding eight dayes in prayer and fasting, with Sacrifice of many men, to aslake the fury of his offended deities. The Diuell bids him not to feare, and that hee should continue those bloudy Rites, assuring him that hee should haue the gods Vitziliputzli and Tescatlipuca to preserue him, saying, That Quezalcouatl permitted the destruction at Chololla, for want of that bloudie sacrifice, Cortes passed a Hill six miles in height, where, by the difficultie of the passage, and of the cold (being alway couered with snow) the Mexicans might easily haue preuented his passing further. Hence hee espyed the Lake, whereon Mexico and many other great Townes did stand, Iztacpallapan a Towne of 10000 housholds, Coyocan of sixe thousand, Vizilopuchtli of fiue thousand. These townes are adorned with many Temples and Towers, that beautifie the Lake. From Iztacpalapan to  Mexico is two Leagues, all on a faire causay, with many Draw-bridges, thorow which the water passeth.
Mutezuma receiued Cortes with all solemnitie on the eight of Nouember 1519. into this great Citie, excusing himselfe of former vnkindnesses the best hee could. Of his house, and Majestie and the diuine conceit the people had of him, we shall speake after more fully, as also of the Temples, Priests, Sacrifices and other remarkable things of Mexico.
Mutezuma prouided all things necessarie for the Spaniards and Indians that attended them: euen beds of flowres were made, in place of litter for their Horses. But Cortes disquieted with those thoughts which commonly attend Ambition (discontent in the present, hopes and feares of the future) vsed the matter so, that he tooke Mutezuma prisoner, and detained  him in the place appointed for the Spaniards lodging, with a Spanish guard about him, permitting him otherwise to deale in all priuate or publike affaires, as before. Hereupon Cacarna, Lord of Tezcuco, Nephew to Mutezuma, rebelled, but by treachery of his owne people was presented prisoner to Mutezuma. He, after this summoned a Parliament, where he made an Oration vnto his Subiects, saying,The like speech he had made at first to Corte, who easily wrought on that aduantage applying this Tradition to the Spaniards. Cortes Narrat. That He and his Predecessors were not Naturals of the Countrey, but his Fore-fathers came from a farre Countrey, and their King returned againe, and said, he would send such as should rule them. And he hath now sent these Spaniards, saith he. Hereupon he counselled them to yeeld themselues Vassals to the Emperour, which they did at his command, though with many teares on his part and theirs, at this farewell of their libertie. Mutezuma presently gaue to Cortes, in the name of tribute, a great quantitie of Gold and other Iewels, which amounted to sixteene hundred thousand  Castlins of Gold, besides Siluer.


@. III. The conquest of Mexico.
CORTES had hitherto a continuall victory in Mexico without any fight: but newes was brought him of Pamphilo de Naruaes, who was sent yywith eighty horse, and some hundreths of Spaniards by Velasques, to interrupt the proceedings of Cortes:  who leauing two hundred men in Mexico, with 250. other came suddenly in the night, and took Neruaes prisoner, and returned to Mexico with Naruaes his company, now his followers also, where he found his men exceedingly distressed by the Citizens, for a murther committed in the great Temple at a solemn Feast, where in a religious dance they were slaine, for the rich garments and Iewels they ware, by the Spaniards. Cortes came in good time for the reliefe of his men: and Mutezuma caused the Mexicans to bridle their rage, which presently was renued; and when MutezumaMutezumas death. was againe by his Guardians, the Spaniards, caused to speake to the people, a blow of a stone on his temple wounded him, whereof three dayes after he died.
Cortes had some thousands of the Tlaxoltecas to help him, but was driuen to fly from Mexico  with all his Spaniards and Indians, which he did closely in the night, but yet an all-arme was raised, and the bridges being broken, much slaughter of his people was made by the Mexicans, and all his treasure in manner lost. They pursued after him also, and had two hundred thousand in the field: when it was Cortes his good hap to slay the Standard-bearer, whereupon the Indians forsooke the field. This battell was fought at Otumpan.
At Tlazcallan, he and his were kindly entertained; they had prepared before 50000. men to goe to Mexico for his helpe, and now they promised him all offices of loyaltie and seruice. With their helpe he subdued Tepeacac; and built certaine Brigandines, and Frigats, which were carried many leagues on the backs of those Indians, and there fastned and finished,  without which he could neuer haue wonne Mexico.
In Tezcuco certaine Spaniards had been taken, sacrificed and eaten, which Cortes now
 reuenged on them. Eight thousand men had carried the loose pieces and Timber of this Nauie, guarded with twenty thousand Tlaxcalans, and a thousand Tamemez, or Porters (which carried victuals) attending. They calked them with Towe, and for want of Tallow and Oyle, they vsed Mans Grease, of such as had been slaine in the Warres. For so the Indians vsed, to take out the Grease of their Sacrifices. Cortes had here nine hundred Spaniards, of which fourescore and sixe were horsemen, three cast Pieces of iron, fifteene small Peeces of Brasse, and a thousand weight of Powder, and 100000 Indian Souldiers on his side. Hee made a fluce or trench aboue twelue foot broad, and two fathome deepe, halfe a league long,  in which forty thousand men wrought fifty dayes. He lanched his Vessels, and soone ouercame all the Canoas of the Lake, or which were reckoned in all fiue thousand. The Spaniards brake the Conduits of sweet water, wherewith the Citie was wont to be serued.
Quabutimoc, now the new King of Mexico, receiuing incouragement from the diuellish Oracle, caused to breake downe the Bridges, and to exercise whatsoeuer wit or strength could doe in defence of his City, somtimes conquering, sometimes (as is the doubtfull chance of warre) conquered. Cortes had in Tezcuco ordained a new King, a Christian Indian; of the royall bloud, who much assisted him in this siege. The Spaniards being Lords of the Lake, and of the Causeys, by helpe of their Galliots and Ordnance, they fiered a great part of the Citie. One day the Mexicans had gotten some aduantage, and thereupon celebrated a Feast of Victory. The Priests went vp into the Towers of Tlalelulco, their chiefe Temple, and  made there perfumes of sweet Gummes, in token of victory, and sacrificed forty Spaniards (which they had taken captiues, opening their breasts, and plucking out their hearts) sprinkling their bloud in the Aire; their fellowes looking on, and not able to reuenge it. They slew likewise many Indians, and foure Spaniards of Aluarado's company, whom they are in the open sight of the Armie. The Mexicans danced, dranke themselues drunke, made bonefires, strucke vp their Drummes, and made all solemne expressings of ioy. D^ead, Disdaine, and all the Furies that Passion or Compassion could coniure vp, had now filled the Spaniards hearts and their Indian partakers: and Cortes, that hitherto had hoped to reserue some part of the Citie, now did the vtmost that Rage and Reuenge could effect; helped no lesse within with Famine and Pestilence, then with Sword and Fire without. At last Mexico  is razed, the Earth and Water sharing betwixt them what Fire had left, and all which had sometime challenged a lofty inheritance in the Ayre. Their King also was taken; all that mighty State subuerted. And as the Mexicans before had prophecied, That the Tlaxantleca's should againe build the Citie, if conquered, for them; if conquerors, for the Spaniards; It was re-builded with a hundred thousand houses, fairer and stronger then before. The siege lasted three moneths, and had therein two hundred thousand Indians, nine hundred Spaniards, fourescore Horses, seuenteene Peeces of Ordinance, thirteene Galliots, and sixe thousand Canoas. Fifty Spaniards were slaine, and sixe Horses: Of the Mexicans, a hundred thousand, besides those which died of hunger and Pestilence.
This was effected Anno 1521. on the thirteenth day of August, which for that cause is  kept festiuall euery yeere. For the Description of the Country wherein Mexico is situate, Cortes in his second Narration to the Emperour saith, it is enuironed with hils: (He telleth of some hils also in his iourney, wherein diuers of his people died with cold) in the middest is a plaine of 70. leagues compasse, and therein two lakes which extend the circuit of fifty leagues; the one salt, which ebbeth and floweth, (an argument for Patritius his opinion that saltnesse is a chiefe cause of that vicissitude of ebbing and flowing, in the Ocean) the other fresh: When the Water of the salt Lake increaseth, it runneth like a violent streame into the fresh Lake, which when it increaseth, is repaired againe by the like issue of this into the former.
Nunno di Gusman,N. di Gus. ap. Ram. vol. 3. hath written his expedition into Mechoacan and other Countries  of New-Spaine 1530. subduing and taking possession for the Emperour: Hee found some of them Sodomites, others Sacrificers of mens flesh, and some closely practising this butcherie after they had professed themselues Christians: none of them which durst looke a Horse in the face, but were afraid, that that Beast would eate them. The seuerall peoples by him reckoned, would heere be tedious to name: which we may say of the like made by Godoy and Aluarado.Lit. P. Aluarado and Dieg. Godoy ap. Ram. vol 3. Of the customes of the Ancient Mexicanes, one of Cortes his Gentlemen hath written a TreatiseRelat. del Temistitan ca. extant in Ramusius, wherein are described their Citie, Temples, Rites  of Sacrifice, and the like; as after followeth out of him and others.




CHAP. X. Of the ancient Inhabitants of New-Spaine, and the Historie of their Kings.

@. I. The Mexican Exodus and first founding.  
HAuing now declared the subuersion of this State and Kingdome by the Spaniards, I hold it not amisse to looke backe vpon the first people which heere inhabited, with the beginnings and proceedings of the Mexican Empire. TheBocero. part. 1. lib. 5. Ios. Acosta. l. 7. Lop. de Gom. part. 1. N. di Gust. first Inhabitants of New-Spaine were very barbarous and sauage, which liued onely by Hunting, and for this reason were called Chichemecas. They liued naked, solitary in the Mountaines, without Tillage, Policie, or any religious Ceremonies: their wiues followed the same Hunting exercise, leauing their children tied in a Panier of Reeds to the boughs of some tree. They did eat what they got in hunting, raw. They ate also Snakes and Lizards, which they offered likewise in sacrifice  to the Sunne, whom onely they worshipped, and that without any Image: they offered to him Fowles, from the Butter-fly to the Eagle. And some remnants of the like beastly men (as is said before) are yet found, which doe great hurt, and will not, by either cunning or force of the Spaniards, be reduced to any other course. They seeme to haue learned the Sauage nature of the wilde Beasts, of whom, and with whom they liue. By this meanes it came to passe, that this wilde Mountainous people left the best and most fertile part of the Country vnpeopled, which certaine remote Nations possessed, whom they calledNauatalcas signifieth welspeakers. Nauatalcas, for their ciuilitie. These came from those Northerne parts, which now they call new Mexico. The Nauatalcas paint their beginning and first Territorie in maner of Caues (because of their seuen Tribes, and men comming out of them. By the supputation  of their Bookes, this departure was aboue eight hundred yeeres since, and (by reducing to our account) about the yeere of our Lord 720. Fourescore yeeres they stayed on the way, the cause whereof they ascribe to their Gods, which spake visibly to them, and bade them seek new Lands, that had such signes as they notified.
Thus they proceeded in seeking those signes, and peopled the best parts, still remouing their habitations as they found more fertile Countries, leauing onely the aged, sicke, and weary, with a few others, to remaine in the former. And by these leisurely proceedings, they entred the land of Mexico, about the yeere 902. after our account. Those seuen Nations came not all at once; but first, the Suchimilcos, next, the Chalcas, and thirdly, the Tepanetans, fourthly, those of Tescuco, after them the Tlalluicans; the sixt were the Tlascaltecans,  which helped the Spaniards to conquer Mexico, and therefore are exempted from tribute to this day. These expelled, as their Histories say, certaine Gyants, whom in pretence of Friendship they had inuited to a banquet, and in their drunkennes stole away their weapons, and slew them. Neither doth this seeme a fable; for at this day are found dead mens bones, of incredible bignesse. I saw a tooth (saith Acosta) at Mexico, in the yeere 1586. as bigge as the fist of a man, and according to this, all the rest was proportionable. Three hundred and two yeeres after the first transmigration, those of the seuenth Caue or Line arriued, which is the Mexican Nation: they worshipped the Idoll Vitzliputzli, and the Diuel spake and gouerned this Nation: He promised to make them Lords ouer all, which the other six Nations possessed, and to giue them a Land plentifull in riches: whereupon they went  forth carrying their Idoll with them in a Coffer of Reeds, supported by foure of their principall Priests, with whom he talked, and communicated his Oracles and Directions. He likewise gaue them Lawes, and taught them the Ceremonies and Sacrifices they should obserue, And euen as the pillar of Cloud and Fire conducted the Israelites in their passage thorow the Wildernesse, so this apish Diuell gaue them notice when to aduance forwards, and when to stay. The first thing they did wheresoeuer they came, was to build a house or Tabernacle for their Vitzliputzli, which they set alway in the middest of their Campe, and there placed the Arke in the middest of the Altar. This done, they sowed the Land, and if their God commanded to gather, they did so, and if to raise their Campe, they obeyed, leauing the aged, sicke, and weary, to gather their fruits, and to dwell there. The chiefe Captaine  whom they followed, was called Mexi, whence came the name of theirMexico and Mexicans. The Mexican picture-history saith of Mexiti (the name of the people) Mexico was so called. City and Nation. Their Idoll perswaded them, when some were bathing themselues in certaine Lakes, to
 remoue the Campe closely, and steale away their clothes: whereat they which were thus forsaken, changed their language and manner of life, retayning alway their hatred to the Mexicans. They peopled the Prouince Mechouacan: from hence to Mexico is fifty leagues and vpon the way is Malinalco, which they say was peopled by a Witch and her familie, whom by the commandement of their God they left behinde, closly remouing the armie by night. They stayed in a place called Tuta, where by stopping a Riuer, they drowned a Plaine, and planted it round with Willowes and other trees; and many liking the place,Beginning of humane sacrifices. talked of staying there: whereat their God offended, threatned the Priests, and in the night slew those which had consulted of staying. Their hearts were found pulled out, and  their stomackes opened; which, after that, they obserued in their Sacrifices. The Mexicans, by the aduice of their Idoll, proceeded, and by force made way thorow the Chalcas, and sent to the Lord of Culbuacan, who granted them the place of Ticaapan to dwell in, which was full of Snakes and venemous Beasts, which by the helpe of their God they tamed. He would not suffer them to stay there, but commanded them to proceed, and to seeke forth a Woman, whom they should name the Goddesse of Discord. Whereupon they sent to the King of Culhuacan, to demand his Daughter to bee Queene of the Mexicans, and Mother of their God, who easily condescended, and sent his daughter gorgeously attired. The same night she arriued, by order of their God, shee was murthered and flayed, and a yong man was couered with her skin, with her apparell thereon; and being placed neere  the Idoll, she was consecrated a Goddesse and Mother of their God; they euer after worshipping the same, making an Idol which they call Toccy, that is, Our Grand-mother. The King of Culhuacan hereupon warred against them, and chased them out of those parts, by which meanes they came to the place where Mexico now is. Heere certaine old Priests or Sorcerers, entring into a place full of Water-Lillies, they met with a very faire and cleare current of Water, with Trees, Medowes, Fish, and other things: all very white, which were the signes their God had giuen them of their promised Land. In the night following, Vitzliputzli appeared in a dreame to an ancient Priest, saying, That they should goe seeke out a Tunall in the Lake, which grew out of a stone, vpon which they should see an Eagle feeding on small Birds, which they should hold for the place where their City should be built,  to become famous through the world. Hereupon, the next day they all assembled, and diuiding themselues into bands, made that search with great diligence and deuotion.
In their search they met with the former Water-course, not white (as it was then) but red like bloud, diuiding it selfe into two streames, one of which was an obscure Azure. At last they espied the Eagle, with wings displayed toward the Sunne, compassed about with many rich feathers of diuers colours, and holding in his Tallons a goodly Bird. At this sight they fell on their knees, and worshipped the Eagle, with great demonstrations of ioy and thankes to Vitzliputzli. For this cause they called the Citie, which there they foundedMexico Tonoxultan., Tenoxtiltan, which signifies Tunal on a stone; and till this day carry in their Armes an Eagle vpon a Tunal, with a bird in his Tallon.
 The next day following, by common consent, they made an Heremitage, adioyning to the Tunal of the Eagle, that the Arke of their God might rest there, till they might haue meanes to build him a sumptuous Temple. This they made of Flagges and Turfes, couered with Straw. Afterwards they consulted to buy of their neighbours Stone, Timber, Lime, in exchange of Fish, Fowles, Frogges, and other things which they hunted for in the Lake: by which meanes they procuring necessaries, built a Chappell of Lime and Stone, and laboured to fill vp part of the Lake with rubbish. The Idoll commanded, that they should diuide themselues into foure principall quarters about this house, and each part build therein: to which he enioyned certaine Gods to his appointment, called Calpultecco, which  is, Quarter Gods. This was the beginning of Mexico.


@. II. The Historie of eight of their first Kings.
THis diuision seemed not equall to some of the Ancients, who valued their deserts farre aboue their allotted portion, who therefore separated themselues, and went to Tlatedulco: whose practices against the Mexicans caused them to chuse a King, to which Soueraigntie was chosed Acamapitzli,Acamapitzli the first King of Mexico. Nephew to the King of Culhuacan,  and of the Mexican bloud by the Fathers side. Him by Embassage they demanded, and obtained in the name of their God, with this answere from the King of Culhuacan: Let my Grand-child goe to serue your God, and be his Lieutenant, to rule and gouerne his Creatures, by
 whom we liue; who is the Lord of Night, Day, and Windes: Let him goe and bee Lord of the Water and Land, and possesse the Mexican Nations, etc.
Hee was solemnely welcommed by the Mexicans: welcome thou art (saith anMany of these Orations are expressed in Acostas seuenth booke at large, full of wittie inuentions and Rhetoricall flourishes. Orator vnto him in their name) to this poore House and City, amongst the Weedes and Mud, where thy poore Fathers, Grand-fathers, and Kinsfolkes endure what it pleaseth the Lord of things created. Remember, Lord, thou commest to bee our defence, and to bee the resemblance of Vitzliputzli, not to rest thy selfe, but to endure a new charge: with many words to that effect, expressed in the Mexican Histories, reserued by tradition; the children to that end learning them by heart, and these being as Presidents to them which learned the Art Oratorie. After this, they were sworne, and hee crowned. The Crowne was like that of the Dukes of Venice. His name  Acamapitzly, signifieth a handfull of Reedes, and therefore they carrie in their Armories a hand, holding many Arrowes of Reedes.
The Mexicans at this time were tributaries to the Tapanecans, whose chiefe Citie was Azcapuzalco: who iudging according to the nature of Enuie and Suspition, that they were so much weaker, how much the stronger they saw their neighbours, thought to oppresse them by a strange policie,Mouing Gardens. in imposing an vncouth, and (in shew) impossible tribute: which was, that they should bring the Tapunecan King a Garden, planted and growing in the water. In this their distresse, Vitzliputzli taught them to doe it, by casting earth vpon Reedes and Grasse laid in the Lake, and planting in this mouing Garden, Maiz, Figs, Gourds, and other things, which at the time appointed they carried growing and ripe: a thing often since proued  in that Lake, emulous no lesse of that glorie, to be accounted one of the Wonders in that New World, then those pensill Gardens, towred vp in the Ayre at Babylon, both heere and there the reason of Man according to his naturall priuiledge, subiecting to his vse the most rebellious Elements of Ayre and Water.
Acamapitzli, the Mexican King, after he had raigned fortie yeeres, dyed, leauing it to their choice to chuse his Successor. They chose his Sonne Vitzilovitli,Vitzilouitli the second King. which signifieth a rich Feather: they anointed him with an Oyntment, which they call Diuine, being the same wherewith they anointed their Idoll.
Of their Coronation, thusLop. de Gom. part. 1. Lopez de Gomara saith, that this was done by the High Priest, attired in his Pontificalibus, attended with many others in Surplices; the Oyntment was as blacke as Inke. They blessed him, and sprinkled him foure times with Holy-Water,  made at the time of the Consecration of their God. Then they put vpon his head a Cloth, painted with the bones and skuls of dead men, clothed him with a blacke garment, and vpon that a blue, both painted with figures of skuls and bones. Then did they hang on him Laces, and bottles of Powders, whereby he was deliuered from diseases and Witchcrafts. Then did he offer Incense to Vitzliputzli, and the High Priest tooke his Oath, for the maintenance of their Religion, to maintayne Iustice and the Lawes, to cause the Sunne to giue his light, and the Clouds to raine, and the earth to be fruitfull, etc: Lastly, followed the acclamations of the people, crying, God saue the King, with dances, etc.
He being crowned, and hauing receiued homage of his Subiects, obtained the King of Azcapuzalco his daughter to wife, by whom he had a sonne called Chimalpopoca,Chimalpopoca. 3. and procured a  relaxation of Tribute from his father in Law. Hee was deuout in his Superstitions: hauing raigned thirteene yeeres, he dyed. His son then but ten yeeres old, was chosen in his roome, but was soone after slaine by the Inhabitants of Azcapuzalco. The Mexicans inraged with this iniury, assembled themselues, and an Orator, among many other words, tels them, That the Sunne is eclipsed and darkened for a time, but will returne suddenly in the choice of another King. They agreed vpon Izcoalt,Izcoalt. 4. which signifieth a Snake of Rsors, the sonne of Acamapixtli their first King. The common people were earnest with this new King, for peace with the Tapanecans, for the obtaining whereof, they would carry their God in his Litter for an intercessor. This was hindered by Tlacaellec the Kings Nephew, a resolute and valiant yong man, who also with perill of his life, vndertooke an Embassage to Azcapuzalco, and  there defied the King, anointing him with the ointment of the dead, after their manner. The Commons of Mexico were herewith offended, and to pacifie them, the King indented with them, that if he lost the Field, they should eate him and his Nobles: they on the other side promising, if he did ouercome, to become his Tributaries (for before they enioyed much freedome) and to labour in his Fields and Houses, and to become his seruants in Warre and Peace. In fine, such was the valour of Tlacaellec the Generall, that the enemies were ouerthrowne, their Citie sacked, and the remainder of them made tributarie, the lands and goods of the conquered being diuided among the Conquerors, and some reserued to each quarter of Mexico,  for the vse of their Sacrifices.
Cuyacan had the next place in the Mexican Conquests: who hauing inuited the Mexicans to a banquet, in the end thereof sent for the last seruice, Womens habits, which they
 forced them to put on: but Izcoalt and Tlacaellec made them know, by their ruine, the Manhood of the Mexicans. They subdued also the Suchimilchos, and Cuitlauaca, a Citie in the Lake; Tescucoy yeelded it selfe. Izcoalt after twelue yeeres died, and MotecumaMotezuma the fift Ki^g. the first was chosen in his stead.
Presently after his Election, they conducted him to the Temple with a great traine, where, before the Diuine Harth, (so called in regard of the continuall fire there kept) they enthronized him. The King there drew bloud from his eares and legs with a Griffons tallons, as a Sacrifice, and was congratulated with many Orations of the Priests, Ancients, and Captaines. And whereas before they had accustomed, in their Elections to make great  Feasts and Dances, and wasted many Lights; He brought in the custome, personally to make Warre in some Prouince, thence to procure Sacrifices, to feast their Gods and Men. This he performed at Chalco, from whence he brought many Captiues, which on the day of his Coronation were sacrificed and eaten. At this Feast all his Tributes were brought in with great solemnitie, each Prouince marching by it selfe, besides innumerable Presents. All Commers were bountifully entertained, and the poore were clad with new garments, giuen them by the King. The Chalcas had taken a brother of Motezuma, and would haue made him their King, but he enioyning them to make a high Scaffold, ascended thereon, and telling them the Gods would not permit, that to be a King, he should be a Traytor vnto his Country, cast downe himselfe; whose death Motezuma reuenged, with the ruine of that whole Nation,  conquering further vnto the North and South Seas, by the counsell and courage of Tlacaelles, This King instituted new Ceremonies, and encreased the number of the Priests: hee built the great Temple of Vitzliputzli, and sacrificed great numbers of men at the Dedication. Hauing raigned eight and twentie yeeres, he died.
Tlacaellec was chosen his Successor by the foure Deputies, and the two Lords of Tescuco and Tacuba (these were the Electors) but refused the Empire, as being fitter for the common good, as an instrument to another, then if himselfe weylded the Scepter. At his nomination they chose Ticocic,Ticocic. 6. sonne of the late King, and piercing his nostrils, for an ornament put an Emerald therein. He, in seeking Captiues for the solemnitie of his Coronation, lost more of his owne people, and after foure yeeres was poisoned by his male-content Subiects.
AxayacaAxayaca. 7. his brother succeeded, altogether of another spirit. In his time died Tlacaellec, chiefe Author of the Mexican greatnesse, whom before in his age, they vsed to carry in his Chaire; on mens shoulders, to Councell. Hee was buried more solemnely then any of the Kings, and his Sonne was made Generall for the warres. Axayaca conquered Tequantepec, two hundred leagues from Mexico, thence to furnish the bloudie solemnities of his Coronation. Hee added to his Conquests Guatulco on the South Sea: in single combate ouer came the Lord of Tlatelulco, and subdued those Mexican-enemies of the Mexicans, setting fire on their Citie and Temple. After eleuen yeeres hee died, and AntzolAntzol. 8. the eight King was chosen. Hee punished the pride of Quazulatlan, a rich Prouince, with those Captiues, to celebrate his Coronation-Feast, and extended his Dominion to Guatimala,  three hundred leagues from Mexico. Hee much adorned his Royall Citie, pulling downe the old houses, and in their roome erected fairer. Hee let in a course of water to the Citie, because that of the Lake was muddie. But because they of Guyoacan vsed these waters, the chiefe man of that Citie, which was a great Magician, sought to hinder it, whereby the King being prouoked, sent to attach him: Hee escaped by his Protean Arts; now appearing like an Eagle, the second time like a Tygre, the third like a Serpent. But at last hee was taken and strangled, and the Mexicans forced a Channell, whereby the water might passe to their Citie, the Priests meane-while casting Incense on the bankes, sacrificing the bloud of Quailes; others winding their Cornets: and one of the chiefe went attired in a habit like to the Goddesse of the Waters, which was saluted and welcommed by all the people. All  which things are painted in the Annales of Mexico: which Booke is now in the VaticanAnd Master Hakluit hath a copie of it, translated into English. It was in the Mexican language, sent to Charles the fift, intercepted by Florinus. Librarie at Rome. Thus he enuironed the Citie with water, like another Venice; and hauing raigned eleuen yeeres, dyed.


@. II. Of MOTEZVMA, and other Rarities of the Mexican Storie.
MOtezumaMetezuma. 9. the second, was chosen, who before his Souereigntie, was of graue and  stayed disposition, much addicted to his deuotions. Hee retired himselfe into a Chappell, appointed for him in the Temple of Vitzliputzli, where (they say) the Idoll spake to him; wherein also he hid himselfe, after hee had intelligence of
 this Election. From whence he was led to the Harth of their Gods, where hee sacrificed, with drawing bloud from his eares, and the calues of his legges. They attired him with the Royall Ornaments, and piercing his nostrils, hung thereat a rich Emerald. Being seated in his Throne, the King of Tescuco, one of the Electors, made an Eloquent Oration, which IosephLib. 7. cap. 20. Acosta hath set downe word by word, and deserueth a roome here, if our hastie Pilgrimage would suffer.
This Motezuma commanded, that no Plebeian should serue him in any Office in his house prouiding Knights and Nobles for that purpose. His Coronation was solemnized with Dances, Comedies, Banquets, Lights, and other pompe: the sacrificed Captiues were of a farre Prouince toward the North Sea, which he subdued. Mechouacan, Tlascalla, and Tapeaca,  neuer yeelded to the Mexicans; which Motezuma told Cortes, that hee spared for the vse of his sacrifices, and the exercise of his Souldiers. He laboured to be respected and worshipped as a God. It was death for any Plebeian to looke him in the face: Hee neuer set his foot on the Ground, but was alwaies carried on the shoulders of Noble-men; and if he lighted, they laid rich Tapestrie, whereon he did goe. He neuer put on one Garment twice, nor vsed one Vessell, or Dish aboue once. Hee was rigorous in execution of his Lawes, and for that purpose would disguise himselfe, to see how they were executed, and offer bribes to the Iudges, to prouoke them to iniustice, which, if they excepted, cost them their liues, though they were his kinsmen or brethren. His fall is before declared: it shall not be amisse here to mention some prodigious fore-runners of the same. The Idoll of Cholola, called Quetzacoalt,  declared, That a strange People came to possesse his Kingdome. The King of Tescuco, a great Magician, and many Sorcerers, told him as much. The King shut vp the Sorcerers in prison where they vanished presently: wherefore hee exercised that rage on their wiues and children, which he had intended against them. He sought to appease his angrie Gods by Sacrifices, and therefore would haue remoued a great stone, which by no humane industrie would be moued, as refusing his atonement. Strange voices were heard, accompanied with Earthquakes and swellings of the waters.Ominous prodigies. A prodigious Bird, of the bignesse of a Crane, was taken; which on his head had (as it were) a Glasse representing armed men, and in the kings presence vanished. A stranger thing befell a poore man, who was taken vp by an Eagle, and carried into a certaine Caue, where he let him downe, pronouncing these words; Most  mightie Lord, I haue brought him whom thou hast commanded. There he saw one like the King, lying asleepe; touching whom, hauing receiued threatning Prophesies, he was againe by that former Pursuiuant placed where he had bin taken vp. These things, as Diuellish illusions abusing GODS Prouidence and Iustice, and imitating his Power, to rob him of his glorie, deserue to be mentioned.
Mutezuma hauing intelligence of Cortes his arriuall, was much troubled, and conferring with his Councell, they all said, that without doubt, their great and ancient Lord Quetzacoalt, who had said, that he would returne from the East, whither he was gone, had now fulfilled his promise, and was come. Therefore did hee send Embassadors with presents vnto Cortes, acknowledging him for Quetzacoalt, (sometime their Prince, now esteemed a God)  and himselfe his Lieutenant.
The Mexican Historie described in Pictures, and sent to Charles the fift, (which I haue seene with Master Hakluit) in the first part sheweth their first Expedition and Plantation in this place; then all drowned with water, with great bogs, and some drie bushie places: their Kalendar,Mexican Tributes from Tlatilulco, and from other places. and the names, yeeres, and conquests of their Kings. In the second part their tributes are described; the particulars whereof are, reparations of certaine Churches; so many baskets of Maiz grownd (holding halfe a bushell) and Almonds of Cacao, baskets of Chianpinoli, mantles, paid euery fourth day: and once a yeere Armours and Targets of Feathers; all this was paid by the Citie Tlatilulco. And in like proportion euery Towne and Nation subiect, was to pay the Naturall or Artificiall commodities thereof: as Armours  garnished with feathers, rich mantles, white, or of other colours, Eagles aliue, beames of timber, boords, salt made in long moulds for the Lords of Mexico onely; pots of honie, Naguas and Huipiles (which were attire for women) Copale for perfume, Cotton, Wooll, Red-Sea-shels, Xicharas in which they drinke Cacao, others full of Gold in powder, each containing two handfuls, plates of Gold, three quarters of a yard long, and foure fingers broad, as thicke as parchment; Yellow Varnish to paint themselues, Bells, and Hatchets of Copper, Turkesse-stones; Chalke, Lime, Deere-skins; Cochinile, Feathers, Frizoles, Targets of Gold Diadems, Borders, Beades of Gold, Beades of Gemmes, Tigres-skins, Amber, Axi or West-Indian Pepper, etc.
Concerning the State of Mexico vnder the Spaniards, RobertR. Tomson. ap Hak. Tomson, who was there  about the yeere 1555. saith, that then it was thought there were a thousand and fiue hundred housholds of Spaniards, and aboue three hundred thousand Indians. TheH. Haukes ap. Hak. Iob Hortop. Citie is enuironed
 with a Lake, and the Lake also with Mountaines about thirty leagues in compasse; the raines falling from these Hils, cause the Lake.
In this City resideth the Viceroy, and heere the highest Indian Courts are kept. There are weekly three Faires or Markets, abounding with plenty of Commodities at a cheape price. Many Riuers fall into the Lake, but none goe out. The Indians know how to drowne the City, and would haue practised it, had not the Conspirators beene taken and hanged. The Indians here are good Artificers, Gold-smiths, Copper-smiths, Black-smiths, Carpenters, Shoomakers, Taylors, Sadlers, Embroderers, and of all other Sciences, and worke exceeding cheape, liuing of a little. They will goe two or three leagues to a Faire, carrying  not aboue a penny-worth of Commodities, and yet maintaine themselues thereby.
MilosMiles Philips.Philips saith, that when Sir Francis Drake was on the South Sea, the Viceroy caused a generall muster to be made of all the Spaniards in Mexico, and found aboue seuen thousand housholds, and three thousand singlemen, and of Mestizoes twentie thousand.
Master ChiltonIohn Chilton. testifieth, that euery Indian payeth tribute to the King twelue Reals of Plate, and a Hauneg of Maiz (fiue Haunegs make a quarter English) and euery Widow halfe so much. And all their children, aboue fifteene yeeres old, pay after the same rate. He hath great gaine by his fifths, and by the Popes Buls: this leaden ware was worth to the King at first aboue three Millions of Gold yeerely. The greatnesse of exactions caused two Rebellions whiles he was there, and the King will not suffer them to haue Oyle or Wine there  growing, although the Earth would prodigally repay them, that they may still haue need of Spaine. Tlaxcalla, for their merits in the conquest of Mexico, as before is shewed, is free: only they pay a handfull of Wheate a man in signe of subiection: but some later encrochers haue forced them to till at their owne charge, as much ground as their tribute would amount to. There are in it two hundred thousand Indians
Some of the wild people in New Spaine are deadly enemies to the Spaniards, and eate as many as they get of them. Iohn Chilton fell into their hands, but being sicke and leane, they thought (as a Captiue Wench told him) that he had the Pox, and was but vnwholsome food, and so let him depart. It is an ill wind that blowes none to good: sicknesse the Harbenger of death, was to him a preseruer of life.
 Mexico is now anBotero. Vniuersitie, and therein are taught those Sciences which are read in our Vniuersities of Europe. This Vniuersitie wasGasp. Ens l. 2. there founded by Antony Mendoza; and King Philip erected a Colledge of Iesuites, Anno 1577. Mexico is an Archbishopricke. ThereOrtel. Theas. bee many Spanish Colonies or Plantations, Compostella, Colima, Guadaleiara, Mechocan, Citie of Angele, and others: whereof diuers are Episcopall Sees. Antonio Herrera reckoneth in this and other parts of America, fiue Archbishoprickes, twentie seuen Bishoprickes, two Vniuersities, foure hundred Monasteries and Hospitals innumerable.
In Guastecan, not farre from Panuco, is a Hill, from whence spring two Fountaynes, one of blacke Pitch, the other of red, very hot. To speake largely of New Gallicia, Mechuacan,  Guastecan, and other Regions, would not be much to the Readers delight, and lesse to to my purpose.



CHAP XI. Of the Idols and Idolatrous Sacrifices of  New Spaine.

@. I. Of their Gods.
THe Indians (as AcostaNaturall and Morall hist. of the Indies. lib. 5 cap. 3. obserueth) had no name proper vnto God, but vse the Spanish word Dios, fitting it to the accent of the Cuscan or Mexican Tongues. Yet did they acknowledge a supreme power called Vitziliputzli, terming him the most puissant, and Lord of all things, to whom they erected at Mexico, the most sumptuous Temple in the Indies. After the Supreme God  they worshipped the Sun, and therefore called Cortes (as he writ to the Emperour) Sonne of the Sunne. That VitziliputzliHernando Cortes. Acost. l. 5. c. 9. Vitziliputzli. was an Image of Wood, like to a Man, set vpon an Azure-coloured stoole in a Brankard or Litter; at euery corner was a piece of
 wood like a Serpents head. The stoole signified that he was set in Heauen. He had the forehead Azure, and a band of Azure vnder the nose, from one eare to the other. Vpon his head hee had a rich plume of feathers couered on the top with Gold: hee had in his left hand a white Target, with the figures of fiue Pine Apples, made of white Feathers, set in a crosse; and from aboue issued forth a Crest of Gold: At his sides he had foure Darts, which the Mexicans say, had beene sent from Heauen. In his right hand hee had an Azured staffe, cut in fashion of a wauing Snake. All these ornaments had their mysticall sense. The name of Vitziliputzli signifies the left hand of a shining feather. Hee was set vpon an high Altar in a small boxe, well couered with linnen Clothes, Iewels, Feathers, and ornaments of Gold: and for the greater veneration he had alwayes a Curtain before him. Ioyning to the Chappel  of this Idoll, there was a Pillar of lesse work, and not so wel beautified, where there was another Idoll called Tlaloc.Tlaloc. These two were alwayes together, for that they held them as companions, and of equal power. There was another Idoll in Mexico much esteemed, which was theGomar part. 1 cals him the God of Prouidence. God of Repentance, and of Iubilees and Pardons for their sinnes. Hee was called Tezcalipuca,Tezcallipuca. made of a blacke shining stone, attired after their manner, with some Ethnike deuices; it had Earings of Gold and Siluer, and through the nether lip a small Canon of Christall, halfe a foot long, in which they sometimes put an Azure Feather, sometimes a greene, so resembling a Turqueis or Emerald: it had the haire bound vp with a haire-lace of Gold, at the end whereof did hang an Eare of Gold, with two Fire-brands of smoke painted therein, signifying that he heard the Prayers of the afflicted, and of sinners. Betwixt the two eares  hung a number of small Herons. He had a Iewell hanging at his necke, so great, that it couered all his stomack: vpon his armes, Bracelets of Gold; at his nauill a rich greene stone, and in his left hand a Fan of precious Feathers of greene, azure, and yellow, which came forth of a Looking Glasse of Gold, signifying that he saw all things done in the World. In his right hand he held foure Darts as the Ensignes of his Iustice, for which cause they feared him most. At his festiuall they had pardon of their sinnes. They accounted him the God of Famine, Drought, Barrennesse, and Pestilence. They painted him in another forme, sitting in great Maiestie on a stoole, compassed in with a red Curtaine, painted and wrought with the heads and bones of dead men. In the left hand was a Target with fiue Pines, like vnto Pine Apples of Cotton; and in the right hand a little Dart, with a threatning countenance, and the  arme stretched out, as if he would cast it: and from the Target came foure Darts. The countenance expressed anger, the body was all painted blacke, and the head full of Quailes Feathers Quecalcauatl was their God of the Aire.
In CholulaCholula. they worshipped the God of Merchandize, called Quetzaalcoalt,Quetzaalcoalt. which had the forme of a Man, but the visage of a little Bird with a red bill, and aboue, a combe full of Warts, hauing also rankes of teeth, and the tongue hanging out. It carried on the head a pointed Mitre of painted paper, a Sithe in the hand, and many toyes of Gold on the legs: it had about it Gold, Siluer, Iewels, Feathers, and habits of diuers colours: and was set aloft in a spacious place in the Temple. All this his furniture was significant. The name importeth Colour of a rich Feather. No maruell if this God had many Suters, seeing Gaine is  both God and godlinesse to the most; the whole World admiring and adoring this Mammon or Quetzaalcoalt. Tlaloc was their God of Water: to whom they sacrificed for Raine.
They had also their Goddesses,Gomar. part. 1 the chiefe of which was Tozi,Tozi. which is to say, Our Grand Mother, of which is spoken before; she was flayed by the command of Vitziliputzli, and from hence they learned to flay men in Sacrifice, and to clothe the liuing with the skins of the dead. One of the Goddesses, which they worshipped, had a Sonne who was a great Hunter, whom they of Tlascalla afterwards tooke for a God; being themselues addicted much to that exercise. They therefore made a great Feast vnto this Idoll, as shal after follow.
They had another strange kind of Idoll, which was not an Image but a true Man. For they tooke a Captiue, and before they sacrificed him, they gaue him the name of the Idoll,  to whom he should be sacrificed, apparelling him also with the same ornaments. And during the time that this representation lasted (which was for a yeere in some feasts, sixe moneths in some, in others lesse) they worshipped him in the same manner, as they did their God; he in the meane time eating, drinking, and making merry. When hee went through the streets, the people came forth to worship him, bringing their Almes with children and sicke folkes, that hee might cure and blesse them, suffering him to doe all things at his pleasure; onely he was accompanied with ten or twelue men, lest he should flee. And hee (to the end hee might bee reuerenced as hee passed) sometimes sounded on a small Flute. The Feast being come, this fat Foole was killed, opened, and eaten. The Massilians are saidIan. Dousa. Praecid. ad Arbit. l. 3. c. 1. to haue vsed the like order, nourishing One a whole yeere with the purest meats, and after with many Ceremonies  to leade him through the City and sacrifice him.
LopesLop. de Gom. part. 1.de Gomara writeth, that the Mexicans had two thousand Gods,They had their Venus and their Bacchus, and Mars, and other such Deities in Mexican appellations, as the Heathen, Greekes, and Romans, as after shall appeare. but the chiefe
 were Vitziliputzli and Tezcatlipuca. These two were accounted Brethren: There was another God, who had a great Image placed on the top of the Idols Chappell, made of all that Countrey seeds, grownd, and made in paste, tempered with childrens bloud, and Virgins sacrificed, whose hearts were plucked out of their opened brests, and offered as first fruits to that Idoll. It was consecrated by the Priests with great solemnitie, all the Citizens being present, many deuout persons sticking in the dowie Image Gold and Iewels: after which consecration no Secular person might touch that Image, not come in his Chappell. They renue this Image with new dow many times, and O terque quaterque blessed man bee that can get any Relikes of him. The Souldiers thought themselues hereby safe in the Warres. At  this consecration also a Vessell of water was hallowed with many Ceremonies, and kept at the foot of the Altar for the Kings Coronation, and to blesse the Captaines that went to the warres, with a draught of it.


@. II. Of their sacrifices of Men.
NExt after their Gods it followeth to speake of theirAcost. l. 5. and Relat. del. Temstitan. godlesse Sacrifices: wherein  they surmounted all the Nations of the World in beastly butcheries. The persons they sacrificed wereSo (some say) from the like practice of the Ancients Victima was so called, a^^ hostia quasi a victo, and ab hoste. Captiues: to get which, they made their warres, rather seeking in their victories to take then to kill. Their manner of Sacrificing was this. They assembled such as should be sacrificed in the Pallisadoe of dead mens skuls, of which we shall after spake, where they vsed a certaine Ceremonie at the foot of the Pallisadoe; they placed a great guard about them. Presently there stept forth a Priest attired with a short Surplesse full of tassels beneath, who came from the top of the Temple, bearing an Idoll made of Wheate and Mays mingled with Honey, which had the eyes thereof made of greene Glasse, and the teeth of the graines of Mays. He descended the steps of the Temple with all speed, and ascended by a little Ladder vp a great stone, planted vpon a high Terrasse  in the midst of the Court. This stone was called Quauxi-calli, that is, the stone of Eagle: as he went vp and came downe, still he embraced his Idoll. Then went hee vp to the place, where those were which should be sacrificed, shewing his Idoll to euery one in particular, saying vnto them, This is your God. This done; hee descended by the other side of the staires, and all such as should die, went in Procession to the place where they should bee sacrificed, where they found the Ministers ready for that office. Six of the Priests were appointed to this execution; foure to hold the hands and feet of him that should be sacrificed, the fift to hold his head, the sixt to open the stomacke, and pull out his heart. They called them Chachalmua, that is, the Ministers of holy things. It was a high dignitie wherein they succeeded their Progenitors.
 The sixt, which killed the Sacrifice, was as high Priest, or Bishop, whose name was different according to the difference of times and solemnities. Their habits also differed according to the times. The name of their chiefe dignitie was PapaPapa the name of the Mexican high Priest. and Topilzin. Their habit and Robe was a red Curtain with tassels below, a Crowne of rich Feathers, Greene, White, and Yellow vpon his head, and at his eares like pendants of Gold, wherein were set greene stones, and vnder the lip vpon the midst of the beard, hee had a Peece like vnto a small Canon of an Azured stone.
The Sacrificer came with his face and hands shining blacke: the other fiue had their haire much curled, and tyed vp with Laces of Leather, bound about the midst of the head: vpon their forehead they carried small Roundelets of Paper painted about with diuers  colours, and they were attired in a Dalmatike Robe of white wrought with blacke, in this attire representing the Deuill. The Souereigne Priest carried a great Knife in his hand of a large and sharpe flint, another carried a coller of wood wrought in forme of a Snake, all put themselues in order before a Pyramidall stone which was directly against the doore of the Chappell of their Idoll. This stone was so pointed, that the man which was to bee sacrificed, being layed thereon vpon his backe, did bend in such sort, as letting the Knife but fall vpon his stomacke, it opened very easily in the middest. Then did the Guard cause them to mount vp certaine large staires in ranke to this place, and as euery one came in their order, the six Sacrificers tooke him, one by one foot, another by the other; and one by one hand, another by the other, all naked, and cast him on his backe vpon this pointed stone:  where the fift of them put the coller of wood about his necke, and the high Priest opened his stomacke with the Knife with a strange dexteritie and nimblenesse, pulling out his heart with his hands, the which he shewed smoking vnto the Sun, to whom he did offer this heat:
 and presently he turned towards the Idoll, and did cast the heart at his face, and then cast away the body, tumbling it downe the staires of the Temple, there being not two foot space betwixt the stone and the first step. In this sort they sacrificed them all one after another. Their Masters, or such as had taken them, tooke vp the bodies and carried them away, and diuiding them amongst them, did eate them. There were euer forty or fifty at the least, thus sacrificed. The Neighbour Nations did the like, imitating the Mexicans in this sacred Butchery.
There was another kind of Sacrifice, which they made in diuers Feasts, called Racaxipo Velitzli, which is as much as the flaying of men, because they flayed the Sacrifice (as is said) and therewith apparelled a man appointed to that end. This manGomara saith, that the ancient persons, and sometimes the King himselfe, would put on this skin, being of a principall Captiue. went dancing and leaping  through all the Houses and Market places of the Citie, euery one being forced to offer something vnto him: which, if any refused, he would strike him ouer the face with the corner of the skin, defiling him with the congealed bloud. This continued till the skinne did stinke, during which time much Almes was gathered, which they imployed in necessaries for their deuotions. In many of these Feasts they made a challenge betweene him that did Sacrifice, and him that should bee sacrificed, thus: They tied the slaue by one foote to a wheele of stone, giuing him a Sword and Target in his hands to defend himselfe: then stepped forth the other armed in like manner. And if he, that should be Sacrificed, defended himselfe valiantly against the other hee was freed, and was reputed a famous Captaine: but if he were vanquished, he was Sacrificed on that stone whereto he was tied.  
They euery yeere gaue one slaue to the Priests, to represent their Idoll. At his first entry into the office after he had beene well washed, they adorned him with the Idols ornaments and name, as before is said: and if he escaped before his time of Sacrifice was expired, the chiefe of his Guard was substituted to that representation and Sacrifice. Hee had the most honourable lodging in all the Temple, where hee did eate and drinke, and whither all the chiefe Ministers came to serue and honour him: hee was accompanied with Noblemen though the streets. At night they put him into a strong Prison, and at the appointed Feast sacrificed him.
The Deuill (aIohn 8.44. Murtherer from the beginning) suggested to the Priests, when there seemed defect of these Sacrifices, to goe to their Kings, telling them that their Gods died for  hunger, and therefore should be remembred. Then assembled they their people to warres to furnish their bloudy Altars.
There happened a strange accident in one of these Sacrifices, reported by men of worthy credit, That the Spaniards beholding these Sacrifices, a young man, whose heart was newly plucked out, and himselfe tumbled downe the staires, when he came to the bottome, he said to the Spaniards in his Language; Knights they haue slaine me. The Indians themselues grew weary of these cruell Rites, and therefore they easily embraced the Spaniards Christianitie: Yea, Cortes writ to the Emperour Charles, that those of Mechoacan sent to him for his Law, being weary of their owne, as not seeming good vnto them.
Some of the SpaniardsLop. de Gom. part. 2. were thus sacrificed at Tescuco, and their Horse-skinnes tanned  in the haire, and hung vp with the Horse-shooes in the great Temple, and next to them the Spaniards garments for a perpetuall memory. At the siege of Mexico, they sacrificed at one time, in sight of their Countrimen, forty Spaniards,
TheAcost. l. 5. c. 27 Mexicans, besides their cruelties, had other vnbeseeming Rites in their Religion: as to eate and drinke to the name of their Idols, to pisse in the honour of them, carrying them vpon their shoulders, to anoint and besmeare themselues filthily, and other things, both ridiculous and lamentable.
TheyGom. pa. 39^. were so deuout in their Superstitions, and superstitious in their deuotions, that before they would eate or drinke, they would take a little quantitie and offer it to the Sun, and to the Earth. And if they gather Corne, Fruit, or Roses, they would take a leafe before  they would smell it, and offer the same: he which did not thus, was accounted neither louing nor loued of God.
The Mexicans in the siege of their Citie, being brought to all extremities, spake thus, as Lopez reporteth, vnto Cortes; Considering that thou art the childe of the Sunne, why doest thou not entreat the Sunne thy Father to make an end of vs? O Sun that canst goe round about the World, in a day and a night, make an end of vs, and take vs out of this miserable life, for we desire death, to goe and rest with our God Quetcanath, who tarrieth for vs.  




CHAP XII. Of the Religious places and persons in New-Spaine: wherein is also handled their Penance, Marriages, Burials, and other Rites performed by their Priests.

 @. I. Of their Temples.
WE haue already mentioned the Temple of Vitziliputzli in Mexico, which requireth our further description. ItAcost. l. 5. c. 13. was built of great stones, in fashion of Snakes tyed one to another: and had a great circuit, called Coatepantly, that is, a circuit of Snakes. Vpon the top of euery Chappell or Oratorie, where the Idols were, was a fine pillar wrought with small stones blacke as Iet, the ground raised vp with white and red, which below gaue a great light: Vpon the top of  the Pillar were Battlements wrought like Snailes, supported by two Indians of stone, sitting, holding Candlesticks in their hands, were like Croysants, garnished and enriched at the ends, with yellow and greene feathers, and long fringes of the same. Within the circuit of this Court there were many chambers of Religious men, and others that were appointed for the Priests and Popes. This Court is so great and spacious, that eight or ten thousand persons did dance easily in a round, holding hands, which was an vsuall custome there, howsoeuer it seemeth incredible. CortesNarrat. 2. ad Car. 5. relateth, that within the compasse of the wall, a Citie of fiue hundred houses might haue beene builded: round about encompassed with goodly buildings, Hals, and Cloisters for the Religious Votaries to dwell in. In that circuit he numbereth forty high Towers well built, to which the ascent was by fifty steps or staires: the  least of them as high as the steeple of the Cathedrall Church in Siuill. The stone-worke as curious as in any place, full of grauen and painted imagerie. All these Towers were sepulchres of great Lords, and had each of them a Chappell to some speciall Idol. There were there three large Hals with their Chappels annexed, into which none but certaine Religious men might enter, both full of Images: the chiefe of which Cortes cast downe, and in stead thereof placed the Image of the Euer-blessed, neuer worthy to bee dignified with indignitie, the glorious Virgin and Mother our Lord, with such other Saints.
There were foure gates or entries, at the East, West, North, and South, at eueryGomara saith that the fourth was not a causey, but a street of the Citie. of which began a faire Causey of two or three leagues long. There were in the midst of the Lake wherein Mexico is built, foure large causies. Vpon euery entry was a God or Idol, hauing  the visage turned to the causie right against the Temple gate of Vitzliputzli. There were thirty steps of thirty fadome long, diuided from the circuit of the court by a street that went betweene them. Vpon the top of these steps, there was a walke of thirty foot broad, all plastered with chalke: in the midst of which walke was a Pallisado artificially made of very high Trees planted in order a fadome asunder. These Trees were very bigge, and all pierced with small holes from the foot to the top, and there were rods did runne from one Tree to another, to which were tied many dead mens heads. Vpon euery rod were many skuls, and these rankes of skuls continued from the foot to the top of the Tree. This Pallisado was full of dead mens skuls from one end to the other, which were the heads of such as had bin sacrificed. For after the flesh was eaten, the head was deliuered to the Priests,  who tied them in this sort, vntill they fell off by morsels. Vpon the top of the Temple were two stones or Chappels, and in them the two Images Vitziluputzli and Tlaloc. These Chappels were carued and grauen very artificially, and so high, that to ascend vp to them there were an hundred and twenty staires of stone. Before these Chappels there was a Court of forty foot square, in the midst whereof was a high stone of fiue hand breadth, pointed in fashion of a Pyramide, placed there for the sacrificing of men, as is before shewed.
GomaraGom. part. 1. saith, that this and other their Temples were called Teucalli, which signifieth Gods house. This Temple, he saith, was square, containing euery way as muchPet. Mart. Dec. 5. l. 4. saith that in largenesse the situation of this Temple is matchable with a Towne of fiue hundred houses. as a Crossebow can shoot leuell: in the middest stood a mount of earth and stone fifty fadome long euery way, built Pyramide-fashion, saue that the top was flat; and ten fadome square. It had  two such Pyramide Stones or Altars for Sacrifice, painted with monstrous figures. Euery Chappell had three lofts, one aboue another sustained vpon Pillars: From thence the eye with much pleasure might behold all about the Lake. Besides this Tower, there were forty
 other Towres belonging to other inferiour Temples; which were of the same fashion: onely their prospect was not Westward, to make difference. Some of those Temples were bigger then others, and euery one of a seuerall God.
There was one round Temple dedicated to the God of the Aire, called Quecalcouatl,Quelcouatl. the forme of the Temple representing the Aires circular course about the earth. The entrance of that Temple had a doore, made like the mouth of a Serpent, with foule and deuillish resemblances, striking dreadfull horrour to such as entered. All these Temples had peculiar houses, Priests, Gods, and Seruices. At euery doore of the great Temple was a large Hall and goodly buildings, which were common Armories for the Citie. They had other darke houses full of Idols of diuers metals, all embrued with bloud, the dayly sprinkling whereof made them  shew blacke: yea, the walls were an inch thicke, and the ground a foot thicke with bloud, which yeelded a lothsome sent. The Priests entered dayly therein, which they allowed not to others except to Noble personages, who at their entry were bound to offer some Man to be sacrificed to those slaughter-houses of the Diuell. There did continually reside in the great Temple 5000. persons, which had there their meat, drinke, and lodging; the Temple enioying great reuenues, and diuers Townes for the maintenance thereof.
NextAcost. l. 5. c. 13. to the Temple of Vitziliputzli was that of Tescalipuca, the God of Penance, Punishments (and Prouidence) very high and well built. It had foure ascents; the top was flat, an hundred and twenty foot broad; and ioyning to it was a Hall hanged with Tapistry, and Curtains of diuers colours and workes. The doore being low and large was alwayes  couered with a Vaile, and none but the Priests might enter. All this Temple was beautified with diuers Images and Pictures most curiously: for that these two Temples were as the Cathedrall Churches, the rest as Parishionall. They were so spacious, and had so many chambers, that there were in them places for the Priests, Colledges and Schooles.
WithoutLop. Gom. p. 1. the great Temple, and ouer against the principall doore, a stones cast distant was the Charnell house, or that Golgotha, (before mentioned) where, vpon poles or sticks, and also in the wals (two Towres hauing no other stuffe but Lime and Skuls) Andrew de Tapia certifiedAcost. l. 5 c. 15 Gomara, that he and Gonsala de Vmbria did reckon in one day, an hundred thirty sixe thousand skuls. When any wastad, supply was made of others in their roome.  


@. II. Of their Nunnes,Nunnes. Friers and other Votaries.
WIthin this great Circuit of the principall Temple were two Houses, like Cloisters, the one opposite to the other, one of Men, the other of Women. In that of Women they were Virgins onely, of twelue or thirteens yeeres of age, which they called the Maids of Penance: they were as many as the men, and liued chastly, and regularly, as Virgins dedicated to the seruice of their God. Their charge was to sweepe and  make cleane the Temple, and euery morning to prepare meat for the Idol and his Ministers, of the Almes the Religious gathered. The food they prepared for the Idoll were small Loaues, in the forme of hands and feet, as of Marchpane: and with this bread they prepared certaine sawces, which they cast dayly before the Idol, and his Priests did eate it.
These Virgins had their haire cut, and then let them grow for a certaine time: they rose at midnight to the Idols Mattins, which they dayly celebrated, performing the same exercises which the Religious did. They had their Abbesse, who employed them to make cloth of diuers fashions, for the ornaments of their Gods and Temples. Their ordinarie habite was all white, without any worke or colour. They did their penance at midnight, sacrificing and wounding themselues, and piercing the tops of their eares, laying the bloud which issued  forth vpon their cheekes, and after bathed themselues in a poole which was within the Monasterie. If any were found dishonest, they were put to death without remission, saying, she had polluted the house of their God.
They held it for an ominous token, that some religious man or woman had committed a fault, when they saw a Rat or Mouse passe, or a Bat in the Idol-Chappell, or that they had gnawed any of the vailes, for that they say, a Cat or a Bat would not aduenture to commit such an indignitie, if some offence had not gone before: and then began to make inquisition, and discouering the offender, put him to death. None were receiued into this Monasterie, but the daughters of one of the sixe quarters, named for that purpose: and this profession continued a yeere, during which time, their fathers and themselues had made a vow to serue  the Idoll in this manner, and from thence they went to be married.

The other Cloyster or Monasterie was of young-men of eighteene or twentie yeeres of age, which they called Religious. Their Crownes were shauen, as the FriersFriers. in these parts, their haire a little longer, which fell to the middest of their eare, except on the hinder part of the head, where they let it grow on their shoulders, and tyed it vp in trusses. These serued in the Temple, liued poorely and chastly, and (as the Leuites) ministred to the Priests, Incense, Lights and Garments, swept and made cleane the Holy place, bringing wood for a continuall fire, to the Harth of their God, which was like a Lampe that still burned before the Altar of their Idoll. Besides these, there were other little Boyes that serued for manuall vses, as to decke the Temple with Boughes, Roses, and Reeds, to giue the Priests water to  wash, Rasors to sacrifice, and to goe with such as begged almes, to carrie it. All these had their superiours, who had the gouernment ouer them; and when they came in publike, where women were, they carried their eyes to the ground, not daring to behold them. They had linnen garments, and went into the Citie foure or sixe together, to aske almes in all quarters and if they got none, it was lawfull for them to goe into the Corne-fields, and gather that which they needed, none daring to contradict them.
Cortes writeth, that almost all the chiefe mens sonnes in the Citie,Cortes narrat. ad Imp. and Relat. del Temistitan ap. Ram. v. 3. after they were sixe or seuen yeeres old, till the time of their marriage, especially the eldest, were thrust into a kind of Religious habit and seruice.
There might not aboue fiftie liue in that strict penance; they rose at midnight, and sounded  the Trumpets, to awake the people. Euery one watched by turne, lest the fire before the Altar should die: they gaue the censor, with which the Priest at midnight incensed the Idoll, and also in the morning, at noone, and at night. TheyMexican Votaries, no lesse strict in that threefold cord which the Popish Votaries glory of Pouertie, Continency, Obedience, with other wil worships: yea, for the time, more austere. were very subiect and obedient to their superiours, and passed not any one point commanded. And at midnight after the Priest had ended his censing, they retyred themselues apart into a secret place, where they sacrificed and drew bloud from the Calues of their legs with sharp bodkins, therewith rubbing their Temples and vnder their Eares, presently washing themselues in a Poole appointed to that end. These yong men did not anoint their heads and bodies withTobacco. Petum, as the Priests did. This austeritie continued a yeere.
The Priests likewise rose at midnight, and retired themselues into a large place where  were many lights, and there drew bloud, as the former, from their legs, then did they set these Bodkins vpon the battlements of the Court, stickt in straw, that the people might see. Neither might they vse one Bodkin in twice. The Priests also vsed great fasts of fiue or ten dayes together, before their great feasts. Some of them, to preserue their chastitie, slit their members in the midst, and did a hundred things to make themselues impotent, lest they should offend their gods. They drunke no Wine, and slept little, for that the greatest part of their exercises were by night.
They did vse also (that the selfe-tyrannizing Catholike should not out-vie Merits) to Discipline themselues with cords full of knots, wherein the people likewise came not behinde in cruell Processions, especially on the Feast of Tezcalipuca, lashing themselues  with knotted Manguey-cords ouer the shoulders. The Priest fasted fiue dayes before that Feast, eating but once a day, and abstaining from their Wiues; the whips supplying those delicacies.
GomaraLop. de Gom. part. 1. pag. 396. speaketh of others, besides those yong ones before mentioned, which liued in those Cloysters, some being sicke, for their recouery; some in extreme pouerty, to finde reliefe; some for riches, for long life, for good husbands, for many children, and some for vertue: euery one abode there as long as they had vowed, and after vsed their libertie. Their offices were to spin Cotton, Wooll, and feathers, and to weaue cloth for their gods, and themselues, to sweepe all thy holy roomes: they might goe on Procession with the Priests, but not sing, nor goe vp the staires of the Temple: their food was boiled flesh and hot bread,  receiued of almes, the smoke whereof was offered vnto their gods: They late and lay all together, but lay in their cloathes.Lit. Episc. Mex. The multitude of Idols and Idol-Temples in New Spaine was such, that a Bishop of Mexico, in his Letters 1532. saith, that the Friers had defaced twenty thousand of the one, and desolated fiue hundred of the other: and where in Mexico they had vsed yeerely to offer more then twenty thousand Harts of Boyes and Girles to their Idols,  they now (saith he) offer them by good instruction to God. God grant it.



@. III. Of their Priests, and the many Rites belonging to their function.
TOuching their Priests in Mexico,Ios. Acost. l. 5. cap. 14. there were some high Priests or Popes, euen vnder the same name, called by the Mexicans, Papas, as they should say, Soueraigne Bishops: others, as before you haue heard, were of inferiour ranke. The Priests of Vitziliputzli succeeded by linages of certaine quarters of the Citie, deputed for  that purpose: and those of other Idols came by election, or by being offered to the Temple in their Infancie. They daily exercise of the Priests was to cast Incense on the Idols, which was done foure times in the space of a naturall day: at breake of day, at noone, at Sun-set, at midnight. At midnight all the chiefe officers of the Temple did rise, and in stead of Bels they did sound a long time vpon Trumpets, Cornets, and Flutes, very heauily; which being ended, he that did the Office that weeke, stept forth attired in a white robe with a Censor in in his hand, full of Coles, which he tooke from the harth, burning continually before the Altar, in the other hand he had a purse full of incense, which he cast into the Censor, and entring the place where the Idol was, he incensed it with great reuerence; then tooke he a cloth, with the which he wiped the Altar and the Curtains. This done, they went all into a  Chappell, and there did beat themselues and draw bloud with Bodkins, as is said: this was alwayes done at midnight. None other but the Priests might intermeddle with their Sacrifices, and euery one did employ himselfe according to his dignity and degree. They did likewise preach to the people at some Feasts. They had reuenues and great offerings. TheyCortes narrat. had conuenient houses for their habitation. They ware blacke garments, and cut not nor combed their haire in the time of their ministration.
The Mexican PriestsAcost. l. 5. c. 26. Their anointings. were thus anointed; they anointed the body from the foot to the head, and all the haire likewise, which hung like tresses or a Horse-maine, for that they applyed this vnction wet and moist. Their haire grew so, that in time it hung downe to their hams, insomuch, that the weight made it burthensome: for they neuer cut it vntill they  dyed, or were dispensed with for their great age, or were employed in gouernments, or some honourable charge in the Common-wealth. They carried their haire in tresses of sixe fingers breadth, which they dyed blacke with the fume of Sapine, Firre, or Rosine. They were alwayes dyed with this tincture, from the foot vnto the head, so as they were like vnto shining Negros. This was their ordinary vnction; they had another when they went to sacrifice or incense on the tops of mountaines, or in darke Caues, where there Idols were, vsing also certaine Ceremonies, to take away feare, and adde courage. This vnction was made with diuers venemous beasts, as Spiders, Scorpions, Salamanders, and Vipers, which the Boyes in the Colledges tooke and gathered together: wherein they were so expert, as they were alway furnished when the Priests called for them. They tooke all these together, and  burnt them vpon the harth of the Temple which was before the Altar, vntill they were consumed to ashes. Then did they put them in Morters with much Tobacco or Petum, which made them lose their force; mingling likewise with these ashes, Scorpions, Spiders, and Palmers aliue. After this, they put to it a certaine seed being ground, which they called Olololuchqui, whereof the Indians made drinkes to see Visions, for that the vertue of this herbe is to depriue men of sence: they did likewise grind with these ashes black and hairy wormes, whose haire onely is venemous; all which they mingled together with blacke, or the fume of Rosine, putting it in small pots, which they set before their God, saying it was his meat, and therefore called it a diuine meat. By meanes of this ointment they became Witches, and did see and speake with the Diuell. The Priests being slubbered with this ointment,  lost all feare, putting on a Spirit of cruelty. By reason whereof they did very boldly kill men in their sacrifices, went all alone in the night time to the Mountaines, and into obscure Caues, contemned all wilde beasts, beleeuing that Lyons, Tygres, Serpents, and the rest fled from them by vertue hereof.
This Petum did also serue to cure the sick, and for children; all resorted to them as to their Sauiours, to apply vnto them this Diuine Physicke, as they called it. They vsed manifold other superstitions to delude the people, in tying small flowers about their necks, and strings with small bones of Snakes, commanding them to bathe at certaine times, to watch all night at the Diuine harth, to eate no other bread but that which had beene offered to their Gods, that they should (vpon all occasions) repaire to their Wisards, who with certaine  graines told Fortunes, and diuined, looking into keelers, and pailes full of water. The Sorcerers andTheir Witches. ministers of the diuell vsed much to besmeare themselues. There were an infinite
 number of these Witches, Diuiners, Inchanters, and the like: and still there remaine of them (but secret) not daring publikely to exercise their superstitions.
The MexicansTheir Rites vnto Infants. had amongst them a kinde of baptisme, which they did with cutting the eares and members of yong children, hauing some resemblance of the Iewish circumcision. This Ceremonie was done principally to the sonnes of Kings and Noblemen: presently vpon their birth the Priests did wash them, and did put a little Sword in the right hand, in the left a Target. And to the children of the vulgar sort, they put the markes of their callings, and to their daughters instruments to Spinne, Knit, and labour.
The Mexican history afore-mentioned, in the third part thereof,Mex. pict. hist. sheweth in pictures their  policie and customes. When a child was borne (as is there described) it was laid in a Cradle: foure dayes after, the mid-wife brought it naked, with the instrument of the trade (as is said) in the hand, into the yard; where were pre^ared Bul-rushes and a little pan of water, in which she washed the same. Three boyes sate by eating tosted Mars,Education of children in Mexico. with sodden Frizoles in a little pan, and at the mid-wiues appointment named the child with a lowd voice. After twenty dayes they went with it into the Temple, and presented the same in presence of the Priest, with an offering: and being of fifteene yeares, committed him to the High Priest of that Temple, to be taught, if they would after haue him a Priest: or if they would haue him a Souldier, they committed him to the Master thereof, with an offering of meat also. In this booke is pictured how they instruct and feed them at three yeeres  of age, giuing them halfe a Cake: how at foure with a whole Cake: at fiue burthening and exercising their bodies, and letting their daughters to spin: how at sixe they exercise them in gathering vp corne spilled on the ground, or the like: at seuen in fishing. There is likewise described their seuere discipline in punishing them with Manguez. The Priests did exercise their Pupils in bodily seruices of the Temple, in going to the Mountains to sacrifice, in Musicke, obseruing the time by the starres, and the like. Old men of threescore and ten, might be publikely drunken without controll,Drunkards theeues, adulterers, stoned. which to yong folkes of both sexes was death, as was theft also and adultery.
The PriestsTheir marriages. also had their office in marriages. The Bridegroome and the Bride stood together before the Priest, who tooke them by the hands, asking them if they would marry:  vnderstanding their will, he took a corner of the vaile, wherewith the woman had her head couered, and a corner of the mans gowne, which he tyed together on a knot, and so led them thus tyed to the Bridegroomes house, where there was a harth kindled. Then he caused the wife to goe seuen times about the harth, and so the married couple sate downe together, and thus was the marriage contracted. That booke of pictures describes it thus: as Amantesa or Broker carried the Bride on her backe at the beginning of the night, foure women attending with Torches of Pine-tree Rosenned. At the Bridegroomes house his parents receiue her, and carry her to him in a Hall, where they are both caused to sit on a Mat, neere a fire, and tyed together with a corner of their apparell, and a perfume of Copale wood is made to their gods. Two old men, and as many old women were present. The married couple  eate, and then these old folke, which after this separate them asunder, and giue them good instructions for Oeconomicall duties.
In other parts of New-SpaineGomara. part. 1 pag. 389. they vsed other marriage-rites; at Tlaxcallan the Bridegroome and Bride polled their heads, to signifie, that from thenceforth all childish courses should be laid aside. At michuacan the Bride must looke directly vpon the Bridegroome, or else the marriage was not perfect. In Mixteopan they vsed to carry the Bridegroome vpon their backs, as if he were forced: and then they both ioyne hands, and knit their mantles together with a great knot. The Macatecas did not come together in twenty dayes after marriage, but abode in fasting and prayer all that while, sacrificing their bodies, and anointing the mouths of their Idols with their bloud. In Panuco the Husbands buy the Wiues  for a Bow, two Arrowes, and a Net; and afterwards the Father-in-law speaketh not one word to his Sonne in-law for the space of a yeere. When he hath a child, he lyeth not with his wife in two yeeres after, lest she should be with child againe before the other bee out of danger; some sucke twelue yeeres: and for this cause they haue many wiues. No woman, while she hath her disease, may touch or dresse any thing.
Adulterie in Mexico was death: common women were permitted, but no ordinary Stewes. The diuell did many times talke with their Priest, and with some other Rulers and particular persons. Great gifts were offered vnto him whom the diuell had vouchsafed this conference. He appeared vnto them in many shapes, and was often familiar with them. He to whom he appeared, carried about him painted, the likenesse wherein be shewed  himselfe the first time. And they painted his Image on their doores, benches, and euery corner of the house. Likewise, according to his Protean and diuersified apparitions they painted him in many shapes.

Acost. l. 5. c. 8. Burials.It belonged also to the office of the Priests and religious in Mexico, to interre the dead, and doe their obsequies. The places where they buried them, were their gardens and courts of their owne houses: others carried them to the places of sacrifices, which were done in the mountaines: others burnt them, and after buried the ashes in the temples, burying with them whatsoeuer they had, of apparell, stones, and iewels. They did sing the funerall offices like Responds, often lifting vp the dead body, with many ceremonies. At these Mortuaries they did eate and drinke; and if it were a person of qualitie, they gaue apparell to such as came. When one was dead, his friends came with their presents, and saluted him as if he were liuing. And if he were a King or Lord of some Towne, they offered some slaues to bee put to death with him, to serue him in the other world. They likewise put to death his Priest  or Chaplain, (for euery Noble-man had a Priest for his domestical holies) that he might execute his office with the dead. They likewise killed his Cooke, his Butler, Dwarffes, and deformed men, and whosoeuer had most serued him, though he were his Brother. And to preuent pouertie, they buried with them much wealth, as Gold, Siluer, Stones, Curtains, and other rich pieces. And if they burned the dead, they vsed the like with all his seruants and ornaments they gaue him for the other world, and lastly, buried the ashes with great solemnitie. The obsequies continued ten dayes with mournefull songs, and the Priests carried away the dead with innumerable ceremonies. To the Noble-men they gaue their honourable Ensignes, Armes, and particular Blazons, which they carried before the body to the place of burning, marching as in a Procession; where the Priests and Officers of the Temple went  with diuers furniture, and ornaments, some casting incense, others singing, and some making the Drums and Flutes to sound the mournfullest accents of sorrow. The Priest who did the Office, was decked with the markes of the Idoll which the Noble-men had represented: for all Noble-men did represent Idols, and carrie the name of some One.
Acost. l. 6. c. 26.The Mexicans honoured the best souldiers with a kinde of Knighthood, of which were three Orders: one ware a red ribband, which was the chiefe; the second was the Lyon or Tyger-knight: the Grey-Knight was the meanest: they had great priuiledges. Their Knighthood had these funerall solemnities. They brought the corps to the place appointed, and enuironing it, and all the baggage with Pine-trees, set fire thereon, maintaining the same with gummie wood, till all were consumed. Then came forth a Priest attired like a diuell,  hauing mouthes vpon euery ioynt of him, and many eyes of Glasse, holding a great staffe, with which he mingled all the ashes with terrible and fearfull gestures.
When the King ofLop. de Gom. part. 1. pag. 383. Mexico sickened, they vsed forthwith to put a Visor on the face of Tezcatlipuca, or Vitzilivitzli, or some other Idoll, which was not taken away till hee mended or ended, If he died, word was presently sent into all his Dominions for publike lamentations, and Noble-men were summoned to the funerals. The body was laid on a Mat, and watched foure nights, then washed, and a locke of haire out off for a relike; for therein (said they) remained the remembrance of his soule. After this an Emerald was put in his mouth, and his body shrowded in 17. rich mantles, costly and curiously wrought. Vpon the vpper mantle was set the Deuice or Armes of some Idoll, whereunto he had been most deuout in  in his life time, and in his Temple should the body be buried. Vpon his face they put a Visor painted with foule and deuillish gestures, beset with jewels: then they killed the slaue, whose office was to light the Lamps, and make fire to the gods of his Palace. This done, they carried the body to the Temple, some carrying Targets, Arrows, Maces, and Ensignes, so hurle into the funerall fire. The High Priest and his crue receiue him at the Temple gate with a sorrowfull Song, and after he hath said certaine words, the body is cast into the fire there prepared for that purpose, together with jewels: also a Dog newly strangled, to guide his way. In the meane-while two hundred persons were sacrificed by the Priests, or more, to serue him, as is said. The fourth day after, fifteene slaues were sacrificed for his soule, and vpon the twentieth day, fiue; on the sixtieth, three, etc. The ashes with the locke of haire  was put in a Chest, painted on the in-side with deuillish shapes, together with another locke of haire, which had been reserued since the time of his birth. On this Chest was set the Image of the King: the kinred offered great gifts before the same. The King of Mechuacan obserued the like bloudy Rites: many Gentlewomen were by the new King appointed their Offices in their seruice to the deceased, and while his body was burning, were malled with clubs, and buried foure and foure in a graue. Many Women slaues, and free Maidens were slaine to attend on these Gentlewomen. But I would not bury my Reader in these direfull graues of men cruell in like and death. Let vs seeke some Festiuall argument, if that may be more delightfull.  




CHAP XIII. Of the supputation of Times, Festiuall Solemnities, Colledges, Schooles, Letters, Opinions, and other remarkeable things in New Spaine.

 @. I. Their Kalender and Conceits of Time, and some of their Feasts.
THe MexicansAcost. l. 6. c. 2. diuided the yeere into eighteene moneths, ascribing to each twentie dayes, so that the fiue odde dayes were excluded. These fiue they reckoned apart, and called them the dayes of nothing: during the which, the people did nothing, neither went to their Temples, but spent the time in visiting each other: the Sacrificers likewise ceased their Sacrifices. These fiue  dayes being past, the first moneth began about the twentie sixe of February. GomaraGom. pag. 317. Mexican. hist. M.S ap. Hak. hath this Kalender. sets downe their moneths names in order. The Indians described them by peculiar Pictures, commonly taken of the principall Feast therein. They accounted their weeks by thirteene dayes: they had also a weeke of yeeres which was likewise thirteene. They reckoned by a certaine Wheele, which contayned foure weekes, that is, two and fiftie yeeres. In the midst of this Wheele was painted the Sunne, from which went foure beames of lines, in a Crosse of distinct colours, Greene, Blue, Red, and Yellow; and so the lines betwixt these: on which they noted by some Picture, the accident that befell any yeere, as the Spaniards comming, marked by a man clad in Red. The last night when this Wheele was run about, they brake all their vessels and stuffe, put out their fire and all the lights, saying, that the  World should end at the finishing of one of these Wheeles, and it might be at that time; and then what should such things need? Vpon this conceit they passed the night in great feare: but when they saw the day begin to breake, they presently beat many Drums, with much other mirth and Musicke, saying, that God did prolong the time with another Age of two and fifty yeeres. And then began another Wheele; the first day whereof they tooke new fire, for which they went to the Priest, who fetched it out of a Mountaine, and made a solemne Sacrifice and Thanksgiuing. The twenty dayes of each moneth were called by seuerall names, the first Cipactli which signifieth a Spade, and so the rest a House, a Dogge, a Snake, an Eagle, a Temple, and the like. By this Kalendar they keepe things in memory aboue nine hundred yeeres since. The Indians of Culhua did beleeue that the Gods had made the  World, they knew not how: and that since the Creation, foure Sunnes were past, and that the fift and last is the Sunne, which now giueth light vnto the World.
The first Sunne (forsooth) perished by water, and all liuing creatures therewith:Opinion of fiue Sunnes. the second fell from Heauen, and with the fall slue all liuing creatures, and then were many Giants in the Country: the third Sunne was consumed by fire; and the fourth by Tempest of ayre and wind, and then Mankind perished not, but was turned into Apes: yet when that fourth Sunne perished, all was turned into darknesse, and so continued fiue and twenty yeeres: and at the fifteenth yeere, God did forme one man and woman, who brought forth children, and at the end of other ten yeeres appeared this fift Sunne newly borne, which after their reckoning is now in this yeere 1612. nine hundred and eighteene yeeres since. Three dayes after  this Sunne appeared, they held that all the Gods did die, and that these which since they worship, were borne in processe of time.
At the end of euery twenty dayes, the Mexicans celebrated a Feast called Tonalli,Mexican Feasts. which was the last day of euery moneth. The last day of the first moneth was called Tlacaxiponaliztli, on which were slaine an hundred Captiues in Sacrifice and eaten, others putting on the skins (as before is shewed.) Many of them would go to the slaughter with ioyfull countenance, dancing, and demanding Almes, which befell to the Priests. When the greene Corne was a foot aboue the ground, they vsed to goe to a certaine Hill, and there sacrificed two Children, A Girle and a Boy, three yeeres old, to the honour of Tlaloc, God of the Water, that they might haue raine: and because these children were free borne, their hearts  were not plucked out, but their throats being cut, their bodies were wrapped in a new Mantle, and buried in a graue of stone.
When the fields of Maiz were two foot high, a collection was made, and therewith were
 bought foure little slaues, betwixt the age of fiue and seuen, and they were sacrificed also to Tlaloc, for the continuance of raine: and those dead bodies were shut vp in a Caue appointed to that purpose. The beginning of this butcherie was, by occasion of a drought, which continued foure yeeres, and forced them to leaue the Country. When the Maiz was ripe, in the moneth and Feast Hueitozotli, euery man gathered his handfull of Maiz, and brought it to the Temple for an offering, with a certaine drinke called Atuli, made of the same graine. They brought also Copalli, a sweet Gumme, to incense the Gods which cause the Corne to grow. At the beginning of Summer they celebrated the Feast Tlaxuchimcaco, with Roses and all sweet flowres, making Garlands thereof, to set on their Idols heads, and spending all that day in dancing. To celebrate the Feast Tecuilhuitli, all the principall persons of each Prouince  came to the Citie on the Euening of the Feast, and apparelled a woman with the attire of the God of Salt, who danced among a great company of her Neighbours, but the next day was sa^rificed with much solemnitie, and all that day was spent in deuotion, burning of Incense in the Temple. The Merchants had a Temple by themselues, dedicate to the God of gaine: they made their Feast vpon the day called Micailhuitl, wherein were sacrificed and eaten many captiues, which they had bought, and all the day spent in dancing.
In the Feast of Vchpauiztli, they sacrificed a woman, whose skin was put vpon an Indian, which two dayes together danced with the Townsmen, celebrating the same Feast in their best attire.
In the day of Hatamutzli, the Mexicans entred into the Lake with a great number of Canoas,  and there drowned a Boy and a Girle, in a little Boat, which they caused to be sunke, in such sort, that neuer after that Boat appeared againe, holding opinion, that those Children were in company with the Gods of the Lake. That day they spent in feasting and anointing their Idols cheekes with a kind of Gumme, called Vlli.
When Cortes was gone out of Mexico, to incounter Pamphilo de Naruaes, and had left Aluarado in the Citie, he in the great Temple murthered a great multitude of Gentlemen, which had there assembled, to their accustomed solemnitie, being six hundred, or (as some say) a thousand, richly attired and adorned, where they vsed to sing and dance, in honour of their God, to obtaine Health, Children, Victorie, etc.  


@. II. Their Feast of Transubstantiation, Lent, Bloudie Processions, and other holy times.
IN the moneth of May,Acost. l. 5. c. 24 Relat. del Themistitam. the Mexicans made their principall Feast to Vitziliputzli: two dayes before which, the Religious Virgins or Nuns mingled a quantity of Beets with rosted Maiz, and moulded it with Hony, making an Image of that paste, in bignesse like to the Idoll of wood, putting in, in stead of eyes, graines of  glasse, greene, blue, or white, and for teeth, graines of Maiz. Then did all the Nobles bring it a rich garment like vnto that of the Idoll, and being clad, did set it in an azured Chaire, and in a Litter. The morning of the Feast being come, an houre before day, all the Maidens came forth attired in white with new ornaments, which that day were called, the Sisters of Vitziliputzli: they were crowned with Garlands of Maiz rosted and parched, with chaines of the same about their neckes, passing vnder their left armes. Their cheekes were died with Vermilion, their armes from the elbow to the wrist were couered with red Parrots feathers. Thus attired, they tooke the Image on their shoulders, carrying it into the Court, where all the young men were, attired in red Garments, crowned like the women. When the Maydens came forth with this Idoll, the young men drew neere with much reuerence, taking  the Litter wherein the Idoll was, vpon their shoulders, carrying it to the staires foot of the Temple: where all the people did humble themselues, laying earth vpon their heads.
After this, all the people went in Procession to a Mountaine called Chapulteper, a league from Mexico, and there made Sacrifices. From thence they went to their second Station, called Atlacuyauaya: and from thence againe to a Village, which was a league beyond Cuyoacoan, and then returned to Mexico. They went in this sort aboue foure leagues, in so many houres, calling this Procession Vpauia Vitziliputzli. Beeing come to the foote of the Temple staires, they set downe the Litter with the Idoll, and with great obseruance drew the same to the top of the Temple, some drawing aboue, and others helping below, the Flutes and Drummes, Cornets, Trumpets, meane-while increasing the Solemnitie. The people abode  in the Court. Hauing mounted, and placed it in a little lodge of Roses, presently came
 the young men, which strowed flowres of sundry kinds, within and without the Temple. This done, all the Virgins came out of their Conuent, bringing pieces of the same paste whereof the Idoll was made, in the fashion of great bones, which they deliuered to the young men, who carried them vp, and laid them at the Idols feet, till the place could receiue no more.
They called these morsels of paste, The flesh and bones of Vitziliputzli. Then came all the Priests of the Temple, euery one strictly obseruing his place, with veiles of diuers colours and workes, Garlands on their heads, and chaines of flowres about their neckes: after them came the Gods and Goddesses, whom they worshipped of diuers figures, attired in the same  liuery. Then putting themselues in order about those pieces of paste, they vsed certaine Ceremonies, with singing and dancing. By these meanes they were blessed and consecrated for the flesh and bones of the Idoll: which were then honoured in the same sort as their God. Then came forth the Sacrificers, who began the Sacrifice of Men, whereof they now sacrificed more then at other times: for this was their solemnest Festiuall. The Sacrifices being ended, all the young men and Maydes came out of the Temple attired as before, and being placed in order and ranke, one directly against another, they danced by Drummes, which sounded in praise of the Feast, and of their God. To which Song, all the ancientest and greatest men did answere, dancing about them, making a great Circle, as the manner is, the young men and Maids remayning alwayes in the middest.
 All the Citie came to this spectacle, and throughout the whole Land; on this day of Vitziliputzli his Feast, no man might eat any other meate, but this paste with Honey, whereof the Idoll was made, and this should be eaten at the point of day not drinking till the afternoone: the contrary was sacrilegious. After the Ceremonies ended, it was lawfull for them to eat any thing. During the time of this Ceremony, they hid the water from their little Children, admonishing such, as had the vse of reason, to abstaine.
The Ceremonies, Dances, and Sacrifices ended, they went to vnclothe themselues, and the Priests and Ancients of the Temple tooke the Image of paste, and spoyled it of all the Ornaments making many pieces of it, and of the consecrated Rolls, which they ministred in a kind of Communion, beginning with the greater, and continuing vnto the rest, both  men, women, and children: who receiued it with teares, feare, reuerence, and other both affects, and effects of deuotion, saying, That they did eate the flesh and bones of their God. Such as had sicke follies, demanded thereof for them, and carried it with great reuerence and veneration. All such as did communicate, were bound to giue the tenth part of this Seed, whereof the Idoll was made. The solemnity of the Idoll being ended, an old man of great authority stept vp into an high place, and with a loude voice preached their Law and Ceremonies. This History deserueth the longer Relation, because it soThe new Catholikes of old Spaine, and old Cacolikes of New Spaine alike in Superstition. much resembleth the Popish Chimara, and monstrous Conception of Transubstantiation, and of their Corpus Christi Feast, with other their Rites, to which Acosta also the Relater compareth it, blaming the Deuill for vsurping the seruice, and imitating the Rites of their Church, whereas their  Church deserueth blame for imitating the Deuill, and these his Idolatrous Disciples, in their stupendious monsters of opinion, and ridiculous offices of Superstition. But you shall yet see a further resemblance.
Next to this principall Feast of Vitziliputzli,Acost. l. 5. c. 2. was that of Tezcalipuca, of chiefe estimation. This fell on the nineteenth day of May, and was called Tozcolt. It fell euery foure yeeres with the Feast of Penance, where there was giuenMexican Iubilee. full indulgence and remission of sinnes. In this day they did Sacrifice a Captiue; which resembled the Idoll Tezcalipuca. Vpon the Euen of this Solemnitie, the Noblemen came to the Temple, bringing a new garment like to that of the Idoll, which the Priest put vpon him, hauing first taken off his other Garments, which they kept with great reuerence. There were in the Coffers of the IdollTheir relicks  many Ornaments, Iewels, Eare-rings, and other Riches, as Bracelets, and precious Feathers, which serued to no vse, and were worshipped as the God himselfe. Besides that Garment, they put vpon him certaine Ensignes of Feathers, with Fannes, shadowes, and other things. Being thus attired, they drew the Curtayne from before the doore, that all men might see. Then came forth one of the chiefe of the Temple, attired like to the Idoll, carrying Flowre in his hand, and a Flute of Earth, hauing a very sharpe sound, and turning toward the East, hee sounded it, and after that to the West, North, and South, hee did the like.
This done, he put his finger into the Aire, and then gathered vp the Earth,The Mexicans Lent begun not with ashes, but with dust. which hee put in his mouth, eating it in signe of adoration. The like did all that were present, weeping,  and falling flat to the ground, inuocating the darknesse of the night, and the winds, not to forsake them, or else to take away their liues, and free them from the labours they endured therein. Theeues, Adulterers, Murtherers, and all other Offenders had great feare and heauinesse
 whiles the Flute sounded, so as some could not hide nor dissemble their offences. By this meanes they all demanded no other thing of their God, but to haue their offences concealed; powring forth many teares, with great repentance and sorrow, offering great store of Incense to appease their Gods. All the Martialists, and resolute spirits, addicted to the Warres, desired with great deuotion of God the Creator, of the Lord, for whom we liue, of the Sun, and of other their Gods, that they would giue them victory against their enemies, and strength to take many Captiues for Sacrifice. This ceremonious sounding of the Flute by the Priest, continued ten dayes, from the ninth of May to the nineteenth, with eating of earth, praying eueryday with eyes lifted vp to Heauen, sighes and grones, as of men grieued for their sinnes. Yet did not they beleeue that there wereGomara writeth otherwise as followeth in the end of this Chapter. any punishments in the other life, but  did these things to auert temporall punishments: they accounted death an assured rest, and therefore voluntarily offered themselues thereto. The last day of the Feast, the Priests drew forth a Litter well furnished with Curtaynes, and Pendants of diuers fashions: this Litter had so many armes to hold by, as there were Ministers to carry it: all which came forth besmeared with blacke, and long haire, halfe in tresses with white strings, and attired in the Idols liuery. Vpon this Litter they set the Image of Tezcalipuca, and taking it on their shoulders, brought it to the foot of the staires. Then came forth the young men and Maydens of the Temple, carrying a great cord wreathed of chaines of rosted Maiz, with which they enuironed the Litter, and put a chaine of the same about the Idols necke, and a Garland thereof on his head.  
The young men and Mayds weare chaines of rosted Maiz, and the men Garlands, the Maydes Mytres made of Rods couered with the Maiz, their feet couered with Feathers, and their armes and cheekes painted. The Image being placed in the Litter they strewed round about store of the boughes of Manguey, the leaues whereof are pricking. They carriedTheir bloudy Processions it on Procession (two Priests going before with Incense) in the circuit of the Court: and euery time the Priest gaue Incense, they lifted vp their armes as high as they could to the Idoll and the Sun. All the people in the Court turned round to the place whither the Idoll went, euery one carrying in his hand new cords of the threeds of Manguey, a fadome long, with a knot at the end, wherewith they whipped themselues on the shoulders, euen as they doe heere (saith Acosta) on Holy Thursday. The people brought boughes and flowres to beautifie  the Court and Temple.
This done, euery one brought their Offerings, Iewels, Incense, sweet Wood, Grapes, Maiz, Quailes, and the rest. Quailes were the poore mans Offering which hee deliuered to the Priests, who pulled off their heads, and cast them at the foote of the Altar, where they lost their bloud: and so they did of all other things which were offered. Euery one offered meate and fruit, according to his power, which was laid at the foote of the Altar, and was carried to the Ministers Chamber. The offering done, the people went to dinner: the young men and Maydes of the Temple being busied meanewhile to serue the Idoll with all that was appointed for him to eat, which was prepared by other women who had made a vow that day to serue the Idoll. These prepared meats in admirable variety, which being ready,  the Virgins went out of the Temple in Procession, euery one carrying a little basket of bread in her hand, and in the other a dish of these meates. Before them marched an old man, like to a Steward, attired in a white Surples downe to the calues of his legges, vpon a red Iacket, which had wings instead of sleeues, from which hung broad Ribands, and at the same a small Pumpion, stucke full of flowres, and hauing many Superstitious things within it. This old man comming neere to the foot of the staires, made lowly reuerence. Then the Virgins with like reuerence presented their meats in order: this done, the old man returnes, leading the Virgins into the Conuent. And then the young men and Ministers of the Temple came forth and gathered vp their meat, which they carried to their Priests Chambers, who had fasted fiue dayes, eating but once a day, not stirring all that time out of the Temple,  where they whipped themselues, as before is shewed. They did eate of these Diuine meates (so they called it) neither might any other eate thereof. After dinner they assembled againe, and then was sacrificed. One who had all that yeere borne the habit and resemblance of their Idoll. They went after this, into a holy place appointed for that purpose, whither the young men and Virgins of the Temple brought them their ornaments, and then they danced and sung, the chiefe Priests drumming and sounding other Instruments. The Noblemen in ornaments like to the young men, danced round about them.
They did not vsually kill any man that day, but him that was sacrificed, yet euery fourth yeere they had others with him, which was the yeere of Iubilee and full pardons. After Sunset, the Virgins went all to their Conuent, and taking great dishes of earth full of bread,  mixed with Hony, couered with small Panniars, wrought and fashioned with dead mens heads and bones, carried the same to the Idoll, and setting them downe, retired, their Steward
 vshering them as before. Presently came forth all the young men in order, with Caues of Reedes in their hands, who began to runne as fast as they could to the top of the Temple staires; euery one striuing to come first to the Collation. The chiefe Priests obserued who came first, second, third and fourth, neglecting the rest; these they praysed, and gaue them ornaments, and from thence forward they were respected as men of marke. The said Collation was all carried away by the young men as great Relikes. This ended, The young men and Maydes were dismissed: and so I thinke would our Reader, who cannot but be glutted with, and almost surfet of our so long and tedious feasting. Yet let me intreat one seruice more, it is for the God of gaine, who I am sure will finde Followers and Disciples too  attentiue.
For the Festiuall of this Gaine-god, Quetzaalcoalt; the Merchants, his deuoted and faithfull Obseruants, forty dayes before, bought a slaue well proportioned to represent that Idoll for that space. First, they washt him twice in a Lake, called the Lake of the Gods, and being purified, they attired him like the Idoll. Two of the Ancients of the Temple came to him nine dayes before the Feast, and humbling themselues before him, said with a loud voice, Sir, nine dayes hence your dancing must end, and you must dye: and hee must answere, (whatsoeuer hee thinketh) In a good houre. They diligently obserued if this aduertisement made him sad, or if he continued his dancing according to his wont. If they perceiued him sad, they tooke the sacrificing Rasors, which they washed and clensed from  the bloud, which thereon had remayned, and hereof with another liquor made of Cacao, mixed a drinke, which they said would make him forget what had beene said to him, and returne to his former iollitie. For they tooke this heauinesse in these men to be ominous.
On the Feast Day, after much honouring him, and incensing him, about midnight they sacrificed him, offering his heart to the Moone, and after cast it to the Idoll, letting the body fall downe the staires to the Merchants, who were the chiefe Worshippers. These hearts of their Sacrifices (somePet. Martyr. Dec. 5. say) were burned after the Oblation to this Planet and Idoll. The body they sauced and dressed for a Banquet about breake of day, after they had bid the Idoll good morrow with a small dance.
This Temple of Quetzaalcoalt had Chappels as the rest, and Chambers, where were Conuents  of Priests, young men, Maydes, and Children. One Priest alone was resident which was changed weekly. His charge that weeke, after hee had instructed the Children, was to strike vp a Drumme at the Sunne setting, at the sound whereof (which was heard throughout the Citie) euery one ended his Merchandize and retired to his house, all the Citie being as silent, as if no bodie had beene there: at day breaking hee did againe giue notice by his Drumme: for till that time it was not lawfull to stirre out of the Citie. In this Temple was a Court, wherein they danced, and on this Idols Holy-day, had erected a Theater, thirty foot square, finely decked and trimmed, in which were represented Comedies, Masks,  and many other representations, to expresse or cause mirth and ioy.


@. III. Of their Schooles, Letters, and other their Opinions.
THe MexicansAcosta li. 6. c. 7. had their Schooles, and as it were Colledges or Seminaries, where the Ancients taught the Children to say by heart, the Orations, Discourses, Dialogues, and Poems, of their great Orators and chiefe Men, which thus were preserued by Tradition, as perfectly as if they had beene written. And in their Temples,  the sonnes of the chiefe Men (as PeterPet. Martyr. Dec. 5. lib. 4. Martyr reporteth) were shut vp at seuen yeeres old, and neuer came forth thence till they were marriageable and were brought forth to be contracted All which time, they neuer cut their haire, they were clothed in blacke, abstained at certaine times of the yeere from meats engendring much bloud, and chastened their bodies with often fasting.
And although they had not Letters,Acosta l. 6. c 9. Indian writing yet they had their Wheele for computation of time, (as it is said before) in which their writings were not as ours, from the left hand to the right, or as of the Easterne Nations, from the right hand to the left, or as the Chinois, from the top to the bottome: but beginning below did mount vpwards: as in that mentioned Wheele, from the Sunne, which was made in the Center, vpwards to the Circumference.  Another manner of writing or signing, they had, in Circle-wise. In the Prouince of Yucatan or Honduras, there were Bookes of the leaues of Trees, folded and squared, which contained the knowledge of the Planets, of Beasts, and other Naturall things, and
 of their Antiquities, which some blindly-zealous Spaniards, taking for Inchantments, caused to be burned.
TheCap. 7. Indians of Tescuco, Talla, and Mexico, shewed vnto a Iesuite their Bookes, Histories, and Kalendars, which in Figures and Hieroglyphicks represented things after their manner. Such as had forme or figure, were represented by their proper Images, other things were represented by Characters; and I haue seene, saith Acosta, the Pater Noster, Aue Maria, and Confession thus written. As, for these things, I a Sinner doe confesse my selfe, they painted an Indian, kneeling on his knees, at a Religious mans feet; To God most mightie, they painted three faces with their Crownes, according to that painting blasphemy  of the Popish Image-mongers, and so they went on in that manner of picturing the words of their Popish Confession; where Images failed, setting Characters; TheirGomara part. 1. p. 3. 69. Bookes for this cause were great, which (besides their engrauings in Stone, Walles, or Wood) they made of Cotton-wooll wrought into a kind of Paper, and of leaues of Metll, folded vp like our Broad-clothes, and written on both sides. Likewise theyPet. Mart. Dec. 4. l. 8. made them of the thinne inner rinde of a Tree, growing vnder the vpper barke (as did also the Ancient Latines, from whence the names of Codex and Liber for a Booke, are deriued by our Grammarians.) They did bind them also into some forme of Bookes, compacting them with Bitumen: their Characters were of Fish-hookes, Starres, Snares, Files, etc. Thus did they keepe their priuate and publike Records.
ThereGomara vbi supra. 5 were some in Mexico, that vnderstood each other by whistling, which was ordinarily  vsed by Louers and Theeues; a Language admirable euen to our wits, so highly applauded by our selues, and as deeply deiecting these Nations in termes of sillinesse and simplicitie. Yea, in Our Virginia (so I hope and desire) Captaine Smith told mee that there are some, which the spacious diuorce of the wide streame notwithstanding, will by hallowes and hoopes vnderstand each other, and entertaine conference. The numbers of the Mexicans are simple, till you come to six, then they count sixe and one, sixe and two, sixe and three; ten is a number by it selfe, which in the insuing numbers, is repeated as in other Languages till fifteene, which they reckon in one terme, ten, fiue, and one, and so the rest to twentie. Some writeRelai. del Temistitan ap. Ram. v. 3. that the men in Mexico sate downe, and the women stood, when they made water.  
The MexicansGom. p. 312. did beleeue concerning the soule, that it was immortall, and that men receiued either ioy or paine, according to their deserts and liuing in this World. They held for an assured faith, that there were nine places appointed for soules, and the chiefest place of glory to bee neere vnto the Sunne, where the soules of good men slaine in the Warres, and those which were sacrificed, are placed: that the soules of wicked men abide in the earth, and were diuided after this sort: children which were dead-borne, went to one place: those which dyed of age or other disease, went to another: those which died of wounds or contagion, to a third: those which were executed by order of Iustice, to a fourth; but Parricides which slew their Parents, or which slew their wiues or children, to a fift. Another place was for such as slew their Masters, or Religious persons.Acosta l. 7. c. 20 Acosta seemeth to deny that the  Indians beleeued any punishments after death, and yet setteth downe an Oration made at Mutezumas Election, wherein he is said to haue pierced the nine Vaults of heauen, which seemeth to allude to this of Gomara.
Their burials also were diuers, as in shewed before: and heere may bee added, that hee which died for Adultery, was shrowded like vnto their god of Leachery, called Tlazoulterel, he that was drowned, like to Tlaloc: he that died of drunkennesse, like to the god of wine: Ometochtli; the Souldier, like to Vitziliputzli. But lest you wish me buried in like manner, which trouble as much my English Reader, with New-Spaines tedious Relations, as Old-Spaines fastidious insulting spirits haue sometime done our English Nation, I will aduenture  further into the adioyning Prouinces.  




CHAP. XIIII. Of other places betwixt New Spaine, and the Straits of Dariene.

@. I.  Of Iucatan, Acusamil, Guatimala, and Hondura.
IVCATANLop. de Gom. part. 1. pa. 10. and gen. hist. cap. 52. is a point of Land extending it selfe into the Sea, ouer against the Isle Cuba, and was first discouered by Francis Hernando de Cordona, in the yeere 1517. at which time, one asking an Indian how this Countrey was called, he answered, Tectoten, Tectetan, that is, I vnderstand you not, which words the Spaniards corrupting, both in the sound and interpretation, called it Iucatan. Iames Velasques, Gouernour of Cuba, sent his Cousin, Iohn de Grijalua the yeere after, who ther^ fought with the Indians at Campotan, and was hurt. The SpaniardsPet. Mart. Dec. 4. lib. 1. went to a Citie on the shore, which for the greatnesse they called Cayro, of that  great Citie in Aegypt. Here they found Turreted Houses, Stately Temples, Wayes paued, and faire Market-places. The houses were of stone or brick, and lyme, very artificially composed. To the square Courts or first habitations of their houses they ascended by ten or twelue steps. The roofe was of Reeds, or stalkes of Herbs. The Indians gaue the Spaniards Iewels of Gold, very faire and cunningly wrought, and were requited with Vestures of Silke and Wooll, Glasse, Beads and little Bels. Their apparell was of Cotton in manifold fashions and colours. They frequented their Temples much,Circum^ision and Crosses. to the which the better sort paued wayes with stone from their houses. They were great Idolaters, and were circumcised, but not all. They liued vnder Lawes, and traffiked together with great fidelitie, by exchanging commodities without money. The Spaniards saw Crosses amongst them, and demanmanding  whence they had them, they said that a certaine man of excellent beauty passing by that coast, left them that notable token to remember him: others said, a certaine man brighter then the Sunne dyed in the working thereof. The Spaniards sayled thence toThis towne was taken by M. Will. Parker, Anno. 1596. Campechium, a towne or three thousand houses. Here they saw a square Stage or Pulpit foure Cubits high, partly of clammie Bitumen, and partly of small stones, whereto the image of a man cut in Marble, was ioyned, two foure-footed vnknowne beasts fastning vpon vpon him, as if they would teare him in pieces. And by the Image stood a Serpent all besmeared with bloud, deuouring a Lyon, it was seuen and forty foot long; and as bigge as an Oxe. These things I mention as testimonies of their Art in these barbarous places; and perhaps of their deuotion also. Grijalua or Grisalua seeing a Tower farre off at Sea, by direction  therof, came to an Iland called Cosumel, agreeing in priuate and publike manner of life with them of Iucatan: Their Houses, Temples, apparell, and trade of Marchandize all one: their houses somewhere couered with Reeds, and where Quarries were, with Slate: many houses had Marble pillars.
They found Ancient Towres there, and the ruines of such as had been broken downe and destroyed: there was one whereto they ascended by eighteene steps or staires. The Gouernour whom they supposed to be a Priest, conducted them to the Towre: in the top whereof they erected a Spanish Banner, and called also the Island Santa Cruce. In the Towre they found chambers, wherein were marble Images, and some of Earth in the similitude of Beares. These they inuoked with loude singing all in one tune, and sacrificed vnto them with fumes  and sweet Odours, worshipping them as their Houshold Gods. There they performed their diuine ceremonies and adoration: they were also circumcised.
GomaraGomar. gen. hist. cap. 54. saith, That heere; and at Xiculanco, the Diuell vsed to appeare visibly, and that these two were great in estimation for holinesse; euery Citie had their Temple, or Altar, where they worshipped their Idols, amongst which were many Crosses of Wood and Brasse, whereby some conceiue that some Spaniards had recourse hither when Roderigo was defeated, and Spaine ouer-runne by the Saracens. InGomar. par. 1. pag. 36. both these places they sacrificed men: which Cortes perswaded them to cease. The Temple in Cosumil or Acusamil was built like a square Towre, broad at the foot, with steps round about, and from the middest vpward were strait: the top was hollow and couered with straw: it had foure windowes  and Porches. In the hollow place was their Chappell, where stood their Idols. In a Temple by the Sea-side was an vncouth Idoll, great and hollow, fastened in the wall with lime: it was made of Earth. Behinde this Idols back was the Vestry, where the ornaments of the
 Temple were kept. The Priests had a litle secret doore hard adioyning to the Image, by which they crept into his hollow panch, and thence answered the people that came thither with Prayers and Petitions, making the simple people beleeue it was the voyce of the god, which therefore they honoured more then any other, with many perfumes and sweet smels. They offered Bread, Fruit, Quailes bloud, and of other Birds, Dogs, and sometimes Men. The fame of this Idoll and Oracle brought many Pilgrimes to Acusamil from many places. At the foot of this Temple was a plot like a Church-yard, well walled, and garnished with Pinnacles, in the middest whereof stood a Crosse of tenne foot long, which they adored for the god of raine. At all times when they wanted raine, they would goe thither on Procession deuoutly, and offered to the Crosse Quailes sacrificed, no Sacrifice being so acceptable. They  burnt sweet Gumme to perfume him with, besprinkling the same with water, and by this meanes they thought to obtaine raine. They could neuer know, saith Gomara, how that the God of the Crosse came amongst them, for in all those parts of India, there is no memory of any preaching of the Gospell that had beene at any time. What others thinke, and what some Indians answered, concerning it, is said before.
BenzoH. Benzo l. 2. cap. 15. writeth, That they did not eat the flesh of those men which they sacrificed: and that they wre first subdued by Francis Montegius, whose cruelties were such, that Alquinotep, a Cacique or Indian Lord aboue an hundred and ten yeeres old, and a Christian, told him That when he was a yong man, there was a sicknesse of wormes, that they thought all would haue dyed: (they were not onely eiected by vomite, but did eate out themselues a passage  thorow mens bodies) and not long before the Spaniards arriuall, they had two battels with the Mexicans, in which an hundred and fiftie thousand men perished. But all this was light in respect of that Spanish burthen.
GuatimalaBo^ l. 5. part. 1. Guatimala, or Saint Iames. commeth next to our consideration, a Prouince of pleasant Ayre, and fertile soyle, where groweth abundance of their Cacao, which is a fruit that serueth the Indians for meat, drinke, and money. The Citie (which beareth the same name) was first at the foot of a Vulcano or Hill which casteth fire, but because in the yeere 1542.Benzo and Gomara say, Sept. 8. 1541. on the sixe and twentieth day of December, a Lake hidden in the bowels of that Hill, brake forth in many places, and with a terrible violence ruined the most part of the Citie: it was remoued two miles thence, together with the Episcopall Sea, and the Kings Councell. But in the yeere 1581. there issued from another Vulcan two miles off, or somewhat more, such an eruption of fire  as threatned to consume euery thing. The day following, followed such a showre of Ashes, that is filled the Valley, and almost buried the Citie. And yet were not all the throwes passed of this Hils monstrous trauels, but the yeere after, for the space of foure and twenty houres thence issued a streame of fire, that dranke vp fiue streames of water, burned the stones and Rockes, rent the Ayre with thunders, and made it a wauing and mouing Sea of fire. BeforeGaspar Ens l. 3. cap. 6. that first eruption of waters, some Indians came and told the Bishop, that they had heard an vncredible noyse and murmuring at the foot of the Hill: but he reproued them, saying, they should not trouble themselues with vaine and superstitious feares; about two of the clocke in the night following, happened that deluge, which carried away many houses, and whatsoeuer stood in the way, in which 520. Spaniards perished, and scarce any mention of  the houses remained.
It is worthy recitall which BenzoH. Benzo l. 2. cap 16. Gomar. Histor. Gen. cap. 209. and Gomara haue recorded, that Peter Aluarado the Gouernour (who by licence of the Pope had married two sisters, the Ladie Frances, and the Ladie Beatrice della Culna) hauing perished by a mischance, his wife not onely painted her house with Sorrowes blacke Liuerie, and abstained from meat and sleeps, but in a mad impietie said, God could now doe her no greater euill. Yet for all this her sorrow, shee caused the Citizens to be sworne vnto her Gouernment (a new thing in the Indies.) Soone after, this inundation hapned, which first of all assailed the Gouernours house, and caused this impotent and impatient Ladie, now to bethinke her of a deuotion, and betake her to her Chappell, with eleuen of her Maids, where leaping on the Altar, and clasping about an Image, the  force of the water ruined the Chappell; whereas, if she had stayed (...) her bed-chamber, she had escaped death. They tell of vncouth noysts, and hideous apparition, which then were seene. Benzo obserued by his owne experience, that this Country is much subiect to Earth-quakes. The Guatimalans in manner of life resemble the Mexicans and Nicaraguans.
Fondura,Benzo lib. 2. cap. 15. or Hondura is next to Guatimala, wherein were (saith Benzo) at the Spaniards first comming thither foure hundred thousand Indians, but when I was there, scarcely eight thousand were left: the rest being slaine, or sold, or consumed by the Mines: and those which are left, both heere, and in other places, place their habitation as farre as they can, where the Spaniard shall be no eye-sore vnto them. The Spaniards in this Prouince planted  fiue Spanish Colonies, which all scarcely could number an hundred and twentie houses.



@. II. Of Nicaragua, their Plentie, and exceeding superstition.
NIcaraguaChap. 16. extendeth it selfe from the Chiulatecan Mines of Fonduta, toward the South Sea. This Region is not great, but fertile, and therefore called of the Spaniards Mahumets Paradise, for the plentie of all things; yet in the Summer time it is so scorched with heate, that men cannot trauell but in the night. Sixe moneths, from May to October, are pestered with continuall showres, which the other six wholly  want. The Parrots are here as troublesome as Crowes and Rookes with vs, and they are forced to keep their corne in like manner from their spoyling. The people are of like condition to the Mexicans they feed on mans flesh. To their dances they flocke two or three hundred in a companie, which are performed with great varietie of gestures, vestures, and passions: Euery man in, and, euery man out of his humour. Thirtie and fiue miles from Legeon or Lyon, an Episcopall Citie in this Region, is a Vulcano of flaming Hill, the fire whereof may be seene (in the night) aboue one hundred miles. Some had a conceit, that molten gold was the matter of this fire. And therefore a certaine Dominican caused a Kettle and long chaine of Yron to bee let downe into this fierie concauitie, where by the violence of the heat, the Kettle and part of the chaine was molten. He makes a bigger and stronger, but  returnes with like successe, and this added, that himselfe and his two companions by eruption of fire, had almost beene consumed. GomaraGom. gen. Hist. cap. 203. calls this fire Blasio de Innesta, and the hill; Masaya. It goes downe two hundred and fiftie braces or yards. In this Country they vsed Sodomie and sacrifices of Men. Of this name Nicaragua, Gilgousales, (that first of the Spaniards discouered these parts) found a King, with whom he had much conference, whom he perswaded to become a Christian, although his prohibition of warres and dancing did much trouble him. This NicaraguaP.M. Dec. 6. lib. 4. demanded them if the Christians had any knowledge of the Floud, which drowned all the Earth with men and beasts (as he had heard his Progenitors say) and whether another were to come; whether the Earth should be ouerturned, or the Heauen fall: when, and how the Moone and Starres should lose their light and motion:  who moued those heauenly bodies; where the soules should remaine; and what they should doe, being freed from the bodie, whether the Pope dyed, whether the Spaniards came from Heauen, and many other strange questions admirable in an Indian. They worshipped the Sun and other Idols, which Nicaragua suffered Gilgousales to take out of the great Temple.
In NicaraguaGom. ca. 205. there were fiue linages, and different languages: the Coribici, Ciocotoga, Ciondale, Oretigua, and the Mexican; though this place was a thousand miles from Mexico, yet were they like them in speech, apparell, and religion: they had also the same figures in stead of Letters, which those of Culhua had, and bookes a span broad, and twelue spans long, doubled of many colours. They differ as in Languages, so in Religions. Of their religious rites thus writeth Gomara: their Priests were all married, except their Confessors, which  heard Confessions,Confession. and appointed Penances, according to the qualitie of the fault: they reuealed not the Confession: they appointed the Holy-dayes, which were eighteene. When they sacrificed, they had a Knife of flint, wherewith they opened him that was sacrificed. The Priests appointed the Sacrifices; how many men, whether they were to be women, or slaues taken in battell; that all the people might know how to celebrate the Feasts, what Prayers and what offerings to make. The Priest went three times about the Captiue, singing in a dolefull tune, and suddenly opens his breast, anoints his face with the bloud, takes out his heart, diuideth his body. The heart is giuen to the Prelate, the feet and hands to the King, the buttocks to the taker, the reft to the people. The heads of the Sacrifices are set on Trees, planted there for that purpose, euery tree hath figured in it the name of the Prouince wherwith  they haue wars. Vnder these trees they many times sacrifice men and children of the Country; and of their owne people, being first bought: for it was lawfull for the Father to sell his children. Those which thePet. Mart. Dec. 6. l. 6. and 7. Kings bring vp of their owne people, with better fare then ordinary for sacrifice, are made beleeue, they shall be some canonized Wights, or Heauenly Deities, and therefore take it gladly. They did not eate the flesh of these, as they did of the captiues. When they ate their sacrificed captiues, they made great Faasts, and the Priests and Religious men dranke much wine and smoke; their wine is of Prunes: whiles the Priest anoints the cheekes and mouth of the Idoll with the bloud, the others sing, and the people make their Prayers with great deuotion and teares, and after goe on Procession (which is not done in all Feasts.) The Religious haue white Cotten-coats, and other ornaments  which hang downe from the shoulders to the legs, therby to put a difference between them and others. The Laymen haue their Banners, with that Idol which they most esteem, and bags with dust and bodkins; the yong men haue their Bowes, Darts, Arrows, and the guide of all
 is the Image of the Deuill set vpon a Lance, carried by the most ancient and Honourable Priest. They goe in order, the Religious singing till they come to the place of their Idolatry, where being arriued, they spread couerings on the ground, or strew it with Roses and Flowres, because their Idols should not touch the ground, and the Banner being stucke fast, the singing ceaseth, and the Prelate beginning, all the rest follow, and draw bloud, some from their tongues, some from their eares, some from their members, and euery man as (...) deuotion liketh best, and with that bloud anoint the Image. In the meant-while, the youths skirmish and dance for the honour of their Feasts: they oure the wounds, with the poulder of hearbs and coles. In some of these Processions they hallow Mayz, be sprinkling the same  with the bloud of their Priuities, and eate it.
They may haue many women, but one is their lawfull wife, which they marrie thus; the Priest takes the Bridegroome and the Bride by the little fingers, sets them in a chamber at a fire, and giues them certain instructions, and when the fire is out, they are maried. If he takes her for a Virgin, and finds her otherwise, he may diuorce her. Many bring their wiues to the Caciques, or Lords to corrupt them, esteeming it an honour. TheirPet. Mart. Dec. 6. Temples were low, darke roomes, which they vsed for their Treasurie also and Armourie. Before the Temple was an high Altar for the Sacrifices, whereon the Priest played the Preacher first, and then the Butcher.
Adulterers are beaten, but not slaine, the adulterous wife is diuorced, and may not marry againe, and her Parents are dishonoured. Their Husbands suffer them to lye with others in  some Feasts of the yeare. He that forceth a Virgin, is a slaue, or payeth her dowrie: if a Slaue doe it with his Masters Daughter, they are both buried quicke. They haue common Brothels. A Thiefe hath his haire cut off, and is made the Slaue from whom he hath stolne, vntill he hath made satisfaction; which if he deferre long, he is sacrificed. They had no punishment for him which should kill a Cacique, for (they said) such a thing could not happen.


@. III. Of the strange creatures in these parts; of NOMBRE DE DIOS; and the  Spanish mysteries at their first Plantation.
THe riches of NicaraguaBotero. consisteth much in a great Lake three hundred miles long, and being within twelue miles of the South Sea, doth disembogue it selfe in the North-Sea, a great way off. In this Lake of Nicaragua are many and great fishes.Benzo lib. 2. cap. 14. Gomara part. 2. cap. 32. One strange kinde is that, which the Inhabitants of Hispaniola call Manati (as for the Inhabitants of the place, the Spanish iniuries haue chased them thence.)
This Fish somewhat resembleth the Otter, it is fiue and twenty foot long, twelue thicke, the head and tayle like a Cow, with small eyes, his backe hard and hairy, he hath onely two feet at the shoulders, and those like an Elephants. The females bring forth yong, and nourish  them with the Vdder, like a Cow. I haue seene and eaten of them (saith Benzo) the taste is like Swines flesh;Pet. Mart. Dec. 3. l. 8. they eate Grasse. There was a King in Hispaniola, which put one of them (being presented him by his Fishermen) into a Lake of standing-waters, where it liued fiue and twenty yeares: when any of the seruants came to the Lake and called Matto, Matto, she would come and receiue meat at their hands: and if any would bee ferried ouer the Lake, she willingly yeelded her backe, and performed this Office faithfully, yea, she hath carrien ten men at once, singing or playing. A Spaniard had once wronged her, by casting a dart at her; and therefore after that, when she was called, she would plunge downe againe, otherwise to the Indians shee remained officious. Shee would be as full of play as a Monkey, and would wrastle with them: especially shee was addicted to one yong man,  which vsed to her. This proceded, partly from her docible nature, partly, because being taken yong, she was kept vp a while at home, in the Kings house, with bread. This Fish liueth both on Land and Water. The Riuer swelling ouer his Banks, into the Lake, this Fish followed the streame, and was seene no more. There was another strange creature in Nicaragua (they call it Cascuij) like a blacke Hogge, with small eyes, wide eares, clouen feet, a short trunke or snowt like an Elephant, of so lowd a braying, that he would make men deafe. Anoth there is, with a naturall purse vnder her belly, wherein she putteth her yong: it hath the bodie of a Fox, handed and footed like a Monkey. The Bats in these parts are terrible for biting. The Inhabitants neere the Riuer Suerus are not differing from the rest, but that they eate not mans flesh. Next, is that necke or narrow extent of Land stretching betweene the North  and South-Seas, and (as it were) knitting the two great Peninsul's of the North and South America together.

Nombre de Dios signifieth the name of God, occasioned by the words of Didacus Niquesa, who after disastrous aduentures elsewhere, came hither, and here bade his men goe on shore in the name of God; whereupon the Colony and Plantation there; was so called: It hath a bad situation and small habitation. Baptista Antonio the King of Spaines Surueyour counselled to bring Nombre de Dios to Puerto Bello. It was remoued from the former seat, in the yeare of our Lord 1584. Sir Thomas Baskeruile burnt it, and went from thence with his Armie towards Panama, in the yeare 1595. Darien was called Antiqua Dartenis, because Ancisus vowed to our Lady at Siuill called Maria Antuqua, if she would helpe him in those Indian Conquests, hee would turne the Caciques house into a Temple: there he planted a Colony.
 It would be tedious to tell of the sturres, and ciuill vnciuill brawles betwixt the Spaniards in these parts. Vasques Valboa imprisoned Ancisus, and after recouered his credit by discouerie of the South-Sea. For whiles the Spaniards contented about the weight and sharing of their Gold, which a Cacique had giuen them, this Cacique being present, hurled downe the Gold, not a little maruelling (as he said) that they would so much contend for that, as if they could eate or drinke it: But if they liked it so well, hee would carry them where their Golden-thirst should be satisfied. He was deceiued in the nature of that dropsie-thirst, which as a fire quenched with oyle, receiues thence greater strength: but hee deceiued not them in his promise, bringing them to the South-Sea: where Valboa named one Prouince, Golden Castile. And for that which he spake of their strife,Benz. l. 1. c. 23. as if they could eate or drinke  those Metals, the cruelties of the Spaniards were such, as the Indians, when they got any of them, would bind their hands and feet, and laying them on their backs, would powre Gold into their mouthes, saying, in insultation, Eat Gold Christian. This Valboa was put to death, by Arias his Father-in-law.
But now we haue mentioned the first Spaniards which planted these parts, it shall not be amisse, to mention some hardships the Spaniards sustained before they could here settle themselues, which may be an answere to those nice and delicate conceits, that in our Virginian Expedition cast off all hope, because of some disasters. How the Spaniards dealt one with another, and how the Indians dealt with them, you haue heard: worse hath not followed from any turbulent emulous spirit of our owne; or hostile, of the Virginian, in this  Plantation. And as for famine, Nicuesa's men were so pinched, that (not to speake of those which perished, one soldP. Mart. Dec. 2. l. 10. an old leane mangie Dogge to his fellowes for many Castellans of Gold: these flayed the Dogge, and cast his mangie skin, with the bones of the head among the bushes. The day following, one of them finds it full of Maggots, and stinking: but famine had neither eyes nor scent: he brought it home, sod, and ate it, and found many Customers which gaue aSeuen shillings and sixe pence. Castellan a dish for that mangie Broth. Another found two Toads, and sod them, which a sicke man bought for two fine shirts curiously wrought with Gold. Others found a dead man, rotten, and stinking, which putrified carkasse they roasted, and ate. And thus, from seuen hundred and seuenty men, they were brought so low, that scarce forty (shadowes of men) remained to inhabite Dariena Much like to this was their  successe at the Riuer of Plate, in Florida and other places of the West-Indies.
What Iohn Oxenam, Sir Francis Drake, Master Christopher Newport, and other our Worthy Country-men haue atchieued in these parts against the Spaniards, Master Hakluyt in his Voyages relateth. It is time for vs to passe beyond the Darien Straits, vnto that other  great Chersonesus or Peruvian  AMERICA.






 RELATIONS OF THE DISCOVERIES, REGIONS, AND RELIGIONS, OF THE  NEW WORLD. OF CVMANA, GVIANA, BRASILL, CHICA, CHILI, PERV, AND OTHER REGIONS OF AMERICA, PERWIANA, AND OF their Religions.  THE NINTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of the Southerne America, and of the Countries on the Sea-coast betwixt Dariene and Cumana.

 @. I. Of the great Riuers in these parts, and of Dariene.
THis Peninsula of the New World extending it selfe into the South, is in forme somewhat like to Africa, and bothGas. Ens. lib. 3 cap. 24. to some huge Pyramis. In this, the Basis or ground is the Northerly part, called Terra Fuma, from whence it lesseneth  it selfe by degrees, as it draweth neerer the Magellan Straits, where the top of this Spire may fitly bee placed. On the East side it is washed with the North Ocean, as it is termed: On the West with that of the South, called also the Peaceable. It isBotero part. 1 lib c. supposed to haue sixteene thousand miles in compasse, foure thousand in length; the breadth is vnequall. The Easterne part thereof, betweene the Riuers Maragnon and Plata, is challenged by the Portugals; the rest by the Spaniard. From the North to the South are ledges of Mountaines, the tops whereof are said to be higher then that Birds will visit; the bottomes yeeld the greatest Riuers in the World, and which most enrich the Oceans store-house. Orenoque, Maragnon, and  Plata seeme to be the Indian Triumuiri, Generals of those Riuer-Armies, and Neptunes great Collectors of his watery tributes. Orenoque for ships is nauigable a thousand miles; for lesse Vessels, two thousand in some places twentie miles broad; in some, thirtie.
 Berreo affirmed to Sir Walter Raleigh, That a hundred Riuers fell into it, marching vnder his name and colours, the least as bigge as Rio GrandeSee infra. 5. 2 one of the greatest Riuers or America. It extendeth two thousand miles East and West, and commandeth eight hundred miles, North and South. Plata, taking vp all the streames, in his way, is so full swolne with his increased store, that he seemeth rather with bigge lookes to bid defiance to the Ocean, then to acknowledge homage, opening his mouth fortie leagues wide, as if he would deuoure the same; and with his vomited abundance maketh the salt waters to recoyle, following fresh in this pursuit, till in salt sweates at last he melteth himselfe in the Combate. Maragnon is farre greater, whose water hauing furrowed a Channell of sixe thousand miles, in the length of his winding passage, couereth threescore and ten leagues in breadth, and hideth his  BankesCoelum vndique and vndique pontus Nil nisi pontus and aer. on both sides from him which sayleth in the middest of his proud Current, making simple eyes beleeue, that the Heauens alway descend to kisse and embrace his waues. And sure, our more-straitned world would so far be accessary to his aspiring, as to style him with the royall title of Sea, and not debase his greatnesse with the meaner name of a Riuer. GirauaH. Giraua l. 2. some what otherwise writeth of these Riuers, that Plata called by the Indians Paranaguaeu, as one should say, a Riuer like a Sea, is twenty fiue leagues in the mouth, (placed by him in thirty three degrees of Southerly latitude) encreasing in the same time and manner as Nilus: Maragnon (hee saith) is in the entrance fiue leagues, and is not the same with Orellana (so called of Francis Orella,Vega pag. 2. lib. 3. cap. 4. saith that they were fierce women which followed their Husbands in the warres, and fought with the Enemie: These Orellana to make greater account of his Discoueries, reported to bee Amazons: and sued to the Emperour to be employed in that seruice and conquest of the Land of Amazons. William Dauies sent hither in the fleet of the Duke of Florence, tels of a small low Iland called Morria, in this Riuer, inhabited only by women, which goe naked, and vse Bow and Arrowes (as doe the men in the parts adioyning) for the killing of their owne food, their haire long, their brests hanging lowe. Hee sayth, he hath seene forty or fifty together going along by the Sea side, and when they espied a fish, to shoote at it, and presently throwing downe their Bowes to leape into the Sea after their Arrow, bringing the same to Land with the fastned prey: in all other things, as lodging, meat-dressing, etc. like the Neighbour Inhabitants. Only they liue requestred from men, except in one moneth of the yeare, when the men resort for copulation to them, and carry away the male children they finde. The other they educate. They carrie their children at their backes like Tinkers budgets, and giue them the breast ouer the shoulder. Thus farre Dauies. As for that vnimammian rite he denies it; of their wars except against fishes and other food no mention: and that by their liuing without men, may either be caused by the vnholsomnesse to that sexe, as is reported of an Iland neere Zocotori, or for some other reason, which I leaue to the Readers search or credit. the the first Spaniard that sayled in it, and Amazones,  of the fabulous reports, as Giraua termeth them, of such women there seene) which hee sayth hath aboue fifty leagues of breadth in the mouth, and is the greatest Riuer of the World, called by some the fresh Sea, running aboue fifteene hundred leagues vnder the Aequinoctiall, Thus much Hee, though lesse then others, yet more then can bee paraleld in any other streames. This Southerne halfe of America hath also, at the Magellane Straits, contracted,  and (as it were) shrunke in it selfe, refusing to be extended further in so cold a Climate. The manifold riches of Metals, Beasts, and other things, in the beginning of the former Booke haue been declared; and in this, as occasion moueth shall bee further manifested. The Men are the worst part, as being in the greatest parts thereof inhumane and brutish. The Spanish Townes in this great tract and their Founders, are set downe by Pedro dePedro de Cieza de Leon. Chron. del Peru. Cieza, Herera, and others. I rather intend Indian Superstitions, then Spanish plantations in this part of my Pilgrimage  
Of the Townes ofEastward from this Towne certain Negro slaues made a head, and ioyning with the Indians, vsed to rob the Spaniards. Benzo. l. 2. c. 9. Nombre de Dios, seuenteene leagues from Panama, the one on the  North Sea, the other on the South, and of Dariene, wee last tooke our leaues, as vncertaine whether to make them Mexican or Peruvian, being borderers, and set in the Confines, betwixt both. The moorish soyle, muddie water, and grosse Ayre, conspire with the heauenly Bodies to make Dariene vnwholesome: the myrie streame runneth (or creepeth rather) very slowly; the waterLinschoten. P. Mart. Dec. 3. lib. 6. but sprinkled on the house-floore, engendreth Toades and Wormes.
TheyGomar. Gen. Hist. c. 67. haue in this Prouince of Dariene store of Crocodiles, one of which kinde, Cieza saith, was found fine and twentie foot long; Swine without tailes; Cats with great tailes; Beasts clouen-footed like Kine, otherwise resembling Mules, sauing their spacious eares, and a trunke or snowt like an Elephant: there are Leopards, Lyons, Tygres. On the right and left hand of Dariene are found twenty Riuers, which yeeld Gold. The MenP.M. Dec. 3. lic. 4. are of good stature, thinne haired; the Women weare Rings on their eares and noses, with quaint ornaments on their lips. The Lords marry as many Wiues as them listeth, other men, one or two. They forsake, change, and sell their Wiues at pleasure. They haue publike Stewes of women, and of men also in many places without any discredit; yea, this priuiledgeth them from following the warres. The yong Girles hauing conceiued, eate certain herbs, to cause abortion. Their Lords and Priests consult of warres, after they haue drunke the smoke of aTobacco. certaine herbe. The Women follow their husbands to the warres, and know how to vse a Bow. They all paint themselues in the warres. They neede no Head-pieces, for their heads are so hard, that they will breake a Sword, being smitten thereon. Wounds receiued  in warre, are the badges of honour, whereof they glory much, and thereby enioy some Franchises.
 They brand their prisoners and pull out one of their teeth before. They will sell their children; are excellent Swimmers, both Men and Women, accustoming themselues twice or thrice a day thereunto. Their Priests are their Physicians, and Masters of Ceremonies; for which cause, and because they haue conference with the Deuill, they are much esteemed,P. Cieza Chron. Per. p. 1. c. 8. They haue no Temples, nor Houses of deuotion. The Deuill they honour much, which in terrible shapes doth sometimes appeare vnto them; as I (saith Cieza) haue heard some of them say. They beleeue, that there is one God in heauen, to wit, the Sunne, and that the Moone is his wife; and therefore worship these two Planets. They worship the Deuill also, and paint him in such forme as he appeareth to them, which is of diuers sorts. They offer  Bread, Smoke, Fruits, and Flowres with great deuotion. Any one may cut off his arme which stealeth Mais. Enciso, with his Armie of Spaniards seeking to subdue these parts, vsed a Spanish tricke, telling the Indians, That hee sought their conuersion to the Faith, and therefore discoursed of One God, Creator of all things, and of Baptisme; and after other things of this nature, lesse to his purpose, he told them, That the Pope is the Vicar of Christ in all the world, with absolues power ouer mens Soules and Religions; and that hee had giuen those Countries to the most mightie King of Spaine, his Master, and hee was now come to take possession, and to demand gold for tribute. The Indians answered, That they liked well what he had spoken of one God, but for their Religion, they would not dispute of it, or leaue it: And for the Pope, he should be liberall of his owne; neither seemed it, that their  King was mightie, but poore, that sent thus a begging. But what words could not, their Swords effected, with the destruction of the Indians.


@. II. Of Vraba, Carthagena, and the Superstitions of Dabaiba.
THe soyle of Vraba is so fatned with a streame therein, that in eight and twentie dayes the seeds of Cucumbers, Melons, and Gourds, will ripen their Fruits. There  isPet. Martyr, Dec. 3. l. 6. a Tree in those Countries, whose leaues, with the bare touch, cause great blisters: the sauour of the wood is poyson; and cannot be carried without danger of lift, except by the helpe of another herbe, which is an Antidote to this venomous Tree.Pet. Martyr. Dec. 2. l. 4. King Abibeiba had Palace in a Tree, by reason of the moorish situation and often inundation of his Land. Vasques could not get him downe, till he began to cut the Tree, and then the poore King came downe, and bought his freedome at the Spaniards price.
Carthagena was so called, for some resemblance in the situation to a Citie in Spaine of that name, Sir Francis Drake tooke it. The Indians thereabout vsed poisoned Arrowes: the women warre as well as the men. Enciso took one, who with her owne hands had killed eight and twenty Christians. They did eate the Enemies which they killed. They vsed to put in  their Sepulchres gold, feathers, and other riches. Betweene Carthagena and Martha runneth a swift Riuer, which maketh the Sea-water to giue place; and they which passe by, may in the Sea take in of this water fresh.
It is called of the Inhabitants Dabaiba (the Spaniards haue named it Pio GrandeRio Grande. and the Riuer of Saint Iohn) it passeth with a Northerne discouerie, into the Gulfe of Viaba before mentioned. They which dwell on this Riuer, obserue an Idoll of great note, called by the name of the Riuer, Dabaiba: whereto the King at certaine times of the yeere sends slaues to be sacrificed, from remote Countries, from whence also is great resort of Pilgrims. They kill the slaues before their God, and after burne them, supposing that odour acceptable to their Idoll, as Taper-lights, and Frankincense (saith Martyr) is to our Saints. Through  the displeasure of that angry God, they said that all the Riuers and Fountaines had once failed, and the greatest part of men perished with famine. Their Kings in remembrance hereof, haue their Priests at home, and Chappels which are swept euery day, and kept with a religious neatnesse. When the King thinketh to obtaine of the Idoll, Sunne-shine, or Raine, or the like; he with his Priests gets vp into a Pulpit, standing in the Chappell, purposing not to depart thence till his suit be granted. They vrge their God therefore with vehement prayers, and cruell fasting: the people meane-while macerating themselues also with fasting, in foure dayes space not eating nor drinking, except on the fourth day, onely a little broth. The Spaniards asking what God they worshipped thus, they answered, The Creator of the Heauens, Sunne, Moone, and all inuisible things, from whom all good things proceed.  And they say DabaibaThey say Dabaiba was a woman of great wisdom, honoured in her life, Deified after death; to whom they ascribe thunder and lightning, when she is angry. was the Mother of that Creator. They call them to their Deuotions with certaine Trumpets and Bels of gold. The Bels had clappers like in forme to ours, made of the bones of Fishes, and yeelding a pleasing sound, as they reported: which no
 doubt, was a pleasing sound and musicke to the Spaniards couetous hearts, howsoeuer it agreeth with the nature of that metall to ring in the eares. One of them, say they, weighed sixe hundredPensum exceedeth the Ducat a fourth part. A Pezo. Pensa. Their Priests were enioyned chastitie, which vow, if they violated, they were either stoned or burned. Other men also in the time of that fast, likewise contained themselues from those carnall pleasures. They haue an imagination of the soule (but know not what substance or name to ascribe vnto it) to which yet they beleeued, was assigned futured ioyes or woes, according to their demerits, pointing vp to Heauen, and downe to the Center, when they spake thereof. Many of their Wiues (for they might haue many) followed the Sepulchres of their husbands. They allow not marriage with the Sister, of which they haue a riduculous conceit of the Spot, which they account a Man, in the Moone,  that for this Incest was thither confined, to the torments of cold and moysture, in that Moons-prison. They leaue trenches on their Sepulchres, in which they yeerely powre Mays, and some of their Wine (to the profit) as they thinke of the Ghosts. If a Mother die while she giueth sucke, the poore nursling must not bee Orphan, but bee interred with her, being put there to her brest, and buried aliue. They imagined that the Soules of their great men and their familiars were immortall, but not others: and therefore such of their seruants and friends as would not be buried with them, they thought should lose that priuiuiledge of Immortalitie, and the delights of those pleasant places, where was eating, drinking, dancing, and the former delicacies of their former liues. They renue the funerall pomps of these great men yeerely, assembling thither with plentie of Wine and meats, and there  watch all night (especially the women) singing drerie lamentations, with Inuectiues against his Enemies, if he dyed in the warres, yea, cutting the Image of his Enemy in pieces in reuenge of their slaine Lord. This done, they fall to drinking of Mays Wine till they be weary, if not drunken. Yet after this, they resume their Songs to his commendation, with many dances and adorations. When day appeareth, they put the Image of the deceased into a great Canoa (a Boat of one Tree, capcable of threescore Oares) filled with drinkes, herbes, and such things as in his life he had loued: which some carrie vpon their shoulders in Procession about the Court, and set it downe there againe, and burne it with all the contents. After which, the women, filled with Wine, and emptied of all modestie, with loose haire, secrets not secret, and varietie of Bacchanal gestures, sometimes goe, somtimes fall, somtimes shake  the weapons of the men, and conclude with beastly sleeping on the ground. The young men exercise their dances and songs, piercing the middle of their priuie member with the sharpe bone of the Ray-fish, bedewing the pauement with the bloud. And their Banti, who are their Physicians, and Priests, heale the same againe in 4. dayes. They haue in those parts Magicians, without whose aduice they attempt nothing: and neyther hunt, fish, nor gather gold, except the Tequenigua, or Wizard thinke it fit.
To end this Dabaiban Story, Martyr sayth (for I will not further engage my credit for the truth) that in Camara, which is at the head of this Riuer, there happened most terrible tempests from the East,Monstrous Harpyes. which threw downe Trees and Houses; and in the last Act of that Tragedie, were brought (not by representation) two foule Monsters of monstrous Fowles,  such as the Poets describe the Harpies, with womens faces; one of them so great, that her legs were thicker then a mans thigh; so heauy, that the boughes of the Trees could not beare her; so strong that she would seize on a man, and flye away with him, as a Kite with a Chicken: the other was lesse, and supposed to bee the young one of the former. Corales, Osorius, and Spinosa, told Martyr, that they spake with many who saw the greater killed, which was done by a stratagems; for they made the Image of a man, and set it on the ground, attending in the Woods with their Arrowes, till shee the next morning seized on this prey, and lost her selfe; the young was neuer seene after; and happily you thinke, not before neither. But they added, that the killers of her were honoured as Gods, and rewarded  with presents.


@. III. Of Tunia, Saint Martha, Venezuela, and Curiana.
IN the Valley of Tunia,Linschot. l. 2. or Tomana, are Mines of Emeralds. The people worship the Sunne for their chiefe God, with such awfull deuotion, that they dare not looke stedfastly vpon it; the Moone also they worship, but in an inferiour degree.  In their Warres, in stead of Ensignes, they tye the bones of certaine men (who in their liues had beene valiant) vpon long staues, to prouoke others to the like fortitude. They
 bury their Kings with golden neck-laces, set with Emeralds, and with Bread and Wine. The people about Rio Grande are Canibals, also about Saint Martha. The Tunians vse poysoned Arrowes: and when they go to the Warres they carry their Idoll Chiappen with them; vnto whom, before they enter into the field, they offer many Sacrifices of liuing men, being the children of Slaues, or of their Enemies, painting all the Image with bloud; which done, they eate the flesh. Returning Conquerers, they hold great Feasts, with dancing, leaping, singing drinking themselues drunke, and againe besmeare their Image with bloud. If they were ouercome, they sought by new Sacrifices to appease Chiappen. They demanded counsell of their Gods for their Marriages, and other affaires. For these consultations they obserued  a kind of Lent two moneths, in which they lay not with women, nor ate Salt. They had Monasteries of Boyes and Girles, where they liued certaine yeeres. They corrected publike faults, as stealing, and killing, by cutting off the eares, and nose; hanging; and if hee were a Nobleman, by cutting off his haire. In gathering Emeralds they first vsed certaine Charmes. They vsed to sacrifice Birds, and many other things.
Saint Martha standeth about fifty leagues from Carthagena, at the foot of certaine Hils, alway crowned with Snow. The IndiansNic. Monard. cap. 53. Gomar. Hist. Gen. c. 71. here are very valourous, and vse poysoned Arrowes. They make Bread of Iucca, a root as bigge as a mans arme, or legge, the iuyce whereof is poyson in the Ilands, and therefore they presse it betweene two stones: but in the firme Land they drinke it rawe; and both heere and there sodden, they vse it for Vineger;  and being sodden till it be very thicke, for Honey. This Bread is their Cusaui, not so good as that of Mais. I haue seene a Plant of this herbe growing in Master GerardsM. Gerrard. Garden, the Picture whereof he hath expressed in his Herball. The people are abominable Sodomites, a badge whereof they ware about their neckes; a Chaine, with the resemblance of two men committing this villany. In Gayra the Sodomites were attired like women, others were shauen like Friers. They had women which preserued their Virginitie: these addicted themselues to hunting, with Bow and Arrowes, alone: they might lawfully kill any that sought to corrupt them. These people were Canibals, and eate mans flesh, fresh and powdered: the young Boyes which they tooke they gelded, to make them fatter for their Tables, as we doe Capons. They set vp the heads of those they killed, at their Gates for a memoriall,  and wore their teeth about their neckes for a brauery. They worship theP. Messia, l. 1. cap. 13. Sun and Moone, and burne thereto Perfumes of Herbs, and Gold, and Emeralds. They sacrifice slaues.
Venezuela is so called, because it is built vpon a plaine Rocke, in the waters of a Lake. The women of this Country paint their brests and armes: all the rest of their bodie is naked, except their priuie parts. They Maids are known by their colour, and greatnesse of their girdle. The Men carrie their members in a shell. There are many filthy Sodomites. They pr^y to Idols, and to the Deuill, whom they paint in such forme as he appeareth to them. They paint their bodies in this sort: Hee that hath killed one Enemy in the Warres, paints one of this armes; the second time, his brest; and when he hath killed a third, hee painteth a line from his eyes to his eares: and this is his Knighthood. Their Priests are their Physicians, who  being sent for by a sicke man, aske the Patient, if he beleeue that they can helpe him; and then lay their hands vpon the place where they say their paines are: if he recouer not, they put the fault in him or in their Gods. They lament their dead Lords in Songs in the night time, made of their prayses: that done, they roast them at a fire, and beating them to powder, drinke them in Wine, making their bowels their Lords Sepulchres. In Zoupaciay they bury their Lords with much Gold, Iewels, and Pearles, and set vpon the Graue foure sticks in a square, within which they hang his weapons, and many Viands to eate.
From the Cape Vela, the space of 2000. miles alongst the Coast, is the fishing for Pearles, discouered by Christopher Columbus, in the yeere 1498. which sayled all along this Coast. InP.M. Dec. 1. l. ^ Gomar. c. 74. tom. c. 84. Curiania they receiued the Spaniards with great ioy; and for Pinnes, Needles, Bels, Glasses,  and such trifles, gaue them many strings of Pearles: for foure Pinnes they would giue a Peacocke; for two, a Phesant; for one, a Turtle Doue; And when they asked, What they should doe with this new Merchandize of Pins and Needles, seeing they were naked? they shewed them the vse to picke their teeth, and to picke out thornes in their feete. These Indians had Rings of Gold, and Iewels made with Pearles, after the formes of Birds, Fishes, and Beasts: They had also the Touch-stone for their Metall, and weights to weight the same, things not else-where found in India. They make their teeth white with an herbe, which all the day  they chew in their mouthes.




CHAP II. Of Cumana and Paria.

@. I. Of the People and strange Creatures in Cumana.  
CVmana is a Prouince named of a Riuer, called Cumana,Gom cap. 76. where certayne Franciscans, Anno 1516. built them a Monasterie, and the Spaniards were very diligent in the fishing for Pearles. AboutP.M. Dec. 7. lib. 4. that time three Dominicans went fourescore miles West from thence to preach the Gospell, and were eaten of the Indians, which hindered not, but others of the same order founded them a Monasterie in Ciribici, neere Maracapana. Both these Orders tooke paines with the Indians to conuert them, and taught their children to write and read and to answer at Masse, and the Spaniards were so respected, that they might safely walke alone through all the Country: but after two yeeres and a halfe, the Indians, whether for their too much imployment in the Pearle-fishing, or for other cause, rebelled, and killed a  hundred Spaniards, slue the Friers, one of which was then saying Masse, and as many Indians as they found with them; which the Spaniards of Domingo soone after reuenged.
The losse ofGom. c. 78. Cubagua. Cumana hindered their Trade for Pearles at Cubagua, and therefore the King sent Iames Castilion to subdue them by force: which hee did, and began the Plantation of New Caliz; for the Spaniards to inhabit there. Cubagua was called by Columbus, the Finder, the Iland of Pearles, situate in twelue degrees and a halfe of Northerly Latitude, and containes twelue miles in circuit. This little Iland is exceeding great in commoditie, that accreweth by those Pearles, which hath amounted to diuers millions of gold. They fetch their Wood from Margarita, an Iland foure miles to the North; and their Water from Cumana, which is two and twentie miles thence: they haue a Spring of medicinall Water  there in the Iland. The Sea there, at certaine times of the yeere, is very red, which those Pearle-oysters by some naturall purgation are said to cause. There are Fishes, or Sea-monsters, which from the middle vpwards resemble men, with Beards, Haire, and Armes. TheCap. 79. people of Cumana goe naked, couering only their shame. At Feasts and Dances they paine them^^lues, or else anoint themselues with a certaine Gumme, in which they stick Feathers of many colours. They cut their haire aboue the Eares, and will not suffer it to grow on any places of their bodies, esteeming a bearded man a Beast: They take great paines to make their teeth blacke, and account them women, which haue them white. They blacke them with the powder of the leaues of a certaine Tree called Gay; these leaues they chew, after they are fifteene yeeres old; they mixe that powder with another of a kinde of Wood, and  with Chalke of white shels burned, in manner as the Easterne Indians vse their Betele and Arecca, with Chalke of Oysters: and this mixture they beare continually in their mouthes still chewing it, that their teeth are as blacke as coales, and so continue to their death. They keepe it in Baskets and Boxes, and sell it in the markets to some, which come farre for it, for Gold, Slaues, Cotton, and other Merchandize. This keepeth them from paine and, rotting of the teeth. The Maides goe naked, only they bind certain bands hard about their knees to make their hips and thighes seeme thicke, which they esteeme no small beautie. The married Women liue honestly, or else their husbands will diuorce them. The chiefe men haue as many Wiues as they will; and if any stranger come to lodge in one of their houses, they make the fairest his Bed-fellow:Their Marriages. These also shut vp their Daughters two yeeres before they  marrie them, all which time they goe not forth, nor cut their haire: After which, there is made a great feast, and very many bidden, which bring their varietie of cheere, and also wood to make the new Spouse a house: A man cuts off the Bridegroomes haire before, and a woman the Brides, and then they eate and drinke, with much excesse, till night. This is the lawfull wife, and the other which they marry afterwards obey This. They giue their Spouses to be defloured to their Piaces, (so they call their Priests) which these reuerend Fathers account their Preeminence and Prerogatiue; the Husbands, their honour; the Wiues their warrant.
The men and women weare Collars, Bracelets, Pendants, and some Crownes of Gold and Pearls: the Men weare Rings in their Noses, and the Women Brooches on their brest, whereby  by at first sight the sexe is discerned. The Women Shoot, Runne, Leape, Swim, as well as the Men: their paines of trauell are small: they till the Land, and looke to the house, whiles
 the men Hunt and Fish. They are high-minded, treacherous, and thirstie of reuenge: Their chiefe weapons are poisoned Arrowes, which they prepare with the bloud of Snakes, and other mixtures. All of both sexes, from their infancy, learne to shoot. Their meat is whatsoeuer hath life, as Horse-leeches, Bats, Grashoppers, Spiders, Bees, Lice, Wormes, raw, sodden, fried: and yet their Countrey is replenished with good Fruits, Fish, and Flesh. This Diet (or, as some say, their Water) causeth spots in their eyes, which dimme their sight. They haue as strange a Fence or hedge for their Gardens and possessions, namely, a threed of Cotton, or Bexuco, as they call it, as high as a mans Girdle; and it is accounted a great sinne to goe ouer or vnder the same, and he which breakes it (they certainly beleeue)  shall presently die. So much safer is their threed wouen with this imagination, then all our stone-wals.
TheP.M. Dec. 8. lib. 7. Cumanois are much addicted to Hunting, wherein they are very expert,Their strange Creatures. and kill Lyons, Tygres, Hogs, and all other foure-footed Beasts, with Bowes, Nets, Snares. They take one Beast, which they call Capa, that hath the soles of his feet like a French shoo, narrow behinde, broad and round before. Another, called Aranata, which for the Physnomie and subtiltie seemes to be a kinde of Ape: it hath mouth, hands, and feet, like a man; a goodly countenance, bearded like a Goat. They goe in Heards, they bellow loud, runne vp Trees like Cats, auoid the Huntsmans Arrow, and cast it with cleanly deliuerie againe at himselfe. Another Beast hath a long snout, and feedeth on AntsOuied calleth it a Beare., putting his tongue into a  hollow Tree, or rather place where the Ants are and as many of them as come thereon, hee licks in. The Friers brought vp one, till the stinke thereof caused them to kill it, snouted like a Foxe, rough-haired, which voided in the excrements long and slender Serpents, which presently dyed. This Beast stinking while he liued, and worse now dead, yet was good food to the Indians. They haue one which will counterfeit the voice of a crying child, and so cause some to come forth, and then deuoure them. The like is written of the Hyana, That shee will call the Shepheards by their names, and then destroy them when they come forth.
They haue Parrots as bigge as Rauens, with bils like Hawkes, liuing on the prey, and smelling like Muske: Great Bats, one of which was a Physician, by strange accident, to a seruant  of the Friers: which being sicke of a Pleurisie, was giuen ouer for dead, because they could not raise a veine wherein to let him bloud; in the night a Bat (after the custome of that Creature) bit and sucked him, whereby so much bloud issued, that the sicke man recouered; which the Friers counted for a miracle. They haue three sorts of Bees; one whereof is little and blacke, and makes honey in the Trees, without Waxe. Their Spiders are greater then ours, of diuers colours, and weaue such strong Cobwebs, that they aske good strength to breake them. There are SalamandersPliny, Astolphi* and others describe this worme, but I could neuer learne any thing to satisfie my selfe therein. as bigge as a mans head: they cackle much like a Pullet: their biting is deadly. I might here hold you too long in viewing these strange Creatures:  we will now returne to their stranger customes.


@. II. Of their vices and superstitions.
THey take great pleasure in two things, Dancing and Drinking,Their dancing and drunkennesse. in which they will spend eight dayes together, especially at the Marriages, or Coronation of their Kings. Many Gallants will then meet together, diuersly drest; some with crownes and Feathers, some with shels about their legges in stead of bels, to make a noise: some otherwise, all painted with twenty colours and figures: he that goes worst, seemes best:  taking one another by the hand, they dance in a ring, some backwards, some forwards, with a world of varietie; grinning, singing, crying, counterfetting the Deafe, Lame, Blind, Fishing, Weauing, telling of Stories; and this continueth sixe houres, and then they eate and drinke: before, he which danced most, now he which drinketh most, is the most complete and accomplished Gallant: and now beyond counterfetting, Drunkennesse sets them together in brauing, swaggering, quarrelling: others play the Swine, spue vp the former, to make way for other liquor: and they adde hereunto the fume of an Hearbe, which hath the like drunken effect; it seemeth to be Tobacco.
This perhaps will not seeme strange to some, seeing these Sauage customes of drinking, dancing, smoking, swaggering, so common with vs in these dayes: It might indeed seeme  strange to our forefathers, if their more ciuill, more sacred ghosts, might returne and take view of their degenerating posteritie: but now hee must be a stranger in many companies, that will not estrange himselfe from ciuilitie, from humanitie, from Christianity, from God,
 to become of a Man, a Beast; of an Englishman, a Sauage Indian; of a Christian, a Fiend, saue that he hath a body, in the diuersified pollutions whereof, he hath aduantage, and takes it to out-swagger the Diuell. These are the Gull-gallants of our dayes, to whom I could wish, that either their Progenitors had beene some Cumanian Indians, ^or that they would leaue this vsurped Gallantry to those true owners, and resume spirits truely English.
The GodsTheir Gods. of the Cumanians are the Sun and Moone, which are taken for man and wife, and for the greatest Gods. They haue great feare of the Sunne, when it Thunders or Lightens, saying that he is angry with them. They fast when there is any Eclipse, especially the women: for the married women plucke their haires, and scratch their faces with their nailes: the Maids thrust sharpe fish-bones into their armes, and draw bloud. When the Moone is at  full, they thinke it is wounded by the Sunne, for some indignation he hath conceiued against her. When any Comet appeareth, they make a great noise with Drums and hallowing, thinking so to scarre it away, or to consume it, beleeuing that those Comets portend some euils.
Among their many Idols and figures, which they honour as Gods, they haue one like a Saint Andrews Crosse, which they thought preserued them from night-spirits; and they hanged it on their new-borne children.
They call their PriestsTheir Priests. Piaces; whose Maiden-head-rite we before mentioned. They are their Physicians and Magicians. They cure with roots and hearbs, raw, sod, and pounded with the fat of Birds, Fishes, and Beasts; with wood and other things vnknowne to the people, with abstruse and darke words which themselues vnderstand not. They sucke and licke  the place where the paine is, to draw out the euill humours. And if the paine encreaseth, they say that the Patients are possessed with euill Spirits: and then rub their bodies all ouer with their hands, vsing certaine words of Coniuration or Charmes, sucking after that very hard; giuing them to vnderstand, that by that meanes, they call out the euill spirits. Presently they take a piece of wood, the vertue whereof none else knoweth but the Piace, and therewith rub their mouthes and throats, so long till they cast all that is in their bellies, vomiting sometimes bloud with the force thereof; the Piace in the meane time stamping, knocking, calling, and gesturing: after two houres there comes from him a thicke flegme, and in the middest thereof a blacke hard bullet, which those of the house carry and cast into the fields, saying, Let the Diuell goe thither. If the sicke man recouer, his goods die and become  the Priests; if he die, they say his time was come. The Piace is their Oracle, with whom they consult, whether they shall haue warre, what shall be the issue thereof, whether the yeere will be plentifull. They forewarne them of Eclipses, and aduertise of Comets. The Spaniards demanded in their necessitie, whether any ships would come shortly? And they answered, that on such a day a Caruell would come with so many men, and such prouision and Merchandize; which accordingly came to passe.
Their Diuinations.They call vpon the Diuell in this manner: the Piace entereth into a Caue, or secret place, in a darke night, and carries with him certaine couragious youths, that may moue questions without feare. He sits on a bench, and they stand on their feet, he cryeth, calleth, singeth Verses, soundeth shels: and they with a heauy accent say many times Prororure, Prororure: if the  Diuell comes not, all this Black-Sanctus is renued with grieuous sighs and much perplexity. When he commeth (which is knowne by the noise) hee sounds lowder, and suddenly fals downe, by visages and varied gesture, shewing that the diuell is entred. Then one of those his Associates demandeth what him pleaseth. The Friers went one day with their coniuring and coniured holies, the Crosse, Stole, Holy-water: and when the Piace was in that distraction, cast a part of the stole on him, crossing and coniuring in Latine, and he answered them in his natiue language much to the purpose: at last they demanded whither the soules of the Indians went? He answered to Hell.
These Piaces by their Physick and diuining grow rich: they goe to Feasts, and sit by themselues apart, and drinke themselues drunke, and say, The more they drinke, the better they  can Diuine. They learne these Arts when they are children, and are inclosed in the woods two yeares, all that time eating nothing that had bloud, see no women, nor their owne parents, come not out of their Caues or Cels: and the Piaces, their Masters, goe to them by night, to teach them. When this time of their solitary discipline is past, they obtaine a testimoniall thereof, and begin to professe in practice of Physick and Diuination. Let vs bury the Cumanois, and then we haue done.
Their Burials.Being dead, they sing their praises, and bury them in their houses, or dry them at the fire and hang them vp. At the yeeres end (if he were a great man) they renue the lamentation, and after many other ceremonies, burne the bones, and giue to his best beloued wife his skull to keepe for a Relique. They beleeue that the Soule is immortall, but that it eateth and drinketh  about in the fields where it goeth, and that it is the Eccho which answereth when one calleth.



@. III. Of Trinidado and Paria.
IN the yeere 1497. (some adde a yeere more)P. Martyr. Dec. 1. lib. 6. Gom part. 2. cap. 84. Christopher Columbus seeking new Discoueries, after the suffering of vnsufferable heats and calmes at Sea (whereby the hoopes of his vessels brake, and the fresh-water not able further to endure the hot indignation of that now-beleeued Burning-Zone, fled out of those close prisons, into the lap of that Father of waters, the Ocean, for refuge) he came at last to Trinidado.  The first Land he incountred, he called by that name; either for deuotion, now that his other hopes were dried vp with the heat, or washed into the Sea by the violent showres aboue-boord, and the lesse (but not lesse dangerous) which flowed from his Caske within: or else for the three Mountaines which he there descried. Once, this discouery of Land so rauished his spirit, by the inexpected deliuery from danger, as easily carried his impotent thoughts into a double errour, the one in placing earthly Paradise in this Iland, (to which opinion, for the excellency of the Tobacco there found, hee should happily haue the smokie subscriptions of many Humorists, to whom that fume becomes a fooles Paradise, which with their braines, and all, passeth away in smoke) the other was, that the Earth was not round like a Ball, but like a Peare, the vpper swelling whereof, he esteemed these parts, Hence  Columbus sailed to Paria, and found out the Pearle-fishingPearle fishing, of which Petrus Alphonsus a little after made great commoditie by trade with the Sauages. He was assailed with eighteene Canoas of Canibals,P. Martyr. D^c. 1. l b. 8 Of the C^^ibals, see Chapter 13. one of which he tooke with one Caniball, and a bound Captiue, who with teares shewed them that they had eaten sixe of his fellowes, and the next day he must haue gone to pot too: to him they gaue power ouer his Iaylor, who with his owne club killed him, still laying on when his braines and guts came forth and testified that hee needed not further feare him.
In Haraia or Paria, they found plenty of salt, which the Fore-man in Natures shop, and her chiefe worke-man, the Sunne, turned and kerned from water into salt: his worke-house for this businesse, was a large plaine by the waters-side. Here the Sepulchres of their Kings  and great men seemed not lesse remarkable: they laid the body on a kinde of hurdle or grediron of wood, vnder which they kindled a gentle fire, whereby keeping the skinne whole, they by little and little consumed the flesh. These dried carkasses they held in great reuerence, and honoured for their houshold Gods. In the yeereGem. cap. 85. 1499. Vincent Pinzon discouered Cape Saint Augustine, and sailed along the coast from thence to Paria.
But why stand we here pedling on the coast for Pearles, Salt, and Tobacco? Let vs rouze vp higher spirits, and follow our English guides for Guiana. Onely let me first haue leaue to mention concerning the Superstitions of these parts Northward from Guiana, what it pleased Sir Walter Raleigh to impart vnto mee from the Relation of a very vnderstanding man of that Countrey, whom he vsed for an interpreter. These people worship the Sunne,Relat. S.W.R.  whom they imagine (as the fabulous Grecians tell of his Charet and horses, wherewith yong Phacton sometime set the World on fire) to be drawne into a Chariot by Tigres, which are the most fierie, and fierce beasts, amongst them. In honour therefore of the Sunne, and for sustenance of his Chariot-beasts, they carefully wash the carkasses of their dead, and lay them forth in the night, for repast vnto the Tigres, wearied with their long and late iourney in the day. For so they beleeue, that after Sun-set these beasts are to this end dismissed from their labour; and that vicissitude, wherein Dauid obserueth the wisedome of diuine prouidence (that when it is night, the wild beasts goe forth to seeke their prey,Psal. 104.20, ^^* 22, 23. which when the Sunne ariseth and calleth men forth of their houses to labour, returne to their Dens) is blindly by them applyed to this their superstition. They likewise haue a Tradition amongst them, that their  Ancestors in times past neglecting thus to prepare the corpses of such as died, for the Tigres diet, or not washing them so neatly as behoued, the Tigres made hereof a complaint to the Sunne, as not able to doe his worke, if not allowed their wonted cates: whereupon the Sun sent one amongst them, brandishing a terrible fierie sword, and so dreadfully assaulting the places of their habitations, and the soyle couered with long grasse, that all fell on fire, and an hundred thousand of the Inhabitants were destroyed: a terrible warning hereafter to bee more diligent in these Tigre-deuotions, which accordingly they performe to this day.





CHAP III. Of Guiana, and the Neighbouring Nations on the Coast and within the Land.

@. I. Discouerie of Guiana by Sir WALTER RALEIGH.  
IN the yeere 1595.Sir Walter Raleighs treatise of Guiana. Sir Walter Raleigh hauing before receiued Intelligence of this rich and mighty Empire, set forth for the Discouery, and on the two and twentieth of March anchored at Point Curiapan in Trinidado, and searched that Iland, which he found plentifull. Hee tooke the Citie of Saint Ioseph, and therein Antonie Berreo the Spanish Gouernour: Leauing his ships, hee went with an hundred men in Boats, and a little Galley, and with some Indian Pylots passed along that admirable confluence of Riuers (as by the Corps du Guard) vnto Orenoque, as great a Commander of Riuers, as the Emperour of Guiana of Souldiers. And although wee haue before mentioned somewhat thereof, yet this, his peculiar place, requireth some further  consideration. This Riuer Orenoque or Baraquan (since, of this Discouerie, called Raleana) runneth from Quito in Peru on the West, it hath nine branches which fall out on the North side of his owne maine mouth, on the South side seuen. Thus many Armes hath this Giant-like streame to be his Purueyers, which are alway filling his neuer-filled mouth (seeming by this their naturall officiousnesse incorporate thereunto, and to bee but wider gapings of the same spacious iawes) with many Ilands and broken grounds, as it were so many morsels and crummes in his greedy Chaps, still opening for more, though he cannot, euen in Winter, when his throat is glibbest, altogether swallow these: yea these force him, for feare of choking, to yawne his widest, and to vomit out, betweene these cleauing morsels, into the Oceans lap, so many streames, and (so farre is it from the Northerne and  Southerne extremes) three hundred miles distant. The Inhabitants on the Northerne branches are the Tiuitiuas, a goodly and valiant people, which haue the most manly speech, and most deliberate (saith Sir Walter) that euer I heard, of what Nation so euer. In the Summer they haue houses on the ground, as in other places: In the Winter they dwell vpon the trees,King Abibeiba dwelt on a Tree in the Countrey of Dariena. Pet. Martyr. Die. 3. lib. 6. where they build very artificiall Townes and Villages: for betweene May and September the Riuer of Orenoque riseth thirtie foot vpright, and then are those Ilands ouerflowne twenty foot high, except in some few raised grounds in the middle. This waterie store (when the clouds are so prodigall of more then the Riuers store-house can hold, whereby they become violent intruders and incrochers vpon the Land) and not the violence of cold, giueth this time the Title of Winter. These Tiuitiuas neuer eate of any thing that is  set or sowne; Natures nurslings, that neither at home nor abroad, will be beholden to the Arte or Labour of Husbandry. They vse the tops of Palmitos for bread, and kill Deere, Fish, and Porke, for the rest of their sustenance. They which dwell vpon the branches of Orenoque, called Capuri and Macureo, are for the most part Carpenters of Canoas, which they sell into Guiana for gold, and into Trinidado for Tobacco, in the excessiue taking whereof, they exceed all Nations. When a Commander dieth, they vse great lamentation, and when they thinke the flesh of their bodies is putrified and fallen from the bones, they take vp the carkasse againe, and hang it vp in the house, where he had dwelt, decking his skull with feathers of all colours, and hanging his gold-plates about the bones of his arms, thighs, and legs. The Arwacas which dwell on the South of Orenoque, beat the bones of their Lords  into powder, which their wiues and friends drinke.
As they passed along these streames, their eyes were entertained with a Pageant of Shewes, wherein Nature was the onely Actor; here the Deere came downe feeding by the waters side, as if they had desired acquaintance with these new-come guests: there, the Birds in vnspeakeable varietie of kinds and colours, rendering their seruice to the eye and eare: the Lands either in large plaines of many miles, bearing their beautifull bosomes, adorned with Floraes embroidery of vnknown Flowres and Plants, and prostrating themselues to the eye, that they might be seene; or else lifting vp the^selues in Hils, knitting their furrowed brows, and strouting out their goggle eyes to watch their treasure, which they keepe imprisoned in their stony walls; and now, to see these strangers: the Waters (as the Graces) dancing  with mutuall and manifold embracings of diuers streames, attended with plenty of Fowle and Fish; both Land and Water feasting varietie of senses with varietie of obiects: onely
 the Crocodile (a creature which seemeth Vassall, now to the land, now to the Water, but to make prey on both) wel-nigh marred the Play, and turned this Comedie into a Tragedie, euen in their sight, feasting himselfe with a Negro of their company.
One leuell passed hence to Cumana, an hundred and twenty leagues to the North wherein dwell the Sayma, the Assawai, the Wikiri and the Aroras, a people as blacke as Negros,These might descend of those in Careca, sup. l. 8. c. 2. but with smooth haire. Their poisoned Arrowes, like cruell Executioners, doe not onely kill, but with vncouth torments make death to be, as the last, so the least of their fury; especially if men drinke after they are wounded.
At the Port of Morequito they anchored, and the King being an hundred and ten yeeres  old, came afoot fourteene miles to see them, and returned the same day. They brought them store of fruits, and a sort of Paraquitos, no bigger then Wrens, and anOuied. in Summar. cals it Bardato. Armadilla, which seemeth to be all barred ouer with small plates, somewhat like to a Rhinoceros, with a white horne growing in his hinder-parts, as big as a great hunting horne, which they vse to winde in stead of a Trumpet. They after eate this beast. MonardusMonard c. 37. saith, it is in bignesse and snout like a Pigge, liues vnder the earth as a Moule, and is thought to liue on earth.
They passed further, till they came in sight of those strange ouer-fals of Caroli, of which there appeared ten or twelue in sight, euery one as high ouer the other as a Church-Tower. They had sight at Winicapora of a Mountaine of Cristall, which appeared a farre off like a white Church-Tower, of an exceeding height. There falleth ouer it a mighty Riuer, which  toucheth no part of the side of the Mountain, but rushing ouer the top, falleth to the ground with so terrible noise, as if a thousand great bels were knocked one against another. No maruell of these roaring out-cries, if we consider that double penalty of Sense and Losse, which this Riuer seemeth to sustaine, the one in that dreadfull downfall, bruising and breaking his vnited streames into drops, and making it foming and senselesse with this falling-sicknesse; the other in leauing behinde his Cristall purchase, further enriched with Diamonds and other Iewels, which euen now hee embraced in his waterie armes, but himselfe (such is the course and curse of couetousnesse) will not suffer himselfe to enioy.
Now for the Monsters of Men: there are said to be (not seene by our men, but reported by the Sauages and other) an Amazonian Nation further South: which Gomara thinkes to bee  but the wiues of some Indians (a thing common, as you haue euen now read) shooting and following the warres, no lesse then their husbands: Once, about Iucatan, about Plata, about the Riuer, called of this supposition, Amazones: about Monomotapa in Africa; our Age hath told, but no man hath seene this Vnimammian Nation. Yet here they speake not of searing of the brest: and what need they, if there bee such,L. Keymis. These may rathe^ be said to want necks then heads, and that cause^h them ^bu^ to see^e. seeing the women are so good Archers in other places, their brests notwithstanding? Againe,Monard c. 37. they tell of men with mouthes in their brests, and eyes in their shoulders, called Chiparemoi, and of the Guianians Ewiaponomos, very strong; and of others headed like Dogges, which liue all the day time in the Sea. These things are strange, yet I dare not esteeme them fabulous: onely (as not too prodigall of faith) I suspend, till some eye-intelligence of some of our parts haue testified  the truth.


@. II. Relations and discoueries thereof by other Englishmen.
FRANCIS SPARREY left in Guiana by Sir W. Raleigh 1595. hath also written of these parts; He relateth of a place called Comalaha,F. Sparrey. M. S. ap. Hak. Southwards from Orenoque, where at certain times they sell women as at a faire. He saith, he bought  eight, the eldest of which, was not eighteene, for a Red-hafted Knife, which in England cost a halfe-peny: he gaue them to the Sauages. Hee was afterwards sent Prisoner into Spaine.
Anno 1604. Captaine Charles LeighMaster Charles Leigh. set saile from Woolwich on the one and twentieth of March for Guiana: May 10. he came in water thicke and white, the next day in fresh, and the day after, saw two Islands in the mouth of Amazones, accounting themselues fortie Leagues vp the Riuer. May 22. they were in the Riuer of Wiapogo, (which they called Caroleigh) in three degrees and halfe Northward from the Line. The people were ready to giue them entertainment. The Iayos and Capayos offered them their owne houses, and gardens already planted, two of which he accepted with some gardens, vndertaking to defend them  against the Charibes and their other enemies. They desired him to send into England for some to teach them to pray, and gaue fiue pledges to be sent thither. He after (intending for England) dyed aboord his ship of the Flux. They intoxicate the fish with a strong sentedwood
 called Ayaw, whereby they easily take them on the top of the water. Their bread is Cassaui, of which chewed they also make d^inke. They are much troubled with a Worme like a Flea (the Spaniards call it Niguas) which creepes into the flesh of their toes vnder the nailes, and multiply there with much multiplication of torment, except they vse speedie preuention. One was so pestred with them, that for remedie, they were faine to hold his feet vpwards, and powre thereon melted Wax hot, which being cold they plucked off, and therewith seuen or eight hundred Niguas. The people are of modest countenance, naked, but would weare clothes if they had them. Huntly returned for England, and left there fiue and thirtie, which should haue bin succoured it. Discord had suffered.
Anno 1605. a ship was sent for supply: but the Mariners and Land-men quarelling, these  were left on Land at Saint Lucia,ohn Nichol. an Island in twelue degrees of Northerly Latitude, to the number of threescore and seuen, and most of them slaine a by the Ilanders. These Indians go naked, haue long blacke haire, their bodies painted red, with three strokes also of red, from the eare to the eye. Eleuen of our men, after much miserie and famishment (which killed some of them in the way) got to Coro: and after good and bad entercourse of fortunes with the Spaniards, some returned home. The Spaniards there (as Iohn Nichol one of this companie testifieth) told them of a Vision of Christ on the Crosse appearing to our King, and reuoking him from his error: at the sight whereof, three of our Bishops fell into a trance, and so continued three dayes, after which they became Catholikes and preached: and the King had sent to the Pope for learned men to perfect this Conuersion. These were the Spanish tricks  with faithlesse tales to peruert these men to their faith. The Mariners gaue names to the places which they left according to their conceits of these men, Rogues Bay, Cape Knaue, Riuer of Rascals. They came as farre as Comana or Cumana, where they obserued the weather hot till noone, and then a coole breeze and thunder without raine. by windes and current they were detained from Wiapogo, which they sought. A Fleming there told them fabulous rumours of Warres with Spaine.
Iohn Wilson of Wansted in Essex.Another ship of Amsterdam (to disgrace our men) told the Indians of Wiapoco, that they came to inhabit there and to oppresse them, as the Spaniards did. See what gaine can doe without godlinesse. A ship of Middleburgh came thither with Negros to sell: thither came also a ship of Saint Malos. The Indians of these parts (as Wilson reporteth) choose their Captaines at their drunken Feasts in this sort: They set the nominated person in the midst with  his hands lifted ouer his head, making Orations to him to bee valiant: after which, they whip him with a whip that fetcheth bloud at euery stroke, for tryall of his courage, he neuer mouing thereat. They haue commerce with the Deuill. For they told vs of three ships in the Riuer of Amazons, and that One two moneths after would visit vs. They call this DeuillLegates company 1606. in a Voyage to Amaz, in a mutinie slue their Captaine, and the rest were taken at Cuba, a^d fourteene h^ng^d, foure kep^ Prisoners. W. Adams. W. Turner. Peyae, with whom the men haue often conference, the women neuer that they could perceiue: they suffer not meane-while a childe in the house. When any bee sicke they thus consult of their recouerie, and if their Oracle answer death, they will giue no Physicke; if life, they vse their best helpes. For an Axe they would trauell with them two or three moneths, or finde them so long victuals at home. The Iayos are proud, ingenious, giuen to flouting. The Arwakos of better carriage. The Saspayes craftie. The two former hate the  Spaniards as much as the Caribes. Their houses haue doores at each end: the men keepe at one end, the women at the other: they are like Barnes, but longer; some hundred and fiftie paces long, and twentie broad, an hundred of them keepe together in one. No raine commeth in, notwithstanding that store which falleth in Aprill, May, Iune, and most of Iuly. They paint them when they goe to feasts. Against the time of trauell, the women haue as roome apart, whereto they goe alone, and are deliuered without helpe: which done, shee cals her husband and deliuers it to him, who presently washeth it in a pot of water, and paints it with sundry colours. I could not heare (saith Wilson) the woman so much as grone all the time of her trauell. When one dyes, they make great moane ten or twelue dayes together, and sometimes longer. Here are store of Deere, Hares, Conies, Hogs, Monkeyes,  Leopards,May. 1606. Lyons, Porke-pines, Parrots as big as Hennes, blue and red, very beautifull, etc. He returned with the rest in a ship of Amsterdam, the Indians being loth to part with them. They often inquired of Sir Walter Raleigh, and one came from Orenoque to aske of him, alledging his promise of returne.
Rob. Harcourts Voyage to Guiano.The like remembrances of him are mentioned by Master Harcourt in his late published Voyage to Guiana. This worthy Gentleman, An. 1608. with Gentlemen and others, to the number of 97. set forth for Wiapoco. The ninth of May they fell into the Current of that great and famous Riuer of Amazones, of which they drunke fresh and good, being 30. leagues from Land: the tenth day, the water became muddy, whitish and thicke: the eleuenth day they made Land, and their Pinnace being left dry vpon the Ebbe, by the next floud comming  on was almost spoyled: Thence they stood along the Coast to Wiapoco, whither they
 came, May the seuenteenth, and setled themselues at Caripo. Hee tooke possession in his Maiesties name (as Captaine Leigh had also done) of this spaciousM. Harcourt. so calls the Priest, and the Deuil Wattipa Countrey of Guiana, bounded on the North with Orenoque and the Sea, on the East and South, with the Riuer of Amazones, on the West, with the Mountaines of Peru. The Charibes are the Ancient Inhabitants, the Other later Incrochers. There is no setled gouernment amongst them, only they acknowledge a superioritie which they will obey as long as they please. They commonly punish Murther and Adulterie by death, which are the only offences punished amongst them: and certaine persons are appointed to execute those punishments. The better sort haue two or three wiues or more, the rest but one: they are very iealous, and if they take  them in Adulterie, cause their braines to be beaten out. Their wiues, especially the elder, are as their seruants, and he which hath most, is the greatest man.
Their account of time is by Moones, or dayes: their numbring is to ten, and then say, ten and one, etc. They also keepe accounts, by bundles of stickes, contayning so many, as dayes are agreed on, of which they take away, euery day one. They haue a certaine obseruance of the Sunne and Moone, supposing them to be aliue: but as farre as he could perceiue, vsed neither Sacrifice nor adoration to any thing. At the death of any great man, they make a solemne Feast, their chiefest prouision being their strongest drinke, calledIt is like March Beere, Parranow, and as long as this drinke lasteth, they continue their Feast, with dancing, singing, and excessiue drinking, accounting the greatest Drunkard the brauest man: during which drunken solemnitie,  some woman (being neerest of kinne to the dead partie) stands by and cries extremely. Their Priests or South-sayers (he cals them Pecaios) haue conference with the Deuill, whom they terme Wattipa, but feare him much, and say hee is naught: hee will often beate them blacke and blue. They beleeue that the good Indians when they die, goe to Caupo or Heauen, the bad to Soy, downwards. When a chiefe man dies, if hee haue a Captiue they slay him; if not, then one of his seruants, to attend him the other Wo^ld.
The qualitie of the Land is diues: by the Sea-side low, and would be violently hot, if a fresh Easterly breeze did not coole it with a vehement breath in the heate of the day: the Mountaines are colder, the mid^le sort most temperate. Profit may here take pleasure, neither need pleasure abandon profit. The particulars are by this and other our Authors related;  I hunt after Rarities to present you. Such is the fish Cassoorwa, which hath in each eye two sights, and as it swimmeth, it beares the lower sights within the water, and the other aboue: the ribs and backe resemble those parts in a man, saue that it is little bigger, but much daintier then a Smelt. Besides the Pockiero, o^ small Swine with the Nauill in the backe, is another called Paingo, as large as ours in England. The Sea-cow or Manatin eates like Beefe, and will take Salt, and serue to victuall ships, it yeelds also an excellent Oyle, and the hi^e will make Buffe. There are infinite store of them. The Pina for delicacie excee^eth, a fruit tasting like Strawberries, Claret-wine, and Sugar. What commoditie TobaccoAnno 1610. The Tobacco that came into E^gland amounted to (at least) 60000. pound and not much lesse in other yeeres. and Sugars in those parts may yeeld is incredible, especially in this smokie humour of the one sexe, and that daintier of the other. Their Dies, Gummes, and other commodities I omit. Of Gold and other Metals they haue good testimonie.
 The Marashawaccas are a Nation of Charibes, vp high within Land, hauing great eares beyond credit: they haue an Idoll of stone which they worship as their God, in a house erected purposely to it, which they keepe verie cleane. It is fashioned like a man sitting vpon his heeles, holding open his knees, and resting his elbowes vpon them, holding vp his hands with the palmes forwards, and gaping with his mouth wide open.
Captaine Michael Harcourt was left Commander of the Countrie for his Brother, who continued the possession three yeeres, in all which space, of thirtie persons died but sixe, and some of them by casualtie. Amongst the East Indian Plants is mentioned one called Sentida: the like they found here, much like vnto Rose trees, about halfe a yard high; which if they  were touched, or a leafe cut from them, would presently shrinke and close vp themselues, and hang as they were dead and withered:Vid. l. 5. c 12. A feeling Plant. within halfe a quarter of an houre by degrees againe opening. Areminta the Cacique of Moreshegoro had a rough skin like to Buffe-leather, of which kind there be many in those parts. They returned by Cape Brea, which is so called of the Pitch there gotten in the Earth, whereof there is such abundance that all places of this our World may be stored thence: it is excellent for trimming of shippes for those hote  Countries, not melting in the Sunne.



@. III. Relations of these and the adioyning Countries by the Spaniards.
IT were a hard taske to muster all that World of Riuers, and names of Nations in the parts neere Guiana, which they that will, may finde in Sir Walter and Master Keymis, and Master Harcourt their owne Relations. As for Guiana, this Sir Walter hath written. It is directly East from Peru towards the Sea, and lyeth vnder the  Aequinoctiall: it hath more abundance of Gold then any part of Peru, and as many or moe great Cities. It hath the same Lawes, Gouernment and Religion; and Manoa, the Imperiall Citie of Guiana (which some Spaniards haue seene, and they call itThe gilded Citie. El Dorado) for the greatnesse, riches, and situation, farre exceedeth any of the World, at least so much of it as the Spaniards know. It is founded vpon a Lake of Salt-water, two hundred leagues long, like vnto the Caspian Sea. The Emperour of Guiana is descended from the Ingas, the magnificent Princes of Peru. For when Francis Pizarro had conquered Peru, and slaine Atabalipa the King; one of his younger brethren fled from thence, and took with him many thousands of those Souldiers of the Empire, called Oreiones, with whom and other his followers, he vanquished all that tract which is between the great Riuers of Orenoque, and Amazones.  
Diego Ordas, who was one of the Captaines of Cortes, in the conquest of Mexico, in the yeere 1531. (thus saith Gomara, and that he perished at Sea; others with more probability, say it was a few yeeres after the conquest of Peru) made search for Guiana, but lost himselfe, being slaine in a mutinie. Before this, his prouision of Powder was fired, and one Iuan Martinez, which had the charge thereof, was therefore condemned to bee executed. But at the Souldiers request, his punishment was altered, and hee set in a Canoa alone without victuall, and so turned loose into the Riuer. Certaine Guianians met him, and hauing neuer seene man of that colour, they carried him into the Land to be wondred at; and so from Towne to Towne, till hee came to the great Citie of Manoa, the seat and residence of Inga the Emperour. He no sooner saw him, but he knew him to be a Christian (for the Spaniards not long before had conquered his brother) and caused him to be well entertained in his Palace. Hee  liued seuen moneths in Manoa, but was not suffered to wander any whither into the Countrie; he was also brought thither, all the way blind-fold, led by the Indians, vntill he came at Manoa. He entred the Citie at noone, and trauelled all that day till night, and the next, from the rising till the setting of the Sunne; thorow the Citie, ere hee came to the Palace of Inga. After seuen moneths the Emperour put him to his choise, whether to stay or goe, and he with the Emperours licence departed. He sent with him many Guianians, all laden with as much Gold as they could carrie; but before he entred Orenoque, the Orenoqueponi robbed him of all, but of two Bottels of Gold beads, which they had thought, had beene his drinke or meate. Thus escaped he to Trinidado, and died after at Saint Iuan de Puerto-rico, where, in his extremes, he vttered these things to his Confessor. He called the Citie Manoa El Dorado,  the gilded or golden, because that at their drunken Solemnities (in which vice no Nation vnder Heauen excels them) when the Emperour carowseth with any of his Commanders, they that pledge him, are stripped naked, and their bodies anointed with a kinde of white Balsamum, and then certaine seruants of the Emperour, hauing prepared Gold made into fine powder, blow it thorow hollow Canes, vpon their naked bodies, vntill they bee all shining: from the foot to the head; and in this sort they fit drinking, by twenties and hundreds, and continue in drunkennesse, sometimes sixe or seuen dayes together. Vpon this sight, and for the abundance of Gold he saw in the Citie, the Images, in the Temples, the Plates, Armours, and Shields of Gold vsed in their Warres, he gaue the Citie that name.
IuanIuan. de Castellanos ap. Hak.de Castellanos reckoneth twentie seuerall Expeditions of some, or other Spaniards,  for this Guianian Discouery with little effect, saue that diuers lost their liues therein. Anno 1543. Gonzalo PizarroLopez Vaz. ap. Hak. tom. 3. Giraua. l. 2. sent a Captaine named Orellana, from the borders of Peru, who with fifty men, were carried by the violent current of the Riuer, that they could not return to Pizarro: he descended not in Orenoque the Guianian Riuer, but in Maragnon, called of him Orellana: which IosephusAcosta l. 2. c. 6. and 3. c. 20. Acosta writeth, from the Relation of one of their Societie; who being a Boy, had bin in the Expedition of Pedro de Orsua for this Discouery, and had sailed the Riuer thorow, that in the middest men can see nothing but the Skie (as before is said) and the Riuer, and that it is seuentie leagues broad, vnder the Aequinoctiall. MartinM. Fernand. de Encisa. apud Hak. Fernandez maketh it seuen degrees and a halfe to the North of the Line, and fifteen leagues broad, and the Sea of fresh water to bee another Riuer of forty leagues breadth: others haue  written otherwise, which varying proceedeth from that varietie of Armes or mouthes of
 Orenoque or Raleana, and Marannon or Amazones which since haue beene better discouered, asL Keymis. T. Masham. Master Keymis, Master Masham and others employed in this action, haue found by experience. ItLop. Gom. c. 86 riseth in Quito. Orellana sayled in it sixe thousand miles. In all these parts, their greatest treasure is multitude of women and children. Topiawari made a heauie complaint, that whereas they were wont to haue ten or twelue wiues, now they had not aboue three or foure, by reason of the wars with the Epuremei their Enemies: whereas the Lords of the Epuremei had fifty or a hundred, and their war is more for women, then either for Gold or Dominion. After Orellana Pedro de Orsua was employed with fiue hundred Souldiers for the conquest of the Amazons (as they called it) but for a beautifull woman  which he had with him was slaine by conspiracie of Lope de Aguirre which loued her, and Fernando de Guzman, whom they saluted King, etc. Veg. pag. 2. lib. 8. c. 14.
Berreo, in the search for Guiana, tooke his Iourney from Nueuo Reyno de Granado, where he dwelt, with seuen hundred Horse, but trauelling, he lost many of his company and Horse: at Amapaia the soyle is a low Marish, and the water issuing thorow the Bogs, is red and venemous, which poysoned the Horses, and infected the men: at noone the Sunne had made it more wholesome for their vse.
ThisLop. Vaz. new Kingdome of Granada is two hundred leagues within Land, Southward from Cartagena. It had that name, because the Captaine that discouered it, was of Granada in Spaine. The plenty of Emeralds in these parts, hath made that Gemme of lesse worth.  The next Prouince to this is called Popayan: in both which the Spaniards haue many Townes. And by the Riuer of Orenoque, both may be inuaded.
AllRot. par 4. l. 6. the parts, from the Golden Castle, and the Gulfe of Vraba to Paria, yeeld Caribes, or Canibals, which eate mans flesh, and geld children, to make them more fat and tender for their diet. And in all Inland parts neere Peru, and in the Hils called Andes, which some call Golden Castile, they little differ. CiezarCieza part. 1. cap. 15. saith, That in the Valley of Anzerma, they keepe certaine Tablets amongst the Reeds, wherein they carue the Image of the Deuill in a terrible shape, also the figures of Cats, and other Idols which they worship. To them they pray for raine, or faire weather: they haue commerce with the Deuill, and obserue such Superstitions as he enioyneth them. They are great man-eaters. At the doores of their houses,  they haue small Courts, wherein are their graues in deepe Vaults, opening to the East: in which they bury their great men with all their wealh. The Curies are not far from them; they haue no Temple, nor Idoll. They haue conference with the Deuill. They marry with their Neeces and Sisters, and are man-eaters. They call the Deuill Xaxarama. They esteeme Virginitie little worth. In the Prouince ofCap. 19. and 4. Arma, the Deuill doth often appeare to the Indians: in honour of whom, they sacrifice their Captiues taken in Warre, hanging them vp by the shoulders, and pulling out the hearts of some of them. In Paucora, they haue like Deuillish Deuotions, and their Priests are their Oracles.
Before the house of the chiefe Lord was an Idoll as bigge as a man,Tuesday Holy dayes. with his face to the East, and his armes open. They sacrificed two Indians euery Tuesday, in this Prouince to  the Deuill. In the Prouince of Pozo, in the houses of their Lords, they had many Idols in such resemblance, as the Deuill had assumed in his Apparitions. And in those Idols, he would also speake, and giue answeres. In CarrapaChap. 13. they are extreame Drunkards: when any is sicke, they offer Sacrifices to the Deuill for his recouery. In Quinbaya is a Hill which casteth forth smoke: but a more Hellish smoke is their conference and commerce with the Deuill, like the former. In the Prouince of Cali they likewise conferre with the Deuill: they haue no Temples or Houses of Religion. They make deepe pits for Sepulchres of their great men, where their Armour, Wealth, and food is set about them. Their lust subiecteth the Neece and Sister to their Marriages. In PopayanChap. 32. they are man-eaters, as also in the forenamed Prouinces. They obserue the same Caninall and Deuillish Rites with the former, framing  their Superstitions to the Deuils direction, in their mutuall Colloquies. They bury with their Lords some of his Wiues and Prouision. Some of them are great Wizards and Sorcerers. In Pasto they talke also with the Deuill: a thing common to al these parts of the Indies. But let vs leaue these steepe and cold Hils, these men of the Deuill (whom they worship) and Deuils to men (whom they deuoure) and see if in the lower Countries wee can find higher  and nobler spirits.




CHAP IIII. Of Brasil.

@. I. The Discouerie and Relations thereof by MAFFAEVS. etc.
AS Guiana is bounded with those mighty Riuers of Orenoque and Maragnon,  so Brasil extendeth it selfe North and South, betweene Maragnon and the Riuer of Plata, or Siluer, which there we haue already shewed to be the greatest Riuers in the World. The Westerne borders are not so well discouered. The Easterne are washed by the Sea. MaffaeusP. Maffaeus Hist. Ind lib. 2. P. Bert. Geograp. Mag. Geog. G Ens Hist. Ind. Occident. P Iarric. lib. 3. cap. 22. and d. Bot part. 1. l. 6 hath largely described the same, whose words Bertius, Maginus, and Gasper Ens haue transcribed: the summe whereof Iarric and Boterus haue inserted into their French and Italian Relations.
Petrus Aluarius Capralis, being sent by Emanuel, King of Portugall, in the yeere 1500. vnto the East-Indies, to auoid the calmes on the Guinnee shore, fetched a further compasse West, and so discouered the Continent, which now, of that Red Wood there plentifully  growing, is called Brasil, but by him was named, the Land of the Holy Crosse, because hee had there erected a Crosse with much ceremony; since vsually named Brasil, of the store of Brasil-Wood there growing. This Brasil was soone after, by Americus Vesputius, at the charges of the said King, further discouered. The Region is pleasant and wholesome, the Hils and Valleyes equally agreeing, in their vnequalnesse, the soyle fat and fertile: there are plentie of Sugar-Canes; a kind of Balme expressed out of the Herbe Copaibas, the Zabucals which yeild a kind of Nuts, growing in great hard cups, of taste like a Chesnut; the Auanaz excellent in scent and taste; the Pacouere, a tree so tender, that it may bee cut with a knife a fadome high, the leaues two foot broad, seuen foot long, the fruit a foot long, like a Cucumber, called Pacoua, thirtie or fortie together in clusters, neuer hearing fruit but once: the  like is in the East-Indies, as Theuet our Authour affirmeth; and many other fruits which the Countrey naturally produceth; besides those, which our Europe hath communicated. Many sorts there are of Beasts, as a kind of SwineWhich feeds on grasse, sle^pes in the wa^er, Boterus. which liue in both Elements; their fore-feet being short in proportion to the hinder, make them slow in running, and therefore being hunted, commit themselues quickly to the water. Antae, resembling a Mule, but somwhat lesse; slender-snowted, the nether chap very long, like a Trumpet, with round eares and short tailes, hiding themselues in the day-time,The Spaniards call it (of the contrary) the light Dogge. The Portugals Sloth. The Indians, Hay. Some haue written that it liues of ayre: and seldome or neuer hath it beene seene eating. and feeding in the night, the flesh tasteth like Beefe: there is also the Armadillo; the Tygre, which being hungry, is very hurtfull; being full, will flee from a Dogge: There is a deformed beast, of such slow pace, that in fifteene dayes it will scarce goe a stones cast. It liueth on the leaues of trees, on which it is two  dayes in climing, and as many in descending, neither shouts nor blowes forcing herto amend her pace. The Tamendoas are as big as a Ramme, with long and sharpe snowts, a tayle like a Squirrell, (twice as long as the body and hairy) where-under they hide themselues, will put out their tongue two foote (out of the mouth, as round as an Oyle-cruze) to gather plentie of Ants into their mouthes, hauing scraped vp the places where they keep with their pawes. The Portugals haue there raised plentie of Horses and Sheepe.
The men worship no God at all, but are giuen to South-sayings. The men and women goe altogether naked, are flat-nosed, make themselues blacke with the fruit Genipapi, weare their haire hanging from the hinder part of the head; not suffering it else-where to grow; in their nether lips weare long stones for a gallantry (which being remoued, they seeme in deformed  manner to haue a double mouth) they goe together by companies, with great silence the Wife going before her Husband, which (some say) is done for iealousie. They entertain and welcome Strangers at first with weeping and deepe sighes, pittying their tedious iourney, and presently drie their eyes, hauing teares at command.
Women in trauell are deliuered without great difficultie, and presently goe about their houshold businesse, the Husband in her stead keepeth his bed, is visited of the neighbours, hath his broths made him, and iunkets sent to comfort him. They are ignorant ofThey know no numbers further then fiue, the rest they supply as they can with their toes and fingers: and if the things numbered exceed, they number by the toes and fingers of many persons assembled together. Stad. lib. 2. c. 29. numbring and Letters: some Tradition they are said to haue touching Noe and the Floud. Vnder the same Roofe (which is like a Boat with the Keele vpwards (liue many Families, they lye in Nets, or beds hanging aboue the ground (which is vsuall in a great part of the Indies) to auoid hurtfull creatures: they minde the day, and are not carefull for the morrow; easily communicate  what they haue; are very patient of labour and hunger, feasting if they haue wherewith,
 from morning till night, and fasting other-whiles, when they want, three dayes together. In swimming they are miraculously skilfull, and will diue whole houres to search any thing vnder the water. They beleeue not any reward or punishment after this life ended, but thinke that as men die, so they goe to the other World, maimed, wounded, sicke or whole: and therefore bury the bodies with a Net to lye in, and food for some dayes, thinking that they both sleepe and eate. They are excellent Archers, and what enemies they take in their warres, they feed well many dayes, and then kill and eate them for great Dainties. They dwell in Houses scattered and separated from each other; their Language is almost generally the same; they haue no Lawes nor Magistrates; the women call certaine  things by one name, and the Men by another. They haue no vse of three LettersIt seemes otherwise by Lerius his Dialogue of that Language c. 20 in the Alphabet, L, F, R, a reason whereof some haue wittily giuen, because they haue no Law, Faith, nor Ruler. They are vnmindfull of good turnes, and too mindfull of iniuries: impotent of Lust and Rage, and in summe, more like beasts then men. Thus farre Maffaeus.
In the yeere 1503.G. da Empoli. ap. Ramus. A. Vesput. Giouanni da Empoli, a Florentine, sayled thither with the Portugals, who reporteth the like of their nakednesse, irreligion, and of their man-eating, saying that they dry it in the smoke as we doe Bacon. The same doth Albericus Vesputius report that he had seene amongst them, and that he had heard one of them boast that hee had in his time eaten three hundred men. He weighed the long stones, (which they vsed to weare in  their faces, seuen in number) about sixteene ounces. He saith they liue an hundred and fiftie yeeres; and that their Women are out of measure luxurious; that they alway haue an Easterly wind, which tempereth their Aire.
Let vs in the next place heare such as haue liued in the Countrie; of which Lerius and Theuet, two Frenchmen, and Ioannes Stadius a Germane, haue written seuerall Treatises. But none hath more fully described them, then a Portugall Frier,A Booke taken from a Frier, written in Portuguse, sold by Fr Cook to M. Hakluia. and Anthonie Kniuet our Countriman.


 @. II. More full Relations by STADIVS, LERIVS, and PETER CARDER.
IOannes StadiusIo. Stad. Hessi cum picturis. ap. T. de Bry in 3 parte America, in the yeere 1554. was Prisoner to the Tuppin Imbas, and because he serued the Portugals, should haue beene slaine and deuoured. But by Gods mercy he escaped. He was the Gunner in the Fort of Saint Vincent, and going into the Wood to prouide somewhat wherewith to entertaine some friends then come to him, became himselfe a prey to those Men-hunters. When they had taken him, they contended which of them had beene the first taker, and that controuersie ended, hee was  stripped naked, and led away. Hee was giuen to one of their Kings* and this victory by them was ascribed to their Tamaraka, or Idols, which, they said, had by Oracle prophesied thereof, but their Kings were no other then the chiefe in euery Cottage, which consisted of one Kindred, and these Tamaraka weare certaine Rattles, as shall after appeare. The manner is, that it gets them a great name, to exhibit this Feast of a slaine Captiue, and therefore some that haue taken, will credit some other friend with the gift of a Captiue, to this solemne butcherie, on condition to repay him the next Captiue hee taketh. This was Stadius his case, who was thus tossed by exchange, from one to another, till at last hee escaped altogether.
But when hee had beene newly taken, the Women came about him, and one while  buffeted him, one saying, This is for such a friend of mine, that the Peros or Portugals had slaine; another fixing on his flesh the memoriall of another friend of hers, and then led him with a Rope about his necke, almost strangling him, making him also to dance in the middest of them, with Rattles tied to his legges: but hee after grew in some credit and respect amongst them, and saw diuers others eaten, while himselfe could not bee free from feare of the like destinie.
The Sauages, that they take, put on a great shew of resolution, and little regard (in seeming) that their Tragedie, supported with this comfort, that their friends will reuenge it. In time of sicknesse or sudden dangers they would resort to him to pray to his God for deliuerance; and this conceit of his God, which they obserued in his Deuotions, was the  principall meanes of deferring his execution. Such as are mortally wounded in their fights, they would spend presently, or at least kill and dresse them, for a Feast neere at hand: and one man that had liued long amongst them, and was desperately sicke, lest Death should
 depriue them of their cheere, they slue, and (because of his sicknesse) hurling away the head and inwardes, ate vp the rest. They take great pride in these their cruelties, and when Konyan Bebe their King, hauing a basket full of pieces of Mans flesh, on which hee was feeding, offered Stadius a piece, who told him that it was more then beastly: hee answered, I am a Tygre, and I delight in these delicacies. This Stadius after escaped in a French Shippe.
Nicolas Durantius,Lerius hist. Nauig. in Amer. and And. Theuet. a Knight of Malta, sirnamed Villagagnon, in the yeere 1555. (male-content with his estate at home) sayled into Francia Antarctica, or the Southerne parts of Brasill, vnder the Tropike of Capricorne, and pretended there to worship God according to the puritie of the Gospell; and to fortifie, both for the habitation of his owne, and for a  Sanctuarie vnto such as at home were persecuted for the Truth. He fortified, and sent thence to Geneua, for assistance in this his holy intent: whereupon Richerius and Charterius, two Ministers (with diuers others, among whom was Iohn Lerius) were sent, and landed there in the yeere 1557. Lerius hath written his Obseruations of these parts, as Theuet also, another of Villagagnons Company, but (as Lerius testifieth) in many things falsly. The first Sauages that Lerius and his fellowes saw, were the Marguiates, which hold friendship with the Portugals, and are enemies to the French, and to the Touou Pinambaulsij or Tuppin Imbas, Confederates of the French, and as deadly enemies to the former. In the meane way they passed by the Tapemiry, Paraiba, Ouetacates, all which, howsoeuer they exercise hostilities, and mutuall disagreements, yet agree in like barbarous and rightlesse Rites. With the Touou  Pinambaulsij he conuersed familiarly about a yeere. They are in habit of bodie like the Europeans, but stronger, and lesse subiect to sicknesse, not subiect to our bodily distempers, by like intemperance, or vexation of mind, by turbulent and distracting passions of Couetousnesse, Enuie, ambition.
They are all naked, except sometimes: the Old men rather to hide their disease in those parts, then their shame, couer their priuities. They weare in their nether lip aGreat at one end, and little at the other: in their infancie it is a bone: and after a greene stone, in some as long as ones finger: they will thrust out their tongues at the hole, when the stone is remoued. Pyramidall stone, which brauerie weigheth downe their lip, and subiecteth the face to great deformitie. Some also not content with this, adde two others in their cheekes to like purpose. They presse downe the noses of their Infants to make them flat. They anoynt themselues with a kind of Gumme, which they couer with the downe of Feathers sticking thereto. They  weare also Frontlets of Feathers: in their eares they weare bones. They which will excell the rest in gallantry, and would seeme to haue slaine and eaten the most enemies, slash and cut their flesh, and put therein a blacke powder, which neuer will bee done away. They vse Rattles of the shell of a certaine fruit, in which they put stones or graines, and call them Maraca, of which they haue some superstitious conceit. The Women differ from the Men in nourishing their haire, which the Men shaue off before, and make not those holes in their lips; but in their eares weare Eare-rings of the forme and bignesse of a meane Candle. They paint also their faces with diuers colours, and weare Bracelets of little bones, of which the men weare Chaines or Collars. They would not weare clothes, pretending their custome of nakednesse, and often washing (sometimes ten times in a day) whereto clothes would bee a  hinderance: and our captiue women, further then the Whip forced them, would not accustome themselues to the apparell we gaue them. The women make two kinds of Meale of certaine Roots, which they vse in stead of Bread, which they doe not put, but hurle into their mouthes without losse. Their office is also to make their drinke of Rootes sliced, and chewed in their mouthes, and thus prepared, boyled, and stirred in a great pot ouer the fire: the like drinke they make of chewed Maiz, which they call Auats: the men would account it a disgrace to do these things, and that they would not taste so well. They call this drinke Caouin; it is thick, and tastes like Milke: I haue seene them continue (saith Lerius) drinking this liquor three dayes and nights together: they hold it a disparagement not to bee able to hold out at this Bacchanall exercise, which they celebrate with dancing and singing, especially  at their beastly Man-feasts: The women dance apart from the men. One of them reported to our Author, that they had taken a ship of the Peros, or Portugals, and eaten the men: they found therein great vessels, which they could not tell what it was, but drank so much thereof, that they slept three dayes after: it was likely that it was Spanish Wine. They eate Serpents and Toads (which with them are not venemous) and Lizards. Our Authour saw one Lizard as big as a man, with scales on her backe like Oysters. They haue a kind of Monkey called Sagouin, of the bignesse of a Squirrell, the fore-halfe in shape resembling a Lion: they haue another strange beast, called Coaty, as high as a Hare, with a little head, sharpe eares, and a snout or beake aboue a foot long, the mouth so little, that one can scarsely put in his little finger; it feedeth on Ants. They takeThe Brasilian Petum is neither in forme nor vertue, the same with Tobacco* as Lerius saith. The women take it not Petum (it is not Tobacco) not in Pipes, but put  foure or fiue leaues in another greater, and firing it, sucke in the smoke, and therewith in time of warre, will sustaine themselues three dayes together, without other sustinance. They weare this herbe about their neckes.

When Sir Francis Drake made his famous and fortunate Voyage about the World, in the South-Sea heNunbo de sylva, and their owne reports. Peter Carder. lost the rest of his company, the Elizabeth wherein M. Winter was (which returned into England) and a Pinnesse; wherein were seuen men, besides Peter Carder, the relater of this History. This Pinnesse being alone returned backe the Straits, and on the North side of the Riuer of Plate, sixe went on shore into the wood to seeke food, where threescore and ten Tapines shot at them, and wounded all, whereof two dyed soone after: foure were taken, their Pinnesse also being broken, onely Peter Carder and William Pitcher remained, which liued in an Iland two moneths, on a fruit somewhat like Orenges and Crabs, without any fresh-water: the want whereof forced them to drinke their owne Vrine, saued  in sherds for that purpose till the next morning. Wea^y of this life (which began to grow weary of them) they with a planke, and certaine boords, made shift in three dayes to set themselues ouer into the maine, three leagues distant, where meeting with fresh-water, this Pitcher was broken, and dyed within halfe an houre of ouer eager drinking; Carder encountred certaine Sauages called Tappaubasse, which led him away dancing, rattling, tabering. They slept on beds of white Cotton netting, tyed two foot from the ground, and a fire on each side, to preuent cold and wild beasts: the next day they marched twenty miles to their Towne, which was foure-square, with foure houses, euery house being two bow-shoot in length, made with small trees like Arbours, thatched to the ground with Palme-tree leaues, hauing no windowes, but thirty or forty doores on each side the square. Their chiefe Lord  was named Caion, about forty yeeres old; he had nine wiues, the rest but one, except the most valiant, which were permitted two, one for the house, another to goe with him to the warres. In this Towne were neere foure thousand persons. Hee found among them good entertainment for certaine moneths.
They vsed to goe to the Warres three or foure hundred in a company, with bowes and arrowes, and hauing ouercome, would bring home their captiues tyed by the arme to so many of their mens armes, and soone after would tye them to a poste, and with a club (after dancing and drinking) slit their heads. Their drinke is made of a root, chewed by women, and spit into a trough, where it stands two or three dayes, and hath a yest on it like Ale, and then is tunned into earthen jarres, wherewith they drinke themselues drunke. After  halfe a yeere, hauing learned the Language, he was requested to their Warres against the Ta^wees, and much bettered their martiall skill, teaching them to make an hundred Targets of tree-barke, and two hundred clubs, marking their owne company with red Balsam (of this they haue red, white, blacke, very odoriferous) and so marched seuen hundred together three dayes, to another foure-square Towne like (but lesse then) their owne. They knocked downe two hundred; tooke twenty; they broyled their carkasses, and after also the prisoners. How many men they kill, so many holed they make in their visage, beginning at the nether lippe, and so proceeding to the cheeke, eye-browes, and eares. Some Portugals came to search for him, two of which, and some Negros, were taken and eaten. Hee obtained leaue to goe to the Coast, hauing foure to prouide him victuals for nine or  ten weekes, and so came to Bahia de todos los Santos, where he yeelded himselfe to Michael Ionas, a Portugall, and arriued in England in Nouember 1586. nine yeeres after his setting forth.


@. III. Most ample Relations of the Brasilian Nations, and Customes by Master ANTHONY KNIVET.
 MAster Anthony Kniuet hath written a Treatise of what he had seene and suffered in Brasil; He was one of Master Candishes company in his vnfortunate voyage,Ant. Kniuet, kinsman to the Lord Kniuet. 1591. who after much misery sustained in the Magellan Straits, in their returne was set on shore at St Sebastians, where many of his company died with eating a kinde of blacke venemous Pease. Hee saw there a great beast come out of the Riuer, hauing on the backe great scales, vgly clawes, and a long tayle, which thrust out a tongue,Some say the Crocodile wanteth a tongue, which others den^, but confesse i^ is very sho^^. like a ^arping iron, but returned without harme. Hee found a dead Whale, which with long lying was couered with Mosse, on which hee yet liued a fortnight. His company were knocked on the head with firebrands, and he like to be eaten of the Sauages, but escaped this and many other miseries; and was saued by the Iesuites from being hanged by the Portugals. Where  his calamities compelled him, with another Indian in like predicament of slauerie, to escape by flying, swimming two miles ouer the Sea: and so they trauelled seuen and thirty dayes thorow a desart, meeting by the way (as he saith) Lyons, Leopards, huge Serpents.
 Some Indians they saw with feathers of diuers colours, fixed on their bodies and heads with oyle of Balsam, seeming as if they had bin so borne, not leauing a spot bare, but on their legs. The Sauages sell their children to the Portugals for toyes. Some of them were so haunted with a Spirit which they called Coropio (like that which Lerius his Sauages called AignanAignan.) that some of them dyed therewith in much amazement. Many complained that they were possessed with spirits, which they called Auasaly, and commanded themselues to bee bound hand and foot with bow-strings, desiring their friends to beat them with cords, wherewith they hang their beds; but most died notwithstanding. They haue wormes which creepe into their fundaments which consume their guts: for remedie whereof they take slices of Limons and greene pepper, and put therein with salt water.  
He in diuers expeditions for war and Merchandize with the Portugals, and escapes from them, trauelled thorow more of those Sauage nations, then perhaps any other before or since Out of whole obseruations bought at so deare a rate, I haue heere mustered these many wild people before thee, with such rarities as hee found amongst them.
The PetiuaresPetiuares. are not so barbarous as many other: they inhabite from Baya to Rio Grande, their bodies are carued with fine workes: in their lips is a hole made with a Roe-Bucks horne, which at mans estate they cut bigger with a Cane, and weare therein a greene stone; otherwise they esteeme a man no Gallant, but a Pesant. They haue no Religion: vse Polygamie: but the women are tied to one husband, except hee giue her publike leaue. When they goe to warre, the wiues carrie all the prouision. That wife whom hee giueth his hunted  prey, is his bed-fellow that night: and she goeth to the water, and washeth her selfe: after which she lyeth downe in the net, and commandeth all the rest to attend on her for that day. When they are in trauell, they goe to the doore, and being deliuered, the father lyeth downe and is visited, as before is said. No Indian will kill any female creature whiles his wife is with childe, thinking that would be the death of his childe. They trauell with great store of Tobacco, and haue continually a leafe thereof along the mouth betweene the lip and teeth, the rheume running out at the lip-hole. They war against the Portugals, and all others, eating all, and take so many new names, as prisoners. They thinke mans flesh makes them valiant, Their houses are two hundred yards long without partition: they hang their nets on beames: wash euery morning both men, women, and children: they  part their grounds. They haue Serpents amongst them with bodies like trees, which strike two fins out of their fore-quarters,See infra. that kill whatsoeuer: they call them d Iaboya. They haue foure legs and a taile (like an Aligator or Crocodile) which they hide when they lye in the woods for their prey. They haue Monkies as big as a water-dog, faced like a man, with long broad beards, which goe twentie together on a tree, and one of them will alway walke vp and downe with his hand on his beard, making a great noyse, the rest harkening still, an houres space.
The MaraquitesMaraquites. are betweene Fernambuc and Baya: other Indians call them Tapoyes, that is, wilde men, which name, all but these, and the Vaanasses, which are like them, account a d^sgrace. The men are of good stature, the women very proper, and fight with their bowes  as well as the men. They haue no dwelling, Religion, nor friendship with any Nation: yet he left them in peace with the Portugals. They haue holes in their lips, but carue not their bodies: vse Polygamie; are swift; neuer come into the field to fight, but keepe in the Mountaines: they eate mans flesh without ceremonies.
The TopimambazesTopimambazes. inhabite from R. de S. Franc. to Baya de todos Sanctos, they are, and speake like the Petowares, but the women are of better complexion. The men let their beards grow long.
From Baya to Eleoos are the Waymoores,Waymoores. men of great stature, and swift as a Horse: fiue or sixe of them will set on a Sugar-house with an hundred therein. I haue seene one (saith our Author) take a man aliue, and defend himselfe with this his prisoner, as it were with a Target.  They haue long haire; are without Townes or Houses, and care not where they come, presuming of their swiftnesse. They are greedie Man-eaters, and are alwaies foule with durt and dust, by lying on the ground and ashes. Iarric writes that they are without Gouernours euery one doing what seemes good in his owne eyes; only he is accounted most Noble, that hath slaine most enemies, with whom for any of them to speake, is punished with death. They roue vp and downe in vncertaine dwellings, and therefore cannot by warre be conquered. This wandring is common to many of these Brasilian Saluages.
The TomomymenosTomomymenos. dwell at Spirito Sancto: haue settled Townes, with great stones set about like pales, of a good height, and within walls of clay and stone: they make the sides of their houses with loope-holss to shoot out at. They deck their bodies with feathers, and  paint themselues blacke and red. One of these tooke the Portugall Captaine, Martin de Sa, and in spite of all his company, carried him a stones cast, and threw him into a Riuer, but hee
 was rescued by PetummyenThis name signifieth l^ng Tobacco, ^s he interpr^ts. Lerius otherwise. another Sauage. The Portugals tooke sixteene thousand, slew the tenth parf, and parted the rest, destroying the Count^y downe the Riuer Paraeyua.
The WaytaquazesWaytaquazes. dwell on the North and South sides of Cape Frio. They are of greater stature then the Waymoores: we took thirteene of them, and whiles we searched for more, they burnt their cords from their hands and fled. Their women warre with bowes and arrowes. They lye on the ground like Hogs, with a fire in the midst: hold no peace with any, but eate all they can get. Heere the mountaines were full of Crablice, which sticked so fast on their skins, that they were faine to take dry straw to singe themselues.
Abausanga-retamAbausan^a-retam. was Captaine of a kinde of Tamoyes, an hundred and twenty yeeres  old, which being taken, ranne amongst the enemies, where being shot in one and twenty places, he fell; then desired Baptisme, after which, within foure houres he died: his haughtie courage could not brooke captiuitie.
The WayanassesWayanass^s. keepe at Ila Grande: they are low, great bellied, cowards, not carued, glory not to eate mans flesh: the Women vgly, with bigge bodies, and are well faced, painted red with Vrucu, which growes in a cod like a Beane; the crownes of both Sexes are shauen like Friers, the rest of their haire long.
The TopinaquesTopinaques. haue their dwelling at Saint Vincents: are of good stature and complexion: the women painted with diuers colours; eate mans flesh; adore nothing; onely when they kill a man, paint themselues with a fruit called Ianipano, and with feathers on their  heads, great stones in their lips, Rattles in their hands, dance three dayes together, drinking a filthy liquor, whereto they said Tobacco made them fresh. Among them is great store of Gold in many hils by the Sea.
The PoriesPories: dwell an hundred miles within Land, are low like the Wayanasses, liue on Pine-nuts, and small Cocos as big as Apples, with shels like Wall-nuts, but harder; they call them Eyrires: they warre with none, eate not mans flesh if they haue other meat: lye in nets of barke, haue no houses, but two or three boughs tyed together, couered with Palme-leaues: for a knife or combe, they will giue fiue or sixe gallons of Balsame-oyle.
The MolopaquesMolapaques. inhabite heere the Riuer Paradiua, are like Dutchmen in bignesse, faire of complexion, bearded, ciuill, couer their priuities: their Towns circled with wals of earth  and great logges: haue a King called Moriuishann, which had thirteene wiues. They haue store of Gold, which they esteeme not, nor vse it but to tye on their fishing lines: this is in the Riuer Para, fourescore leagues beyond Paraeyua. They take none but what the rayne washeth from the Mountaines, which are of blacke earth without Trees. The Women are goodly and faire like English women, modest, neuer seene to laugh, and of good capacitie. They tye their haire about their middle with barke, and couer therewith their nakednesse: their haire also is of diuers colours: and they which want long haire, vse a furre to couer themselues. They eate mans flesh; obserue meales at noone and night (a thing rare in those parts) vse no Religion, so farre as our Author could see in nine or ten dayes of his abode with them: they are very cleanly.
 The MotayasMotayas. met them with dancing and singing: the women sate about them and wept, and then set forth their victuals: they laughed at them for refusing mans flesh: they are small people and browne, weare their haire in fashion as we in England, frizling it round about, and in other parts of the body, plucke it away with a shell.
The Lopos,Lopos. or Biheros, as the Portugals call them, liue in the Mountaines of Pine-apples: they saw no houses, but boughs tyed together with the pils of Trees: they would rob them of their goods, but not hurt their persons: heere they found many mines of Gold, and many rich stones: no part of America is richer, but it is farre within Land, and the Countrey populous, that neither Spaniard nor Portugall can inhabite there: they are browne and small, the women as shamelesse as beasts.
 The WayanawasonsWayanawasons. dwell in small Townes by the side of a Riuer, are the simplest of all other, would stand and gaze on vs like heards of Deere, without speaking word. They are bigge, tall, cleane made, lazie: heere sixteene of their company dyed with eating a certaine yellow plumme, as bigge as a Horse-plumme. The Rootes of Mandioca had almost killed them all, but by a piece of Vnicornes Horne they were preserued. From hence hee with twelue Portugals determined to trauell to the South-Sea by Land: they came to many mountaines where they found store of gold, and many precious stones, and had thought themselues in Peru: those stones they tooke vp one day, they cast away the next to take vp better. In this Countrey they trauelled two moneths, till they came to the great Mountaine of Crystall, for height seeming to tower vp it selfe in the clouds, and was impassable  for steepenesse: they saw it ten dayes before they came at it, and were not able when the Sun was aloft, to trauell against it for the glistering reflection. They passed alongst it twentie dayes before they could finde passage, and at last came to a Riuer which ranne vnder it.
 Then did they make them prouision of great Canes, three yards and a halfe broad, and sixe long, and killing good store of Tamandroes, rosted them: and thus prouided went into the vault, which made such a noise with the water, that it seemed to them an enchantment. They went in on a Munday morning, and came out againe on a morning, they knew not whether one or two dayes after.
The next Sauages they encountred were a kinde of Tamoyes,Tamoyes. which are as proper men as any in Europe, most of them faire, their heads set with feathers; the women tall, proper, slender in the waste, faire, fine-handed, comely faced, and brests carued. They esteeme of gold and gems, as we of stones in the streets. Here he liued eighteene moneths: but his twelue companions they slue and deuoured. Him they spared, because hee professed himselfe a Frenchman,  with whom they sometimes had commerce.
The TocomansTocomans. dwell betweene the Riuer of Plate and Saint Vincent. They are sandie, small, but not so little as they say of the Pigmees, and dwell in Caues.
The CariyoghsCariyoghs. for two or three Glasses and a Combe, with some Kniues, would giue the worth of foure or fiue thousand crownes in gold or stones. Their women are comely and faire, the men die their bodies blacke. These CarigijHieron. Rodericus. (so Rodericus cals them) dwell in handsome thatched houses, sixty foot long: euery house they call a Village. They haue no superiour; dwell in a barren soyle; are very fond of euery trifle and toy, and will trauell laden with their wares for such trade thirty leagues to the Portugals, and sometimes sell themselues slaues. If they take an enemy aliue, they commit him to the Boyes of ten yeeres old to bee  slaine; fiue or sixe of which smite out his braines with clubs. And this is a kind of Knighthood or Gentility vnto them; in signe whereof they cut the skinne from the Ankle to the Necke, and fast many dayes, and obserue a set Diet. They obserue charmes and sooth-sayings. If any dye without children, all his substance is buried with him.
The Tamoyes his last hosts, by his instructions (who was desirous to try if the Sea might yeeld him any succour) left theirThey had so done before, or else could not haue knowne the French. habitations, and 30000. of them aduentured themselues to seeke new. They came into the countrey of the Amazones, which the Indians call Mandiocusyams, but durst not warre against them: they tooke a towne of the Carijos, and ate three hundred of them: the rest fled to the Riuer of Plate, and obtained Portugall succour, who tooke these Tamoyes captiues, slue ten thousand, and shared 20000. amongst them for  slaues. And thus came he againe into his Portugall slauery, from which hee had made an escape once before, and trauelled nine moneths in the wildernesse: fiue or sixe yeeres he serued the Portugals, and liued a yeere and eleuen moneths with the Canibals.
He made another escape into Angola, and serued as a drudge in Mafangana, the sickliest Countrey vnder the Sunne, where the Portugals die like Chickens, gape for aire like the Camelions, liue close, take Physicke, euery weeke let bloud, obserue certaine diet and houres when to goe abroad. But his houre to goe abroad at liberty was not yet come. Backe he was sent to Brasile: and long it was before his longing could be satisfied to reuiew his Country and friends: some compassion of his passions, I think this tedious following him in this epitomised discourse of his disasters hath bred in you: wherein (as in the following also) are  many things strange, some seeming doubtfull, which if any reiect, let them not blame me, who had rather beleeue more then this, then to aduenture the search amongst those cruell Barbarians.


@. IIII. Of the strange Creatures in Brasile.
Friers Treatise of Brasil.NO man hath written so absolute a discourse of Brasile, as was that taken from a  Portugall Frier, and by Francis Cooke sold to Master Hakluyt. Out of him I could recite the names of other Brasilian Nations, Ararape, Apigapigtanga, Vintan, which he saith were by a Magician Priest of Portugall conueyed to Fernambuc) Tapuya is a generall name, of which he reckoneth threescore and sixteene seuerall Nations, most of them of sundry languages.
Guaymares or Waymores, as K. and as Stad. Wayganna.The Guaymares haue hard skins, and beat their children with thistles to harden them. They are swift and cruell, cut off the captiues flesh with Reeds, leauing nothing but the bones and guts, and disbowell women with childe, to eate the child roasted. The Camucuira haue paps reaching almost to the knees, which when they runne, they binde to their waste. The Curupetie eate not men, but carry the heads for shew.
The Winter begins in Brasile in March, and ends in August. The beasts of BrasilBe^sts of Brasil. he reckoneth  Deere; Elkes like vnto Kine or Mules, which diue and goe (but swimme not (vnder
 the water; Bores of two sorts, Conies, Pigs, Ounces, Foxes with bags to carry their yong vnder the belly. The Tatu or Armadilla, which digs as much as many men with Mattocks: the Conduacu or Porcupine of three sorts: the Hirara like Ciuet Cats, which eate honey: the Aquiqui, bearded Apes blacke, and sometimes one yellow, which they say is their King, hauing an Instrument from his gullet as bigge as a Duck-egge, wherewith he maketh a loud sound; so actiue, that they sometimes are said to catch an arrow with the hand, and redart it at the shooter; and so cunning, that they seeke a leafe, chew it, and put the same into their wounds. There are of them many kindes. The Cuati are like Badgers, they climbe trees; no snake, egge, or bird escapes him. There are others greater, as great Dogs, with Tusks, which  deuoure men and beasts. There are wilde Cats, which yeeld good Furre, and are very fierce: the lagoarucu; are Dogs of Brasile; the Tapati also barke like Dogs. The Iaguacinia is a kind of Foxe which feedeth on Sea-crabs and Sugar-canes. The Birataca, a kinde of Ferret of such stinking sauour, that some Indians haue died thereof: yea Dogges, which come neere, escape not: the sent endureth fifteene or twenty dayes in those things which he hath come neere to: and causeth some towne sometimes to bee disinhabited. This commeth of a ventositie, which it voideth and couereth in the earth, or casteth it out, being in danger to be taken: it feedeth on birds Eggs, and Amber. Ten or twelue kinds of Rats, all good meat. Other beasts are before mentioned.
Of SnakesSnakes. without venome, hee numbreth the Giboya, some of which are twenty foot  long, and wil swallow a Deere whole, crushing it with the winding of his taile, and bruising it with licking to that purpose. The Guiaranpiaquana eateth eggs, goeth faster on the trees, then any man can runne on the ground, with a motion like swimming. The Camoiama is all greene, and liueth on like food. The Boytiapua eate Frogs; the Indians strike this Serpent on womens hips as remedy to barrennesse. The Gaitiaepia smelleth so, that none can abide it: such is also the Boyuma: the Bam (so termed of his crie) is great and harmelesse; the Baicupeganga hath venemous prickles on his backe.
There are other venomous Snakes, as the Iararaca, of which are foure kinds, of musky sent,Master Kniuet. one ten spannes long, with great tuskes, which they hide and stretch out at pleasure. The Curucucu fifteene spannes long, which lyeth on a tree to hunt his prey. The Boycimiaga  which hath a bell in his tayle, so swift, that they call it the flying Snake; there are two kinds thereof. The Ibiracua causeth by his biting, the bloud to issue thorow all parts of the body, eyes, mouth, nose, eares, etc. The Ibiboca is the fairest, but of foulest venome amongst them all. The fields, woods, houses, beds, bootes, are subiect to the plenty of Snakes, which without helpe kill in foure and twenty houres. There are also many Scorpions, which ordinarily kill not, but cause extreme paine for foure and twenty houres space. Lizards couer the wals of houses, and holes are full of them. Their fundament-worms are very dangerous, which Sir Richard Hawkins saith he saw like a long Magot, greene, with a red head, creeping in, and glewing himselfe to the gut, where it groweth so great, that it stoppeth the passage, and killeth, with cruell Colicke torments.
 Master Kniuet speakes of one Serpent which he killed, thirteene spans long,Friers Treatise of Birds. with foure and twenty teeth, great shels about the necke, blacke and russet, like a collar, lesse on her bodie, and darke greene vnder her belly, all speckled with blacke and white, with foure sharpe feet, no longer then a mans finger, and a tongue like a harping iron. Her tayle like a strait bull-horne, blacke and white listed. If they finde fire, they beat themselues in it, till either the fire or themselues be extinguished. They vse from a tree to fall on their prey passing by, thrusting their tayle into the fundament. The Indians will not goe (vnder fiue or sixe) to set vpon one of them; this yet he killed with the helue of an axe.
Of Birds, there are Parrots innumerable, more then Starlings or Sparrows in Spaine:Fruits, Trees, and Herbs. the Guaminbig like Bees, which sleepe sixe moneths; the Tangara which haue the falling-sicknesse,  the rest dancing about that which is fallen, with a noise, from which they will not bee skarred till they haue done, etc.
Of Fruits, hee reckons the Iacapucaya, like a pot, as bigge as a great bowle, two fingers thicke, with a couer in it, within full of Chesnuts: being much eaten greene, it causeth all haire to fall off: Balsam trees pricked, excellent for cure and sent: Oyle-trees many; one as a Well or Riuer, growing in dry places where no water is: it hath holes in the branches as long as ones arme, full of water Winter and Summer, neuer running ouer, but alwayes at like stay: fiue hundred persons may come to the foot of it and drinke and wash their fill without want: the water is sauoury and cleere. There are hearbs which seeme to sleepe all night, and others which make shew of sence, as wee haue before obserued from  Master Harcourt in Guiana.
Of strange fishes in Brasil, he nameth the Oxe-fish,Oxe-fish. with eyes and eye-lids, two armes a cubit long, with two hands, fiue fingers and nayles, as in a man; and vnder the armes the female
 had two paps inwards like an Oxe: it cannot bee long vnder water: it hath no fins but the tayle, which is round and close, two stones neere the braine of great esteeme; the inwards of an Oxe, and taste like Porke.
Master T. Turner (who liued in Brasil, and was acquainted with Mr Kniuet) saith the I^suites told him the like.The Cucurijuba is a fresh-water Snake, fiue and twenty or thirty foot long (the Mamma is a greater kinde) toothed like a dogge, with a chaine striped along the backe very faire: It catcheth a Man, Cow, Stag, or any other prey, winding it with the tayle, and so swalloweth it whole: after which she lyes and rots, the Rauens and Crowes eating her all but the bones, to which after groweth new-flesh, by life deriued from the head, which is hidden all this while in the mire (which therefore they that finde, seeke and kill.) They will sleepe so being full, that they may cut off pieces (he tels an instance) from the tayle, and they not awaken.  They found one which was fifty spans or twelue yards and a halfe long, hauing two wilde Bores in the belly. Thus much of the creatures in Brasile. Let vs now take better view of their Warres, Religion, and other their Rites.



CHAP. V. Of the Customes and Rites of the Brasilians.  

@. I. Of their warres and man-eating, and of the Diuel, torturing them.
Lerius Nauig.THe Brasilians, for the most part as you haue seene, exercise irreconciliable hostilitie, not to enlarge their dominions, but onely to be reuenged for the death of their friends and Ancestors, slaine by their enemies. The Elder men, as they sit or lye in their hanging beds, will make an Oration of the vertue of  their Predecessors, and of their sustained wrongs, and so excite the yonger to take armes: These Orations last sometimes sixe houres. Their armes are clubs; or woodden swords, fiue or sixe foot long, and a foot broad, a finger thicke, and very sharpe. One of these men being throughly moued, would trouble two of our Fencers. Their bowes are as long as ours, the string made of the herbe Tocon, little, yet able to endure the strength of an horse: their arrowes an ell long, which they will shoot twice as fast, as our men; they haue leather shields; their elder men lead the rankes (if they may be so called, which haue none to marshall or order them) and with great shouts, and shewing the enemies the bones of their slaine friends, they enter into a fierce battell. Their captiues they conuey in the middest of their armie home to their Territories, vnto whom the men will  not sticke to giue their Sisters or Daughters, to performe all the duties of a Wife, and feed them with the best, till they redemand the same out of their flesh: the men are employed (if it be long before the slaughter) in hunting, fowling, fishing; the women in gardening, or gathering Oysters. When that dismall day approacheth, knowledge is giuen, and the men, women, and children assemble to the place appointed, and there passe the morning in drinking; and the captiue although he knoweth the dreadfull issue) danceth, drinketh, and frolicks it with the best. After sixe or seuen houres thus spent, two or three of the strongest fasten a rope about his middle, leauing his armes at liberty, and so lead him vp and down the Village in triumph. Neither doth he for all this hang down his head, as men heere going to be hanged, but with incredible courage emblazoneth his own worthinesse. Thus, thus, saith  he, haue I sometimes bound your kindred, and thy father, saith he to one, haue I deuoured, and thy brethren (to another) haue I boucaned and eaten: and what innumerable numbers of you Touau Pinambausij haue these hands taken, this throat swallowed? Neither will the Margaiates suffer this my death vnreuenged. Then they bring him stones, and bid him reuenge his death. He hurleth them at those which stand about him, whereof there are some foure thousand, and hurteth diuers: I saw one (saith our Author) whose legge I had thought had beene broken by the violence of one of those blowes. After this comes one, which all this while had bin hidden, with theThis club they call Iwara Pernem, which is consecrated to this mischiefe by certaine ceremonies of singing and painting. fatall club; and, Art thou not one of the Margaiates? saith he: and hast thou not deuoured our kindred? the other answereth, O how lustily I haue done it, how prompt haue I been in taking them, how greedy in eating? And therefore, replyeth  the other, shalt thou be killed and rosted on the Boucan. What then? saith he, my death shall not beeThis confidence is as well in the women as in the men. vnreuenged. The club ends their Dialogue, with one blow striking him dead.
 His wife (if he had any, as they sometimes vse to bestow on their Captiues) comes to the carkasse, and spends a little time and passion in mourning, but her Crocodiles teares are soone dried, and the humour fals into her teeth, which water for the first morsell. The other women, especially the elder (which are most cruell and greedie) bring hot water and wash the body, and rub it till it looke like the skin of a Pigge: then comes the Master of the Feast, which owed the Captiue, and cuts it out as readily, as any Butcher with vs can doe a Weather. They daube the childrenIo. Stad. lib. 2. cap. 29. with the bloud: foure women carrie about the armes and legs for a shew, with shouts and cries: The trunke is diuided into two parts, the vpper part being cut and separated from the lower: the inwards are left to the women, which seethe  and make the broth of them called Mingau, which they sup vp, with their children: they eate also the flesh about the head. The braine, tongue, and that wh^ch within the head may serue for meate, is the childrens share. The Author of the Feast hath a new name added to the former (for they haue so many names as they haue slaine Captiues, the chiefe of ^he Cottage branding him on the arme, with an honourable ma^ke for the memory the^eof) and all that day he must spend in quiet. The WaygannaStad. l. 2. c. 3. are a kind of Brasilians, which hold confederacie with no other Nation, but kill all which come to their hands, and that so cruelly, that they will cut off their armes and legges while they are aliue. These liue in the Mountaines. They cut them with stones, and those which haue trade with the Christians, vse Kniues.
 Their Boucan is a Grediron of foure cratches, set in the ground, a yard high, and as much asunder, with billets laid thereon, and other stickes on them grate-wise. On this they rost the flesh, putting fire vnder, all the people standing about the same, and euery one gets a little piece of him. But me thinkes I see horror expressed in the countenance of him that reades this, and euery one wearie of viewing this Tragedie, loathing this inhumane feasting with humane flesh.
I will therefore leaue their shambles, and (which better beseemes a Pilgrime) will visit their holies and holy places. But alas, where or what are they? M^ffaeus hath alreadie told vs, that they obserue no Gods; and Lerius confirmes the same, yet sheweth that they acknowledge a Deuill, whom they call Aygnan: not that they worship him, but are tormented  by him. Euen in speaking of him,Ler. c. 16. they tremble, and the remembrance breedes a compassionate amazement in the hearer, an amazed passion in the speaker, while he applaudes our happinesse free from such tyrannie, and deplores his owne miserie. Hee sometimes in the forme of a beast, sometimes in forme of a Bird, and otherwhiles deformed in some monstrous shape, doth grieuously torment them. Euen whiles the Christians were in conference with them, they would pitiously cry out, Hei, Hei, helpe, Aygnan vexeth me. Nor could this bee counterfeit in the iudgement of any that conuersed with them. They beleeue the immortalitie of the soule, and t^at the soules of the vertuous, that is (in their sense) of such as haue killed and eaten many enemies, shall flie beyond the highest Mountaines, and be gathered to the soules of their Progenitors, and there liue in pleasant Gardens, and perpetuall dancings and  delicacies. The cowardly Ghosts shall be carried vnto torment, by Aygnan, without end. They haue no name, whereby to signifie God vnto them, but wondered to heare what the Frenchmen told of the Creator of Heauen and Earth. And because they are afraid of Thunder, which they call Toupan, they told them that God was Author thereof:Theuet tels otherwise of Toupan, as after followes. the foolish Indians reply, that he was then naught which would make them afraid. But the feare of Aygnan made them sometimes flexible to embrace the Christian Religion, hearing that this Deuill was inferiour to the Christians God. So that euen in these (the most degenerate of all, which I haue obserued in this long and tedious Pilgrimage) there is some sparke left of Religion,  euen in the acknowledgement of a Deuill, and of eternall rewards and punishments.


@. II. Of their Priests or Magicians.
THis is further confirmed by that which is written of certaine Magicians or Priests amongst them: which perswade the people that they haue dealings with Spirits, that by their meanes they haue their Roots and sustinance, and may by them haue fortitude. I (saith Lerius) was present at one of their Assemblies, where sixe hundred were gathered together, which diuided themselues into three parts: the men went into one  house, the women into a second, the children into a third. The Cariabes forbade the women and children to depart their houses, but to attend diligently to singing; and we (saith he) were commanded to abide with the women. Anon the men in one house fell to singing, He, He,
 He, answered by the women in the other with the same. They howled it out for a quarter of an houre, shaking their brests, and foming at the mouth, and (as if they had had the falling sicknesse) some falling downe in a swoune, the Deuill in seeming entring into them. The children also followed in the same harsh deuotions. After this, the men sung pleasantly, which caused me to goe thither, where I found them singing and dancing in three seuerall Rings, in the middest of each, three or foure Caraibes, adorned with Hats and Garments of Feathers euery one hauing a Maraca, or Rattle, in both his hands. These Rattles are made of a fruit bigger then an Ostriches Egge, out of which they said, that the Spirit would speake, and they continually shooke them, for the due consecration. These Caraibes danced to and fro, and blowed the smoke of Petum on the standers by, saying, Receiue yee all the Spirit of  Fortitude, whereby yee may ouercome your Enemies. This they did often: the solemnitie continued two houres, the men ignorant of Musicke, and yet rauishing my spirit with the delight I conceiued in their Song. Their words sounded this, that they were grieued for the losse of their Progenitors, but were comforted in the hope, that they should one day visit them beyond the Hils; and then threatned the OuetacatesLer. c. 5. (which dwell not far from them, and are at enmitie with all their Neighbours, as swift as Harts, wearing their haire to the buttockes, eating raw flesh, and differing from all others in Rites and Language) and now prophesied their destruction at hand. Somewhat also they added in their Song of the floud, that once had drowned all the World, but their Ancestors, which escaped by climbing high trees. That day they feasted with great cheere.  
This solemnitie is celebrated euery third yeere; and then the Caraibes appoint in euery Family three or foure Maraca, to bee adorned with the best Feathers, and sticked in the ground, with meate and drinke set before them; and the people beleeue they eate it. They minister vnto their Maraca fifteene dayes; after which, in a superstitious conceit, they think that a Spirit speakes to them while they rattle their Maraca. They were exceedingly offended, if any tooke away any of this Prouision, as the French sometimes did; for which, and denying other the Caraibes lyes, those Priests hated them exceedingly. Yet doe they not adore their Maraca, or any thing else. Peter CarderPet. Carder. saith, he could obserue no Religion amongst them, but the worship of the Moone; specially the New Moone, whereat they reioyced, leaping, singing, and clapping of hands.
StadiusStad. l. 2. c. 23. tels (as you heard) that they ascribed his taking to the prediction of Maraca.  Hee tels of their consecration, that theLerius saith, That the Caraibes and the Paygi are two kinds: Theuet but one, and Stadius mentions no m^re but the Paygi. Paygi (so hee cals them) enioyne that euery one should carry their Tamaraka to the house, where they should receiue the faculty of speech. Euery ones Rattle is pitched in the ground by the steele or stalke, and all of them offer to the Wizard which hath the chiefe place, Arrowes, Feathers, and Eare-rings; he that breathes Petum on euery Rattle, puts it to his mouth, shakes it, and saith, Nec Kora, that is, Speake if thou be within: anon followeth a squeaking voyce, which I, saith Stadius, thought the Wizard did, but the people ascribed it to the Tamaraka. Then those Wizards perswade them to make warres, saying, that those spirits long to feed on the flesh of Captiues. This done, euery one takes his Rattle, and builds vp a Roome for it, to keepe it in, where he sets victuals, requireth and asketh all necessaries thereof, as we doe of God: and these, as Stadius affirmeth,  are their Gods. These Paygi doe initiate Women vnto Witchcraft by such Ceremonies of smoke, dancing, etc. till shee fall as in the Falling sicknesse, and then hee sayth, hee will reuiue her, and make her able to foretell things to come: and therefore when they goe to the Warre, they will consult with these Women, which pretend conference with Spirits.
Andrew TheuetA. Theuet. Antarct. (which was in this Antarctike France with Villagagnon) agreeth in many of the former Reports: he addeth, that for feare of Aignan they will not goe out, but they will carry fire with them, which they thinke forceable against him.
He writes that they acknowledge a Prophet called Toupan, which they say makes it thunder  and raine, but they assigne no time nor place to his worship. They tell of a Prophet, which taught them to plant their Hetich or Root which they cut in pieces and plant in the Earth, and is their chiefe food; of which they haue two kinds. The first Discouerers they much honoured as Caraibes or Prophets, and as much haue distasted the Christians since, calling them Mahira, the name of an ancient Prophet, detested by them. But Toupan (they say) goeth about, and reuealeth secrets to their Caraibes. Theuet addes, that they obserue Dreames; and their Payges, or Caraibes professe the interpretation of them; which are also esteemed as Witches, which conferre with Spirits, and vse to hurt others with the poyson called Ahouay, a kind of Nut. They doe a kind of worship to these Payages, and will pray them that they may not bee sicke; and will kill them, if they promise falsly. In their consultations,  they will prouide a new lodging for the Wizard, with a cleane white bed, and store of Cahouin (which is their ordinary drinke, made by a Virgin of ten or twelue yeeres
 old) and of their Root-food: into the which they conuey him, being before washed, and hauing abstained nine dayes from his Wife. Then doth he lye on that Bed, and inuocate,M. Kniuet told me that one of them being tormented by the Spirit, hee hea^d one of these Payges which spake to him and told him this was contr^ry to his couenant thus to to^ment them (which death vsually followed) and if he so co^tinued, they would all goe the White men and become Christians. Whereupon the Deuill left that body presently, and he recouered. none being with him in the House, and rayseth his Spirit, called Hauioulsira; which sometimes, as some Christians affirmed to our Authour, appeareth so, as all the people may heare, though they see him not. And then they question him of their successe in their enterprises. They beleeue the soules Immortality, which they call Cherepiconare, with rewards to the valiant Man-eaters, in goodly Paradises, and Agnans punish^^nts to others. But his boldnesse makes me the lesse bold in following him in these and other things; which I know not with what authoritie hee auerreth against the former witnesses, whereas Theuet, sometimes taken in  lying, deserueth lesse credit in the rest. When there is any tempest in the water, hee saith hey attribute it to the soules of their Progenitors, and cast something into the water to appease it.
They haue a Tradition, That one, in habite like to the Christians, had long since told their Progenitors of Diuine matters, but with so little effect, as he forsooke them; and euer since had those bloudy Warres continued amongst them. How little the Iesuites can preuayle, in bringing the Brasilians to Christianitie, MaffaeusMaff. l. 15. Pierre du Iarric l. 3. ac. 22. ad finem. hath written somewhat, and Pierre du Iarric, a Iesuite, very largely; which is not so pertinent to our present purpose.
Master Kniuet (to whose Relations our former Chapter is so much indebted) telleth of a  Rocke in Brasill called Etooca, with an entrance like a doore, where the Indians say (it is like they borrowed it of some fabulous Frier) that Saint Thomas preached. It is within like a great Hall: hard by it is a stone as bigge as foure Canoes, supported by foure stones like stickes, little bigger then a mans finger. The Indians say it had beene wood, and by Miracle was thus altered. They shew vpon great Rockes many foot-prints of one bignesse; and tell that the Saint called the fishes of the Sea, and they heard him preach. This smels of a Franciscan Cowle.
The Portugall Friers TreatiseFriers treatise. mentioned in the former Chapter deliuereth many things worthy our obseruation: They haue some Tradition of the floud, in which they say all were drowned, one only escaping on a Ianipata with a Sister of his, which was with childe, from  whom they had their beginning. They haue no knowledge of the Creator, nor of paine and glory after this life, and therefore vse no Ceremonies of worship. Yet doe they acknowledge that they haue soules which die not, but are conuerted into Deuils, and goe into certaine fields where grow many Figge-trees alongst the bankes of a goodly Riuer, and there dance. They are greatly afraid of the Deuill (whom they call Curupira,Sup. c. 4. Taguain, Pigtanga, Matichera, Auchanga) insomuch that often they haue dyed with the imagination of him. Yet doe not they worship it, nor any other creature or Idoll; onely some old men say, that in some wayes they haue certaine posts, where they offer him some things for feare, and because they would not dye. Sometimes (but seldome) the Deuill appeares to them, and some few among them are possessed. There are Witches which vse Witchcrafts, rather for  health then deuotion. Some Witches are called Carayba, or holinesse, but (like his holinesse of Rome) are of bad life: these would seeme to do strange things, raysing some to life which had fained themselues dead: they are their Oracles for their husbandry and other affaires: sometimes causing them to dye for hunger, whiles they promise to make the Mattockes worke alone.


@. III.  Of other their Rites, and a new Mungrell Sect amongst them.
THey haue no proper name for God, but say Tupan is the Thunder and Lightning, which gaue them Mattockes and food. Their Mariages are diuorced vpon any quarrell. In times past (they tell) no young man married before he slue an Enemie, nor the woman before she had her termes, which time was therefore festiuall. At Marriages also they vsed great Drinkings, and the Feast ended, they were laid in a cleane Net, after which the Father tooke a wedge of stone, and did cut vpon a stake or post, which (they say) was to cut the tailes from the grand children, who were for this cause borne without them. After  they were married they began to drinke; (for till then their Fathers brought them vp in sobrietie of dyet and modesty of speech) and then with a vessell the old men gaue him the firstTheir strong drinke. Wine, holding his head with their hands for feare of vomiting, which, if it happened, was
 a signe he would not be valiant. They eate at all times in the night and day, and keepe no meate long, being no niggards of their store (this name were the greatest disgrace you could offer them) and count it an honour to be liberall. They are patient of hunger and thirst: will eate Snakes,Feasts. Toads, Rats, and all fruits which are not poyson: drinke not ordinarily whiles they eate, but after meate will drinke drunke. They haue some particular Festiuals, in which two or three dayes together they eate not, but drinke, and goe about singing, calling all to the like fellowship: sleepe not, haue their Musickes, and sometimes fall to quarrels. They wash not before meate; they eate sitting, or lying in their beds, or on the ground. They goe to bed betimes, and rise not early. In the morning one chiefe man makes an OrationOrations. to them lying in his Net, which continueth the space of an houre, about labouring as their forefathers  did, with the substance and circumstances thereof. When he is vp, hee continueth his preaching, running through the Towne. This custome they borrowed of a bird, which singeth euery morning, by them called the King and Lord of birds. When a man speakes with a woman, he turnes his backe to her. They shaue their haire with a halfe Moone before, which they say they learned of Saint Thomas. Being angry, they let their haire grow: women, when they mourne, or when their Husbands goe a farre iourney, cut their haire. They go naked: and when any weare apparell, it is for fashion rather then honesty, as on the head, or no further then the nauell. Some houses haue fiftie, threescore, or threescore and tenne Roomes, and some are without partition: ordinarily in one House they are of a Kindred, and one is principall.  
In Child-birth,Child-births. the Father or some other (whom they take for their Gossip) takes it vp, and cuts the Nauell-string with teeth, or two stones, and fasts till it fals off, and then makes drinkings. The women presently after trauell wash themselues in their Riuers: giue sucke a yeere and halfe, without any other thing to eate; carrying the child on her backe in a Net to the place of her labour: they rocke them on the palmes of their hands. They neuer strike their wines except in times of drinking, and sometimes will be willing to take this opportunitie. Their children play without scurrilitie or quarrels imitating the voyces of Birds and the like. They will spare a Captiue that is a good Singer.
Funerals.When one dyeth, they of that Kindred cast themselues vpon him in the Net, sometimes choking him before he be dead: and those which cannot cast themselues on the bed, fall on the ground, with such knockes, that it seemeth strange, they dye not also for company: and  sometimes they proue so feeble that they dye likewise. If the party dye in the Euening, they weepe all night with a high voyce, calling their Neighbours and Kindred to societie of their griefe. If it be one of the principall, all the Towne meets to mourne together, and they curse with plagues those which lament not, prophecying that they shall not bee mourned for. They wash and paint the dead curiously, and then couer him ouer with Cotton yarne, and put him in a great vessell vnder the Earth, that no Earth may come to him, and couering this vessell with the Earth, make him a House, where euery day they carry him meate. For when he is wearied with dancing, say they, hee comes thither to eate. Thus for a certaine time they goe to bewaile him euery day. With him they bury all his Iewels; if any had giuen him a Sword or other thing, now he challengeth his gift againe. The Mourn^rs eat  not but by night. This mourning lasteth a Moone, after which they make Drinkings: but many after this will forbeare them.
They rule themselues by the Sunne, and goe two or three hundred leagues thorow the Woods: no Horse will hold out with them: they feare no Sea, being able to continue a night and a day swimming. When they returne from victory, their women receiue them with shouts, and buffeting themselues on the mouth. The Keeper appointed to the Captiue, is one giuen him to be as his Wife for bed and boord. Some of these are so resolute, that they will not be ransomed, saying, it is a wretched thing to dye and to stinke and be eaten of Wormes. Sometimes their Keeper will run away with them.
When they kill a Captiue at their Feasts, if hee fall on his backe, it is an ominous signe  that the killer shall dye, which presages they obserue in other circumstances. The taker hath a new name, as a title of dignitie added to him, and must be content to fill his fancie with this new Gentility,Gentilities. for nothing is left him to fill his belly, euery one taking from him that which he hath. He stands all that day on certaine logges of the Tree Pilan, with strange silence: he is presented with the head of the dead, the eyes pulled out, his pulses annointed with the strings and sinewes, and cutting off the mouth whole, they put it in manner of a Bracelet about his arme. Thus lyeth he downe in his Net, fearing if all Rites be not accomplished, that the soule of the dead will kill him. Within few dayes after they giue him the habit, razing his skin with the tooth of a Cutia, in forme of some worke, putting thereon Cole and juyce of Broome-rape, he lying still certaine dayes in silence, hauing water, meale,  and fruits set neere him. After this, they make a great Feast, and then may hee lay aside his
 mourning, and cut his haire; and thence forwards may kill any without any painfull ceremonie. Abaetes, Marnbixaba, Moczacara, are names of Gentilitie amongst them.
The Fryers haue obtained some good liking with the Brasilians, for teaching their children to write, reade, and cipher: the Iesuits will be of esteeme euery where: yet two and fifty of them sayling from Lisbon to Brasil, Anno 1570. by Frenchmen atVid. Epist. 2. Diazij and Henrici. Sea were taken and slaine.
InLer c. 17. Marriages they abstaine (sayth Lerius) onely from Mother, Sister, and Daughter: they obserue no Ma^riage-ceremonies, but vpon consent of her friends and her owne, take her home. It is a credit to haue many wiues, amongst whom is no Leah to enuie Rachels  greater portion of loue: the Husband may kill the Adulteresse; but for their vnmarried Maydens they are not scrupulous. Our Author hearing a woman cry in the night, thought shee had beene in some danger of deuouring by a wild beast, but found her Husband playing the homely Midwife to her in her trauell, byting the nauel-string, and pressing downe the nose. The Father washeth and painteth him. They vse to put to their male-infants little Bowes and Arrowes into one end of the bed, and herbs at the other, which are the Enemies his Son must be supposed to kill, and eate; chatting out their hope of the childes valour, in being auenged when he shall be a man, vpon his Enemies. They name their children at aduenture, by the name of a Beast, Bird, or otherwise, as this Child was called Orapacon, that is, Bow and Arrowes. The men are modest, in accompanying with their Wiues secretly. The women  haue not the ordinary feminine sicknesse. Lerius thinkes, that humour was diuerted in their youth, seeing the Mothers cut their Daughters side downe to the thigh, at twelue yeeres of age. But twice while he was there, did he see any in priuate brawling, or contention: if such happens, as they began, so they are suffered to end it: if any hurt or kill other, he sustayneth the like in his owne person, inflicted by the Kindred of the party wronged. They haue their proper pieces of ground, which they husband with their Rootes and Mais. When they entertayne a Stranger, the Moussacat, or Good-man seemes to neglect him a while, and the guest sits him downe silent on the bed, the women sit by on the ground, and hold their hands before their eyes, weeping, with many prayses, that hee is a good man, a valiant man, that (if he be a Christian) he hath brought them fine Wares. The Stranger must  endeuour, in some measure, to imitate the like weeping gesture. The Moussacat is all this while whitling his Arrow, not seeming to see his new Guest, till anon he comes. And are you come, sayth hee? How doe you? with many termes of his best Rhetoricke: and then askes, if he be hungry; and if he be, sets his cheere before him on the ground: which kindnesse is repayed with Glasses, Combes, or the like. They are very kind, both to their owne, and to such Strangers as they are enleagued with. They would carry burthen, or man, for the space of some miles, when they needed: their loue and hatred are in like extremes; the one to their owne, the other to their Enemies. They haue Physicians called Pages. They vse much mourning at the death of any, and making a round pit, bury him vpright therein, sixe houres after his death, with that wealth they had. In their Villages liue some six hundred  persons: they remoue their Villages often, which yet carry the same name. StadiusStad. l. 2. c. 5. Carder speakes of more, which (as in ours) might well happen, some Townes greater, some lesser. sayth, there are few Villages of aboue seuen Houses, but those Houses are a hundred and fifty foot long, and two fathoms high, without diuision into plurality of Roomes; and therein liue many Families, all of one Kindred.
What our Countrimen haue done on this Coast, I referre the Reader to Master Hakluyts Discoueries. The IesuitsP. Iarric. l. 3. and 5. first came into these parts, Anno 1549. which whiles they sought to reduce the Brasilians from their Man-eating Feasts, had like to haue kindled a dangerous contention betwixt them and the Portugals: whereupon the Iesuits sought to bee permitted to speake with them whom they kept for the Boucan instructing and baptizing them; but then also they complained, the flesh was distastfull (they said) vnto them; so that the Iesuits  being forbidden that, by stealth with a wet cloth, following them to execution, would performe a kind of Baptisme: and that also being espyed was prohibited. Since which, by schooling their children, teaching them to reade and write, they haue most (though not much) preuayled with these Barbarians.
Somewhat (as themselues write) they haue beene hindred in their Brasilian Conuersions, by the peruersenesse of some couetous Portugals, who sometimes vnder colour of peace, would betray these silly soules, and seize on them to cruell slauery, sometimes would counterfeit Iesuiticall habits, and vnder pretence of Religion, perswading them to goe with them, haue betrayed Religion and Them together; sometimes would vnder-hand, and closely threatten seruitude to all such as beleeued the Iesuits, with all promises of kindnesse to such  as would follow them, which in effect proued, to the Mynes, or other offices of slauish ^rudgery; and sometimes by hostile violence haue seized on such as the Iesuit; haue conuerted,Hieronimus Rodericus. and made slaues of them. Most strange is that which they write of certaine Brasilians, within
 the Land, which eyther hauing seene the Religious Rites of the Portugals, or instructed therein by some Fugitiues or Apostata's, had set vp a new Sect of Christian Ethnicisme, or Mungrell-Christianity. This was about Anno 1583. They chuse one Supreme in their vnholy Holies, whom also they call Pope; other inferiour Prelates they call Bishops: These ordayne their Priests, which obserue in an Apish imitation their Confession, Absolution; Beads to number their Prayers, great Gourds or Rattles in stead of Bels, to assemble them together; Free-schooles for instruction of youth; Bookes of Barke, bound in wood, and strange Characters therein written; a kinde of Baptisme also, but wanting the essentiall words and forme; all the Men they name Iesus, the Women, Marie: the Crosse they haue, but without veneration; their Priests vow Continence. They conceiue a state of perfection  in drinking the juyce of the herbe Petine, till they fall downe distracted, as in the Falling-sicknesse, quaking, and stretching out their limbes with terrible gestures, the Deuill speaking from within them, their mouthes not open, nor their lips moued: after they haue thus continued a while, they returne to themselues, and are washed all ouer their bodies; he is iudged the most sanctified Wight, that hath expressed most extaticall gestures. The most transcendent degree of perfection they ascribe to the muttering of certayne words ouer them by an Inchanter. They say, that their Ancestors, long since dead, will returne by shipping, and deliuer them from the Portugals, which all shall be slaine by them; and if any shall escape, they shall be turned into fishes or beasts. Those of this faith shall inherit Heauen, and all the v^beleeuers shall be deuoured of Birds or Beasts. In the yeere 1602. a Iesuite was sent amongst  these Sectaries; where their Great Father, or Pope, came to meete him, attended with many weaponed men, and Archers. He began a Song which the other Brasilians vnderstood not, and when he had sung one Verse, the rest (as with vs in the Quire) answered. Then did this Holy Father Catechize, or instruct them, with many idle words, often mixing and repeating Sancta Maria Tupama Remireco, that is, Saint Mary the Wife of God, etc. Kneeling, he lifted vp his eyes and hands to Heauen, after the fashion of the Priests at Masse. Hee and the Iesuite imbraced each other; and then hee told the Iesuite that hee liued in the Woods, as one that would not bee seene of Men. The next night hee caused a youth to bee hanged that had beene familiar with the Iesuite. A conference was appointed betwixt him and the Iesuite, where after much boasting of his sa^ctitie, the Iesuite interrupted him, and  told him, he came to teach him the way to Heauen; but the other soone after conueyed himselfe away, and came no more.



CHAP VI. Of the Countries from the Riuer of Plate to the Magellane Straits.  

@. I. The Nations inhabiting neere the Riuer.
THis Riuer we haue already mentioned; the IndiansBotero. call it Parana: and Iohn Dias de Solis discouering the same in the yeere 1512. for some shew it seemed to haue of that Metall, called it the Riuer of Plata, or Siluer. It is forty leagues wide in the entrance, and preuayleth so farre against the Oceans sa^tnesse,  that the taste of the fresh water sooner discernes his waters, then the eye can see his bankes. It ouerfloweth the Countrey; as Nilus in Egypt, and Orenoque, Marannon, with the other great Riuers in America. It ebbeth and floweth a hundred miles vp the streame.Sebastian Cabot may rather be called the first discouerer Dias, whom some call the first Discouerer, was, with fifty of his companions, there slaine and eaten. But hee which hath most fully discouered the Nations that dwell neere this Riuer, is HuldericusAdmiranda Nauig. H. S. Schmidel; who sayled thither in the yeere 1534. and continued in those parts almost twenty yeeres. He sayled thither with PeterHerera tels of one of that name taken out of his bed by a Tygre, and deuoured in a Caue. Mendoza, who carried with him fiue and twenty hundred men, to discouer, conquer, and inhabit those Regions.
They built the Citie Buenas Aeres, so called of the wholsome Aire, neere to an Indian  Towne, named Carendies of three thousand Inhabitants; if that may bee called a Towne, whose Inhabitants stay not long in one place. They will drinke the bloud of the beasts
 they kill, for thirst. The Spaniards destroyed them, whose parts famine seemed to take against that cruell people, which with inuisible Darts so pierced their entrailes, that vile and venemous creatures were applyed to the curing of their wounded stomackes: and when such Medicines failed, three of them stole a horse,These horses so multiplyed in these parts, that now they are dispersed in wild troops, and they will hunt and kill them for the Hides, and which is a great commoditie in Angola) for the tayles. minding to flee from famine on that dead beast but were therefore horsed on a Gibbet; where three others, that by this example were terrified from Horse-flesh, aduentured vpon these carkasses, cutting thence large gobbets, to pay that cruellest Tyrant, and greediest Exactor, Hunger, his Tribute. Another, whose Brother dyed, buried him in his owne body: halfe their company were consumed with this plague.
 The Indians of Carendies, Bartennis, Zeechuruas, and Tiembus, taking this aduantage, assayled their Towne of Good Aires, turning it into good fires, by shooting Arrowes, fired at the end, thereinto. They after passed vp the Riuer, and came to Tiembus, where the men are tall and great, their women alway deformed, with scratched and bloudy faces. The Tiembus could make fiue thousand men. Of the Spaniards were not left fiue hundred in a small time; and Mendoza dyeth, returning homewards. The Curenda, the next people, are like the Tiembus. The Macuerendas liue onely on fish, and a little flesh. There they killed a Serpent fiue and twenty foot long, and as bigge as a man. The Saluaisco goe starke naked, and liue onely on fish, flesh, and honey. The Curemagbas are of huge stature: the men bore a hole in their nose, in which they weare a Parrots feather. The women paint their faces with indeleble  lines. The Carios Countrie is large, neere to the Brasilians in Rites and Site. They goe naked: they will sell; the father, his daughter; the husband, his wife; the brother his sister. The price of a woman is a Hatchet, Knife, or such like. They fat such as they take in their warres, and then deuoure them with great solemnitie. The Lampere made neere vnto their Towne, Pits, with sharpe stakes set vp in them, couered with stickes and earth: these they made for the Spaniards, but in a confused flight fell therein themselues. Here the Spaniards built the Towne of Assumption, which Herera saith, hath foure hundred Spanish housholds, and three thousand Mestizas. The King of the Scherues, attended with twelue thousand men, met the Spaniards, and gaue them friendly entertainment, with dancing, musick, and feasting. The women goe naked, and paint themselues as artificially as any of our Painters  could doe: they weare Carpets of Cotton, with the figures of Indian beasts.
The King asked the Spaniards, What they sought? who answered, Siluer and Gold. He then gaue them a siluer Crowne, which hee said he had taken in the warres, which hee had waged with the Amazones, that dwelt two moneths iourney thence. Of these Amazones the Indians told the same things that Orellana told of, neere that Riuer, which hath receiued name of this supposition.
The Spaniards with some of the Scherues for their Guides, set forth for this Amazonian Discouery, but were encountred by the way with hote waters, in which they waded vp to the waste, and so continued diuers dayes, till they came to a Nation called Orthuesen, who were then infected with a Pestilence, caused by famine; which famine the Grashoppers had  effected, two yeeres together, eating vp all the fruits which nature or husbandry had prouided for their sustinance.
Thus these Martiall and Venerean warres of the Spaniards, wanted food to hold out further toward the Amazons, if there were any such people, and that they were not, as before I said, the warre-like Wiues, or haply some gallant Viragoes, that by themselues would let the World see what women could doe: but yet I cannot subscribe to the rest of their storie.
But I am wearie of leading you any further in this Discouerie of this great Riuer and the neere Inhabitants, seeing little is obserued in our Authour of their Religions. Some of these barbarous Nations, he sayth, hanged vp the hairie skin of their slaine Enemies in their Temples or Houses of deuotion: this people is called Iepori. To giue you a Catalogue of the names  of the Indian Nations that inhabited these parts, would be but tedious. These Iournies of the Spaniards were to see what Gold, and not what Gods, the Indians had. They passed vp through the Land into Peru.
Betweene PeruBotero. and these more Easterly parts, are the Hils Andi or Andes, which lift vp their snowie tops vnto the cloudes, and reach vnto the Magellane Straits. In them inhabit many fierce Nations, bordering vpon the Nations of Brasill and Plata. The Ciraguans, the Viracans, the Toui, the Varai. These last exercise their children vnto Armes betimes, vnto them they commit their Captiues, for triall of their bloudy forwardnesse; and he which at one blow can kill a Captiue, is of the greatest hopes, and rewarded for his encouragement. To this end they name their children Tygre, Lion, that their names might teach them the  like beastly furie. At the new and full Moone they wound themselues with sharpe bones, to inure themselues to things of war. They weepe in the entertainment of a friend, as the Brasilians doe. In seuenteene degrees stands the Spanish Citie of Holy Crosse of the Mountaine.
 The Riuer Vapai in those Vall^yes riseth and falleth as Nilus doth. There is a Brooke at Holy Crosse of a wonderfull nature: it is but little aboue two yards broad, and shallow withall, not r^nning aboue a league, but is drunke vp of the thirstie sands. Yet doth this Brooke prouide the Citie water, and three sorts of good fish, and that in great plenty from the end of February to the end of May. At other times there are few. They vse diuers meanes of shauing their heads, which, they say, they learned of one Paicume. In the womens lying in, the man keeps his bed, as is said of the Brasilians.
Gen^rall Langua^e.More towards the East dwell the Itatini people, which call themselues Garay, that is, Warriours; and others, Tapuis or Slaues. The language of the Varrai is common to all these Nations with the Brasilians, that as in the other World, Latine, Sclauon, and Arabike, so  in that New World the Varay, Cuscan, and Mexican Language, will generally serue a mans turne.
The Kingdome of Tucuma stretcheth two hundred leagues betweene Chili, Brasill, Holy Crosse, and Paraguay. The Spaniards haue therein fiue Colonies. It is a plaine Country. The Paraguay inhabit along the Riuer so called, whereof they take name. From Plata Southwards is the great Region of Chica, washed on the South, East, and West by the Sea. The Inhabitants are called Patagones.


@. II.  Of Giants, and other Nations neere the Straits.
THe SpaniardsPigafetta ap. Ram. Of Mag. See Mariana l. 26. Osor. etc. which with Magellane first discouered the Straits, saw Giants on this Coast, of which he carried away one with him to Sea, where after, for want of sufficient food, he died. EdwardEd Cliffe ap. Hakluyt. Cliffe, that wrote Master Winters Voyage, (who first of all others, returned out of the Straits by the same way homewards) because he saw on this Coast men of common stature, excepteth against that report of Giants, as a Giant-like report, exceeding the stature and measure of Truth. But (besides that some of our owneM. T. Candishes Voya^e, ap. Hak. tom. 3. written by Fr. Pretty. at another time measured the print of mens feete eighteene inches in the Sands) OliuerNauig. Ol. N. and Seb. W. in Additan. 9. par. America. Noort in his World compassing Voyage, had three of his men slaine  by men of admirable stature, with long haire, not farre from Port Desire, about seuen and forty degrees of Southerly latitude, and after, in the Magellane Straits discomfited a band of Sauages, which neither would yeeld, nor flee from their wiues and children, which were in a Caue iust by, till euery man was slaine. Foure Boyes the Hollanders carried away: one of which, learning their Language, told them of three Families, or Tribes, in those parts of ordinary stature, and of a fourth, which were Giants, ten or eleuen foote high, which warred vpon the former.
Sebalt de Weert being detayned fiue moneths in the Straits by foule weather, sent his men to fish for their prouision (which exceedingly failed them) who there were suddenly assayled by seuen Canoas of Giants, which they guessed to be so high, as is mentioned: who being put  to flight by their Peeces, fled to land, and plucked vp Trees, in their rude manner barricadoing and fortifying themselues against the further pursuite of the Hollanders, who were no lesse glad that they were rid of such company.
These men, both Giants and others, went either wholly naked, or so clothed, as they seemed not to dread the cold, which is yet there so violent, that besides the Mountaintops, alway couered with Snow; their very Summer, in the middest thereof, freeth them not from Ice. Yea, at that time of the yeere those Hollanders encountred an Iland of Ice in the Sea, which the cold Aire had there mounted and maintained in despight of Neptunes rage, or the Sunnes volley of shot, in his neerest approach. The Trees in these parts, and the men (it seemeth) are naturally fortified against those Colds; the one (as is said) alwayes in manner naked:  the other alwayes clothed, out-brauing the Winters violence in their Summer-like Greene Liuery, seeming to stoope vnder the burthen of continuall Frosts and Snowes, and in a naturall wisdome clothe themselues, and hold their leaues the surer.
Those Giantly menTh. Cand^sh. M. A. Kniuet. about Port Desire, when they die, are brought to the Cliffes, and there buried, with their Bowes, Arrowes, Darts, and all their (almost no) substance. Master Kniuet writeth, that he saw footings at Port Desire as bigge as foure of ours: and two men newly buried, one of which was fourteene spans long. He also saw one in Brasil, taken by Alonso Dias, a Spaniard, being by foule weather driuen out of Saint Iulians, which was a yong man, and yet aboue thirteene spans high. They goe naked, and are faire and well proportioned. At Port Famine in the Straits, He saith, they saw some dwarfish Sauages, not aboue  fiue or six spans high, which were thicke and strong, with wide-mouthes (almost to the
 eares) they eate their meat a little scorched, besmearing their faces and brests with the bloud running out of their mouthes: they lay young feathers to this bloud, which glues them to their bodies. Foure or fiue thousand traded with them at the Poles end. The cold is so extreme, that Henry Barwell became bald therewith, so continuing a yeere or two. One Harris a Goldsmith, blowing his frozen nose, cast it with his fingers into the fire: and our Author himselfe going on shore, and returning wet on his feet, the next morning pulled off his toes, together with his stockins, from his benummed feete, which were as blacke as foote, without feeling, and were after cured with words or charmes. Euery day some died of cold. They saw there a kind of beast bigger then a Horse, with eares aboue a span long, and a taile  like a Cow, called Tapetyweson: he saw the like in Manicongo. The Sauages about the Straits feed (as both the same Author, and the Hollanders report) on raw flesh, and other filthy food, and are Man-eaters.


@. III. Of the Magellan Straits.
 IT is no small credit to our Nation and Nauigation, that these Straits haue more enlarged themselues, and giuen oftner and freer passage to vs, then to any other. DrakeSee Hak to. 3. swamme thorow; Winter both passed and returned; and so did Carder in the Pinnasse, as before is said; Candish passed, but returned (as Drake had done) about the World in his circuit. The Delight of Bristoll entred them, and with small delight spent sixe weekes in them: and Captaine Dauies, companion of Master Candish in his last Voyage, three times entred the South Sea, which three times forced him backe into the embracing armes of the vntrustie Straits. Some others haue attempted, but not attained them, as Fenton and Ward, and the Voyage set forth in the yeere of our Lord 1586. by the Earle of Cumberland. The Land on Larbord side (saith Sir Richard Hawkins) is without  doubt Ilands, low, sandy, broken: on Starbord is very mountaynous, the lower Mountaynes whereof, although they be for their height wonderfull, yet (as we haue said of the differing statures of the men) they haue more Giantly ouer-lookers, with Snowie lockes, and Cloudy lookes; betweene them may be numbred three Regions of Clouds. These Straits are fourescore and tenHerera hath 110. Acosta saith 100. of which 70. the North-Sea floweth in, and the South-Sea 30. l 3. c. 13 leagues thorow, of vnequall breadth, in the narrowest place a league ouer. The mouth is in two and fifty degrees and an halfe, or as Sir Richard Hawkins obseruedSir Richard Hawkins. in 52. degrees, 50. minutes. His company killed a thousand Penguins a day: this is a Fowle like a Goose hauing no feathers on their bodies but downe: it cannot flye, but will runne as fast as most men, feeds on fish and grasse, and harbours in Berries. Seales are many in these parts, which will fall dead with a blow on the snout (some affirme the same of the Crocodile)  otherwise not easily pierced with a Sword, or fearing a Musket-shot. He saith they are like Lions, that they sleepe on Land, and haue euer one to watch: which is also reported of the Morse. Hee addeth of the Canoes of the Sauages there,Lopez Vaz. that they are made artificially of the rindes of Trees, sowed together with the finnes of Whales, sharpe at both ends, and turning vp.
When these Straits were first discouered, they named them the Strait of Victorie,Narrat. d'un Portoghese ap. Ram. because the ship called the Victorie first descried them; a name fitly ascribed both to the Straits and Ship; the one first obtayning the Marine victory, and encompassing the compasse of the earth; the other still remayning the onely knowne passage, whereby that Sea-victory can bee atchieued. But the name soone passed from the Ship to the Generall, of whom still it is called  the Strait of Magaglianes, or Magellan.
The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake so vexed the Spaniard, that hee sent Pedro Sarmiento to inhabit there, that he might prohibit other Nations to passe that way: but Tempest and Famine hating the Spanish insolence (whose ambitious designes alway aimed at a Plus vltra) brought them to a Plus vltra indeed, further then euer they had designed; diuers of the ships (which at first were three and twentie, with three thousand and fiue hundred men) perishing in the deuouring iawes of the Ocean, and others in their selfe deuouring mawes of Hunger, which eate them vp with not eating. The Name of Iesus, and Philips Citie, were their two newly erected Colonies, peopled with foure hundred men and thirty women, which by famine were brought to three and twenty persons, when Master Candish tooke Hernando one  of that company, in his prosperous Voyage; another,W. Magoth^. ap. Hakluyt. who had maintained himselfe by his Peece, and liued in a house alone a long time, was taken by the Delight of B^i^toll, two yeeres after. The English gaue a name fitting to this distressed Citie, calling it Port Pamine.

The last Voyage of Master Candish proued vnfortunate, both in the losse of himselfe, and many men: the blacke Pinnasse was lost in the South Sea: the Desire returned, but lost diuers of her men, surprised (as wasIohn Iane. thought) and deuoured by the Sauages, neere to Port Desire. The Sauages heere presented themselues, throwing dust in the Aire, leaping, etc. and either had Vizards on their faces, like Dogges faces, or else their faces were Dogges faces indeed.
I haue seene a CopieAp. Hak. M. S. of a Discourse written by Master Candish himselfe to Sir Tristram-Gorges, whom he made sole Executor of his last Will: where he thus affirmeth; The running away of the Villaine Dauis, was the death of me, and decay of the whole action, and his onely trecherie in running from me, the vtter ruine of all. Hee complaines also of mutinies; and that by  South-west, and West South-west winds, he was driuen from shore foure hundred leagues, and from fifty to forty degrees; that he was taken with Winter and stormes in the Straits, and such Frosts and Snowes in May, as he neuer saw the like, so that in seuen or eight dayes forty dyed, and seuenty sickened. Dauies in the Desire, and his Pinnasse, left him in forty seuen. The Ro-bucke kept with him to thirtie sixe. Captaine Barker transgressing his directions, was slaine, with fiue and twenty men, on Land, and the Boat lost; and soone after 25. others followed the like fortunes: ten others, by the cowardise of the Master of the Ro-bucke, forsaken at Spirito Sancto, which stole away with sixe monethes victuals for an hundred and twenty persons, they being but forty sixe. At Sebastians happened another mutinie by treacherie of an Irish man (here Master Kniuet and other sicke persons were set on shore.) Intending  againe for the Straits, he beate, and was beaten vp and downe the frowning Seas, and came within two leagues of Saint Helena, but could not attaine it; and professeth he had rather haue put himselfe on an Iland, if hee could not attaine it; and professeth hee had rather haue put himselfe on an Iland, if he could haue found one which the Charts place in eight degrees, then returne: and now was scarce able to hold a Pen when he wrote this. Hee dyed homewards. Since that, Sir Richard Hawkins passed the Straits into the South Sea, of which his Voyage I haue read a long Discourse written by himselfe. Hee fell into the hands of the Spaniards, which tooke him in the South Sea.
Let me adde this touching these Straits, that possession thereof was formally taken by turfe and twigge after the English manner, in the first Voyage, Captaine Drake deliuering  the said seisin to Captaine Winter, in the name of Queene Elizabeth and her Successors. This did Captaine Winter himselfe relate to me at Bathe in the presence of many (desiring to haue it published) this last September 1618. forty yeeres after the performance, with many other particulars of that his Voyage.



CHAP. VII. Of Terra Australis and Chili.  
AS for the Land on the Southerne side of the Straits, it is calledBotero. the Land of Fire, either because the Discouerers saw fire thereabouts, or because that cold Climate so much needeth fire. More Easterly against the Cape of Good Hope, is the Land Terra di Vista. This Land about the Straits is not perfectly discouered, whether it be Continent, or Ilands. Some take it for Continent, and extend it more in their imagination then any mans experience, towards those Ilands of Salomon, and New Guinnee, esteeming (of which there is great probabilitie) that Terra Australis, or the Southerne Continent, may, for the largenesse thereof, take vp a fift place in order, and the first in greatnesse, in the diuision and parting of the whole World.  
Enquiries of Lang. and Relig. 4. 14.Master Brerewood our Learned Countriman (as is before obserued) perswadeth himselfe that it is as large as the Easterne Continent, which containeth Europe, Africa, and Asia altogether. His reasons are, that touching latitude, it is knowne to approch neere (if not on this side) the Aequator; and touching Longitude, to runne along in a continuall circuit about the Earth, fronting both the other Continents. Another reason, which he deemeth of more certaine importance, is this; that the Land to the North side of the Line in the other Continents of the Old and New World, is at least foure times as large as that part of them which lyeth to the South. Now for as much as the face of the Sea is leuell (so hee argueth) being therefore called Aequor and Aqua; and secondly, the Earth beeing equally poysed on both sides of her owne Centre; and thirdly, this Centre being but one to the Water, and the Earth,  euen no other then the Centre of the World: it followeth thereupon, that the Earth should, in answerable measure and proportion, lift it selfe, and appeare aboue the face of the Sea, on
 the South side of the Line, as it doth on the North. And consequently, that what is wanting in the South parts of the other Continents towards the counteruailing of the North parts (which is about three fiue parts of both the other Continents layed together) must of necessitie be supplyed in this Continent of the South.
Lopez Vaz writeth, That the Gouernours which the King of Spaine sendeth for Peru and New Spaine, haue a custome to discouer new Countries. The Licentiate Castro being Gouernour of Peru, sent forth a Fleet from Lima; which sayling 800. leagues Westward, found certaine Ilands in 11. degrees to the South of the Equinoctiall, with a kind of people of yellowish complexion, and all naked. Heere they found Hogs, Dogges, Hens, Cloues, Ginger,  Cinamon, and some Gold. The first Iland they named Izabella, the greatest Guadalcanal, on the Coast whereof they sayled 150. leagues, where they tooke a Towne, and some graines of Gold hanged vp in the Houses. They burnt their Towne, because they had in a sudden surprize killed fourteene of their men. They spent fourteene moneths in this Discouery, and named them the Ilands of Salomon, that by that name men might bee further induced to discouer and inhabit them, imagining that Salomon had his Gold from thence.
NouaBot. part. 1. vol. 2. Herera.Guinea was discouered by Villalobos, sent from New Spaine in the yeere 1543. going to discouer the Moluccas. Herera saith, it was discouered by Aluaro of Saauedra, Anno 1527. and the Ilands of Salomon in the yeere 1567. by Lope Garcia of Castro, which are many and great, but eighteene principall; some of them 300. leagues in compasse, two of  200. others of 100. and of fifty, and lesse: the Inhabitants, some blacke, some white, some browne: the greatest, named Saint Isabel, 150. leagues in length, and eighteene in breadth: Saint Nicholas 150. leagues in compasse. The Inhabitants are blacke of hue and wittie. The Spaniards haue coasted it 700. leagues, and yet cannot tell whether it bee an Ile or Continent.
Hesselius Gerardus hath largely set forth the Petition or Memoriall ofP. Ferdin. de Quir. Detectio Australis Incognit. Peter Ferdinandez de Quir, vnto the King of Spaine, about his discouery of those Southerne vnknowne Ilands, for the Plantation of the same. I haue since seen this his Supplication to the King in Spanish, with other memorialsBy Walsingham, Grisley, etc thereof, wherein he saith that hee was sent with two ships to discouer the Ilands of Salomon, and taking his course about the height of the Magellan Straits,  discouered a mayne Land, and sayled eight hundred Leagues on the Coast, till hee came in fifteene degrees Southward from the Line, where he found a fruitfull Countrey. He discouered a Bay, into which fall two great Riuers, where they purpose to settle a Plantation. Order was taken that he should presently be sent from Peru, with commission to take vp 1200. men, with shipping and other necessaries, and as many the yeere after out of New Spaine. He found out three and twenty Ilands, 230. leagues from Mexico; Taumaco, Chicayma (where are great Oysters with Pearles) Guaytopo (the people whereof are as white as the Spaniards) Tucopio, Fonofono, etc. They pray to the Deuill, which hath conference with an Indian vnseene, from a piece of wood; and to him and all the rest many times by night, he toucheth the face and brest with cold touches, but they could neuer learne what he was. He  foretold of the Spaniards comming.
This Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, fourteene yeeres busied himselfe to no small endamagement of his state and person about this Discouerie. The length thereof he equalleth vnto all Europe, and as much of Asia, as thence extendeth to the Caspian Sea: and for the wealth and riches, he cals it a Terrestriall Paradise. The Inhabitants, hee affirmeth, are innumerable, some white, some like the Mulatos, and some otherwise, in colour and habit of body diuersified. They neither haue King nor Lawes, nor Arts. They are diuided, and warre one vpon another, with Bowes, Arrowes, and other weapons, all of wood. They haue their Oratories and places of Buriall. Their Bread is made of three sorts of Roots. They haue varietie of Fruits, Cocos, Almonds of foure sorts, Pome-citrons, Apples, Dates: there are also Swine,  Goats, Hens Partriches, and other Fowles; and as the Indians report, Kine and Buffals. Hee saw amongst them Siluer and Pearles, others added Gold: and the Coast Countries seemed to promise great wealth within Land: Many Riuers: Sugar Canes, Bayes, Hauens, and other commodities of Lands and Seas, making shew of another China, the ayre very wholesome and temperate.
He tooke possession thereof, in the name of the King, and set vp a Crosse and a Chappell, in the name of the Lady of Loretto. These Regions trend euen as high as the Aequinoctiall. When this Discouery was made he mentioneth not; onely hee sueth to the King for employment therein. It is rightly called Terra Australis Incognita, and therefore I will not take vpon me to be your Guide: in another senseMercurius Britannicus. one of our Countrimen hath wittily and learnedly  (according to his wont) described this Countrey, and paralelled therewith the Countries of Europe, and hath let vs see that wee are acquainted in those Coasts too much, and need a Pilot or Guide to conduct vs out of them.

But let vs come backe to our Straits of Magellan, that we may coast from thence and visit the Countries of Chili and Peru: for of the Westerne borders of Chica, girt in betweene the salt waues, and cold Hils, little can be said fitting our purpose.
Of Chil.Hauing sailed out of the Straits, we haue a wide Sea before vs, and on our right hand the Countrey is so barren and cold, that I would not hold the Reader in any cold or tedious Narration thereof. Iohn Ellis, which was with Sir Richard Hawkins in his South-sea Voyage, reporteth, That being past the Straits, they sayled North-west, and by North, forty leagues into the Sea, and then due North, till they came at Mocha in 38. degrees 30. minutes, and thence held their course Northerly to Saint Maries in thirtie sixe, and so to Val Paresa in thirtie three: Where they made good purchase and prize, if they could haue kept it. From  hence they came as farre as Arecca in two and twentie, and so passed the Line to Tacame, where they were taken. But our trauell must bee by Land (as was theirs after, against their will) where wee first encounter with Chili. This nameBotero. some extend euen to the Straits, where we haue placed Chica, and the PatagonesG. En^ l. 2. c. 4 others straiten it in shorter bounds; betweene Chica on the South; Charchas and C^llao on the North; Plata on the East; and the Sea on the West: it is called Chili of the chilling cold, for so the word is said to signifie. The Hils with their high lookes, cold blasts, and couetous encrochings, driue it almost into the Sea: on^ly a narrow Valley vpon lowly submission to her swelling Aduersaries, obtayneth roomeLop. Vaz. for fiue and twentie leagues of breadth, where it is most, to extend her spacious length of two hundred leagues on that shore: and to withstand the Oceans furie, shee payes  a large tribute of many streames, which yet in theL. Apollon. hist Pe^u l. 1. Night-time shee canThe Riuers of Chili in the night time froz n. hardly performe; the miserable Hils in their Frozen charitie, not imparting that naturall bountie and dutie, till that great Arbiter the Sunne ariseth, and sendeth Day with his Light-horse-troupe of Sun-beames, to breake vp those Icie Dungeons, and Snowie Turrets, wherein Night, the Mountaynes Gaoler, had locked the innocent Waters. Once, the poore Valley is so hampered betwixt the tyrannicall Meteors and Elements, as that she oftenEarthquakes in Chili, and their ^ff^cts. quaketh with feare, and in these chill Feuers shaketh off, and loseth her best Ornaments.
Arequipa,Some r^ckon this Tow^e to Peru. It was vexed with Earthquakes. 1582. and 1586. one of her fairest Townes, by such disaster in the yeere 1582. fell to the ground. And sometimes the Neighbour. Hils are infected with this Pestilent Feuer, and tumble downe as dead in the Plaine, thereby so amazing the fearefull Riuers, that they runne quite out of their Channels to seeke new; or else stand still with wonder, and the motiue  heate failing, fall into an vncouth Tympanie, their bellies swelling into spacious and standing Lakes: the tydes seeing this, hold backe their course, and dare not approch their sometime beloued streames, by diuers miles distance; so that betwixt these two stooles the ships come to ground indeed. The sicke Earth thus hauing her mouth stopped, and her stomacke ouerlayed, forceth new mouthes, whence she vomiteth streames of oppressing waters.
I speake not of the Beasts and Men, which in these Ciuill warres of Nature must needs be subiect to deuouring miserie. These are the strange effects of cold and Earthquakes, not strange in Chili, where we are now arriued. The people are fierce and cruell, and some (as is reported) Giants. Almagro, one of the first Conquerours of Peru, in hope of Gold, passed from thence hither: but was deceiued by the Indians which led him the wrong way. In  passing the Deserts of Chili, the Aire is so piercing (as before is obserued)Acost. l. 3. c. 9. that men fall downe dead, or else lose their members suddenly, in manner without feeling. Ierome Costilla the General, one of Acostaes Acquaintance, had lost three or foure toes which fel off without any paine: many of his Armie dyed, whose bodies at his returne he found lying there without stinke or corruption; and one Boy remayned aliue, which had mayntained himselfe by eating Horse-flesh. The Horses also were found whole, as ApolloniusL. Apollon. Hist. Peru l. 3. writeth, and the men sitting on them, as if they had beene aliue, with the Bridles in their hand.
In six and thirty degrees is that famous Valley of Arauco, which defend their persons and freedome, maugre all the force and furie of the Spaniards.Nuno da Silua These killed two of Sir Francis Drakes men, and wounded himselfe: they destroyed also three and twenty Hollanders,  of the company of Cordes: both which they did in detestation of theOliu. de Noort. Spaniards, of whom they esteemed the English and Dutch, because of their Apparell. They haue destroyed many of the Spaniards: they tooke the City Baldiuia in the yeere 1599. and slue the Spaniards. Twice before, if not oftner, they had burnt and spoyled it. Yea, Baldiuia himselfe, the first Conquerour of Chili (for Almagro stayed not) and of whom that Citie receiued name, was taken by these Indians, his Horse being slaine vnder him. They bid him feare nothing, hee should haue Gold enough: and making a great Banquet for him, brought in the last seruice, which was a Cup full of molten Gold, which they forced him to drinke, saying; Now glut thy selfe with Gold. This Baldiuia had entred Chili with foure hundred Horse, and easily conquered that part which had beene subiect to the Kings of Peru: but the other, which was the  richer part, held out. The Spaniards sent them word, they were the Sonnes of God, and
 came to teach them the Word of God: and if they would not yeeld to them, they would shoote fire among them. The Indians would try this argument in the field, and there the great Ordnance so well pleaded the cause, that they beleeued and subiected themselues. The Spaniards imployed them in the Mynes, whence they gathered such plenty of Gold, that others had twenty thousand, but Baldiuia himselfe had t^ree hundred thousand P^zos by the yeere.
The Indians after perceiuing the Spaniards to be but mortall men, rebelled: and whereas they had vsed to carry grasse into the Fort for the Spaniards Horses, they conueyed in the same, Weapons, by which meanes being assisted by their fellowes without, they wonne the  Forts and when Baldiuia would haue recouered it, he lost himselfe, as you haue heard.
Euer since,Adams and the Dutch Fleet lost many of their men in fight with the Indians 1608. about S. Marie. this hostility hath continued, and the Araucans are the Lists and Barres to the Spanish Conquests. Their Countrey (to consider Arauco by it selfe) is but small, about twenty leagues in length: neither could the Inguas or Kings of Peru conquer it: their manner of Warre is much like the Christians, in pitched Battels placing their Bowmen among their rankes of Pikemen. To speake of other Townes which the Spaniards haue built in this Coast, is not our purpose. When they sacked Baldiuia, Anno 1599. they feasted the Spaniards with the like golden Cups powred ho^ downe their throats: theyOliu. de Noort. cut off the Images heads, triumphing ouer the Spaniards Gods as they termed them. They were then at the siege of Imperiall, another Spanish Citie, hauing before taken Baldiuia. They plucke out  the hearts of the Spaniards which they kill, and drinke in their skuls.
Lately the Hollanders haue not only taken the Bay and Towne of All Saints, on the Easterne shore of Brasil, but are also reported to haue done much harme to the Spaniards in Peru, the particulars whereof partly I haue expressed in the second part of my Pilgrimes after the Relation of the Amboyna Tragedy, partly haue left to more full discouery by Time the Mother of Truth.
Likewise since the last Edition of this Worke, that Expedition of Mayre and Schouten round about the Globe hath beene published (and in the second Booke of my Pilgrimes is extant) in which the Coasts of Terra Australis are best notified. But let (mee giue the Reader warning that Sir Francis Drake had discouered those Straits in 57. being forced by tempest,  out of the South Sea thorow them: and named that Elizabeths Iland in Anno 1578. which these Hollanders called Barneuelts, as in an old Map in his Maiesties priuy Gallery, dedicated to Queene Elizabeth is yet to be seene.


CHAP VIII. Of the Conquest of Peru by the Spaniards, and of  their Ingua's or Emperours.

@. I. Of PIZARRO, his Discouery, and taking the King of Peru.
FRancis PizarroGomar. c. 144. vid. historia general del Peru Escrita por el Ynca Garcilasse de la Vega in 8. lib. was the Bastard sonne of Gonzallo, a Captaine in the Kingdome of Nauarre: he was borne at Trusiglio, and exposed at the Church  doore; and none being found that would giue him the brest, he was nourished by sucking a Sow for certaine dayes: at last his Father acknowledged him; and when hee was growne, set him to keepe his Swine; which being one day strayed and lost, hee durst not returne home for feare, and therefore went to Siuill, and thence passed to the Indies. In this Swinish education hee had not so much as learned to reade. Hee went to Vraua with Alonso de Hoieda; with Valuoa, to the Discouery of the South Sea; and with Pedrarius de Auila, Gouernour of Golden Castile, to Panama. In this CitieGom. c. 108. Benzol. 3. c. 1. L. Apol. l. 1. were diuers which aff^cted Golden Discoueries. Pedrarius intended Nicaragua; but Diego di Almagro, Hernando Luche, or Luques, a rich Priest, and this Pizarro now growne rich, agreed to ioyne their Purses and best industry to search Southwards,  where they had heard was store of wealth. They prouided a Nauie, and two hundred and twenty Souldiers, and Almagro with Pizarro, in the yeere 1525. or (as Benzo hath it) 1526. set forward.

Almagro and he parting company, Pizarro, offering to land his men, was wounded and forced to retire to Panama: Almagro in another place had better successe, the Indians vsing him kindly, and giuing him three thousand Ducats of Gold. But seeking to land in that place of Pizarro's misfortune, hee was set vpon by the Indians, and lost in fight one of his eyes. They meet at Panama, and hauing cured their wounds, repaire their forces, and with two hundred men, and many slaues, set sayle, and land in another place, but a re repelled to their ships by the Inhabitants, and goe to Gorgon, a little Iland, sixe miles from the Continent, where Pizarro stayed, whiles Almagro went backe for better supply. At his returne Pizarro and his company were almost starued, but being refreshed, and all of them now together attempting the Indian shore, were repelled with losse to the Ile, which they called  Galli. Almagro is againe sent backe for new aide; the Souldiers would haue passed with him, and cursed this Land and their Couetousnesse. Pizarro and his Company agree to search further, and hauing sayled fiue hundred miles, came to Chira, a Prouince of Peru, and taking some of the Inhabitants to learne them the Spanish Tongue, returned to Tumbez.
Hauing learned of the Indians the great wealth of those parts, he set one Peter a Candian, on shore, who was kindly entertayned of the Gouernour, that shewed him a Temple dedicated to the Sunne, wherein were vnspeakable riches; which when he related to Pizarro at his returne, the Spaniards goe backe with these newes to Panama. His two fellowes, Almagro, and the Priest (called after the Foole, because he had spent his estate on this businesse, and at last was excluded by his companions) agreed with Pizarro to goe to Spaine to get license  for this Conquest; and borrowed one thousand and fiue hundred Ducats, to set him forth. Pizarro seekes and obtaynes this Facultie onely for himselfe, neuer mentioning his Partners, and with Letters Patents returneth to Panama with his foure Brethren, Hernando, Gonzalo, Iohn, and Martin di Alcantara his Brother by the Mothers side. His two Partners were not a little grieued, when they heard how things passed; but after much stirre, Almagro and Pizarro became friends, and agreed to communicate Purses and Titles. Pizarro goes before with a hundred and fiftie Souldiers (taking order that Almagro should follow with all the strength he could make) and Lands in Peru,Peru why so called. a Riuer so called, which gaue name to those mighty and rich Prouinces, because the Spaniards by this way discouered them. They went by land, enduring much misery by the way to Coach, where they were well refreshed.  But a disease worse then the French Poxe there warred vpon them, called Pori. Yet did Pizarro hold on his resolution; he passed ouer to Puna, where the Gouernour intreated the Spaniards well, till the abusing of their Wiues caused the Indians to take Armes, and so made their riches become a prey to the preuayling Spaniards.
There had Pizarro the first intelligence of Atabaliba. The Gouernour of this Iland, to satisfie his iealousie, cut off the Noses, the Members, and the Armes of his Eunuches, or Keepers of his women. Pizarro sent to Tumbez sixe hundred Prisoners, which the Gouernour of this Land had taken of the party of Atabaliba, who at that time mayntained Warre against his Brother Guascar about the Souereigntie, and this Gouernour had taken Guascars part. This ciuill discord was much to the Spaniards aduantage.  
PizarroGom. c. 112. Apol. l. 2. Ben. l. 3. c. 3. sent three Messengers to Tumbez to demand peace and safe entrance, but they (notwithstanding the freedome of their Captiues) deliuered them to the Priests to bee sacrificed to their Idoll of the Sunne. Hee taketh Tumbez and sacketh the Temple and Citie.
From thence he proceeded in his way to Caximalca: and Guascar sent some vnto him with great promises to demand his aide against his Brother Atabaliba: soone after Atabaliba sent one to him, to charge him to returne to his ships. Pizarro answereth, That hee came not to hurt any, but for their good, as his Emperour had giuen him in charge; nor could he now, (being the Embassadour of the Pope and Emperour, Lords of the World) returne without great dishonour, before he had seene his Royall person, and communicated to him  such instructions as might be good for his body and soule.
As he passed the Prouince of Chira, the Lords thereof prouoked him against Atabaliba, who had lately conquered their Countries. And on the Riuer of Chira hee founded the Colonie of Saint Michael, for the safe keeping of his spoyles, and for his ships. Hee marcheth on to Caximalca, and sendeth Messengers on horse-back, to giue him notice of his comming. This strange Beast made the Indians afraid, but Atabaliba was nothing mooued therewith more mooued to see those bearded men giue him so little reuerence.
Atabaliba sent Pizarro a paire of shooes, cut and gilded, that (as hee pretended) he might know him: others thought, that hee might bee knowne and designed to imprisonment or slaughter.  
The next day the King was carried, as in solemne triumph, vpon mens shoulders, garded with fiue and twentie thousand Indians in rich pompe and magnificence. Vincentius
 de Valle Viridi, a DominicanThe Friers preaching. This Oration is expressed more at large by Vega, p. 2. l. 1. c. 22. diuided into two parts. And Philipillus the Interpreter wanting fit words (which the Cuscan Language hath not) to exp^esse his Oration, falsified the sense as by their Quippos hath appeared. So for Trinitie and Vnitie, hee interpreted Foure: for our sinne in Adam, that on a time all men being assembled layed their sinnes on Adam. Nothing of the Diuinitie of Christ but that hee was a great Lord, etc. and that their forces which they threatned were superiour to those of Heauen: as if they had Gods not men to fight against. Whereupon Atahuallpa (so he cals him) fetched a deepe sigh: and after made an answere far differing from this which Authors haue related. But this was written by the Spaniards to the Emperour to cleere themselues which had offered abuse to the Inga: neither would they suffer the truth to be written. His answere hee relateth at large, and is worth reading. The Spaniards weary of his prolixitie, made a rout and tooke him, no man resisting, Miguel Astete laying first hold (but Pizarro carrying the credit, such as it was) his Fringe or Diademe remayned with Astete till 1556. When he restored it to the Inga Sayritupac. The Frier was a^ter a Bishop and lastly slaine by the Indians. Frier, holding in one hand a Crosse, in the other his Breuiarie, or (as some say) a Bible, came before him with great reuerence, and blessing him with the Crosse, said: Excellent Lord, it behoueth you to know, that God in Trinity and Vnity made the World of nothing, and formed a man of the Earth, whom hee called Adam; of whom wee all  haue beginning. Adam sinned against his Creator by disobedience, and in him all his Posteritie, except Iesus Christ: who being God, came downe from Heauen, and tooke flesh of the Virgin Mary; and to redeeme Mankind, dyed on a Crosse like to this (for which cause wee worship it;) rose againe the third day, and after forty dayes ascended into Heauen, leauing for his Vicar in Earth Saint Peter, and his Successours, which wee callGom. c. 113. Popes; who haueThis hee spake according to the Bul of Alexander the Sixt, which had giuen the Southerne and Western world to the Spanish Kings. The hornes of the Bull, and not of the Lambe, are the Popish weapons. giuen to the most puissant King of Spaine, Emperour of the  Romans the Monarchy of the World. Obey the Pope, and receiue the faith of Christ; and if yee shall beleeue it most holy, and that most false which yee haue, yee shall doe well; and know, that doing the contrary, we will make warre on you, and will take away and breake your Idols; therefore leaue the deceiueable Religion of your false Gods. This preaching of the Frier might well seeme strange to Atabaliba, which it seemes hee learned of the Mahumetans, and not of the Apostles. He answered, that hee was Free, and would not become tributary to any, nor did acknowledge any greater Lord then himselfe: and for the Emperour, he could be pleased to be the friend of so great a Prince, and to know him: but for the Pope, he would not obey him, which gaue away that which was not his owne, and tooke a Kingdome from him, whom hee had neuer seene. As for Religion, hee liked well his owne,  and neyther would nor ought to call it in question, being so ancient and approued; especially seeing Christ dyed, which neuer befell the Sunne or Moone; And how (saith hee) doe you know that the God of the Christians created the World? Frier Vincent answered, That his Booke told it him, and gaue him his Breuiarie. Atabaliba looked on it, and in it, and saying it said no such thing to him, hurled it on the ground. The Frier tooke it vp, and went to Pizarro, crying, Hee hath cast the Gospels to the ground: Reuenge it, O Christians, seeing they will not our friendship, nor our Law: or (to vse the words of a Spanish Captain there present in his relationRel. della conq. del Peru ap. Ram. tom. 3. Xeres ibid. thereof) Come forth, Christians, come forth, and come to these Enemies, Dogs that wil not accept the things of God, and the Cacique hath cast our holy Law to the ground. Francisco di Xeres, who was Pizarroes Secretary, writeth, that the Frier would haue opened  the book, because Atabaliba could not, and he in disdain smote him on the arme, and obiected to the Spaniards their abuses, and robbing of his Caciques, saying, hee would not depart thence till all were restored.
Pizarro commanded to bring forth the Standard and the Ordinance: the Horsemen in three Bands assailed Atabaliba's people, and slue many: hee himselfe arriued with his Footmen, which layed about with their Swords: all charged vpon Atabaliba, slaying them which carried him, whose Roome was presently supplyed by other, till at last Pizarro pulled him downe from his Litter by the clothes. All this while not one Indian fought, because they had no commandement; or, as Xeres sayth, for feare and amazement to see their Cacique so vsed;Vega saith, Atahuallpa forbad them whose command was a Religion to them, and death to transgresse: and there perished 5000. of which 3500. Souldiers, others of all ages and both Sexes which had come in great multitudes to heare and solemnize this Embassage of them which they tooke for Gods. and therefore no Spaniard was slaine, and many Indians perished vpon  the thrust; for so the Frier had bidden them fight for feare of breaking their Swords: neither were any wounded, but onely Pizarro by one of his owne, thrusting at Atabaliba in his taking, and wounding Pizarro therewith in the arme. Thus are the Indians chased, their King with other great spoyles remayning with the Spaniards: of which Xeres reckoneth 80000. Castilians in ^old, and 7000. Markes (euery Marke being eight ounces) in Siluer of the houshold Plate of Atabaliba. And in Caxamalca they rifled houses full vp to the roofe of Garments, besides Armour and Weapons, of which some were Axes and Pole-axes, of  Gold and Siluer.



@. II. The huge Treasures taken by the Spaniards.
THe next day the Spaniards scowred about for spoyle, and found fiue thousand Women of the Kings with much treasure. Atabaliba was much grieued with his imprisonment, especially in regard of the chaine which they put vpon him.Lop Vaz. And when they had spent much reasoning about his ransome, a Souldier named Soto (of whom you haue heard in our History of Florida) said vnto him, Wilt thou giue vs this house full of Gold and Siluer thus highGomara saith that it was a great roome, and they made a line about it: it was all of wrought metal in vessels, etc.? lifting vp his Sword, and making a stroke vpon the wall. Atabaliba  answered, that if they would giue him liberty to send into his Kingdome, he would fulfill their demand. Whereat the Spaniards much maruelling, gaue him three monethes time: but he had filled the house in two moneths and a halfe: a matter scarce credible, yet most true: For I (saith Lopez Vaz) know aboue twenty men that were there at that time, who all affirme, that it was aboueGom. hath 252000. pou^ds of siluer, and 1326000. Pezos of Gold. ten Millions of Gold and Siluer. That Spanish Captaine in Ramusius relateth, that he promised to giue them so much Gold as should reach vp to that marke, a span higher then a tall man could reach, the Roome being fiue and twenty foote long, and fifteene wide: and the Gouernour asking how much Siluer he would giue; he answered, he would fill vp an inclosure which should be made there, with Vessels of Plate, for his ransome, which was promised him. This Captaine was appointed Guardian of that  Golden roome, and saw it melted, and reckoneth vp the parcels and particulars that were brought in Vessels and Plates of Gold and Siluer. And the Gouernour sent to the Emperor his fift part, and parted the rest; to eueryXeres saith, they were 102. Footmen, and Horsemen. Footman 4800. pieces of Gold (which make 7208. Duckets) to euery Horseman twice as much, besides the aduantages that belonged to any: To Almagros company (which were 150. that came after the victory) hee gaue 25000. Pezos, and gaue 2000. to the Inhabitants of Saint Michel. Many other gifts hee gaue to Merchants and others: and yet after the Gouernour was gone, there was brought more Gold then that which had beene shared. This also is affirmed by Xeres, that ten or twelue dayes after Pizarro was gone, the Spaniards which had beene sent to Cusco, brought as much Gold (which was taken from the wals of a House, and Roofe of a Temple in Cusco, being Plates of ten  or twelue pound weight a piece, and other like) as amounted to two Millions and a halfe, and being molten, proued on Million 326539. Pezos of fine Gold: and 51610. Markes of Siluer. He addeth that Atabaliba was by sound of Trumpet freed from his promise; but was kept still vnder guard for the Spaniards securitie.
Howbeit they killed him notwithstanding,They baptised him before his death thretning otherwise to burne him aliue, Vega l 1. c. 36. The gold and siluer which Atabaliba paid came to 4605670. Duc. Blas Valeca hath 4. Millions 800000. Duc. a summe not now maruailous when euery yeere 10. or 12. millions entreth the Guadalquibir: The naturall strength of the country is such that had there not bin contentio^ betwixt the Brethren, etc. Peru could neuer haue bin subdued. and in a night strangled him. But God the righteous Iudge, seeing this villanous act, suffered none of those Spaniards to die by the course of Nature, but brought them to euill and shamefull ends.
During the time of AtabalibasGom. c. 115. imprisonment, his Captaines had taken his Brother Guascar,The Spanish Captaine in Ramus. cals Cusco, and saith he promised 4, times as much who spake with Captaine Soto, and promised, that if they would restore him to his liberty, and to his Kingdome, he would fill vp the roome at Caximalca to the Roofe, which  was thrice as much as Atabaliba had promised: and added that his Father Guaynacapa on his death-bed had commanded him to be friend to the white and bearded men, which should come and rule in those parts. Atabaliba hearing of these things, fained himselfe sorrowfull for the death of Guascar, whom he had heard that Quisquiz his Captaine had slaine: this hee did, to try how the Spaniards would take his death; which when hee saw they little respected, hee sent and caused him to bee slaine indeed. This was done in the yeere of our Lord God 1533. He had before slaine another of his Brethren and drunke in his Skull, as hee had sworne to deale with Atabaliba.
The Indians hereupon hid the Treasures of Gold, Siluer, and Gemmes, that were in Cusco and other places, and had belonged to Guaynacapa, which were far more then euer came  to the Spaniards hands. Chilicuchima, one of Atabalibas chiefe Captaines, which visited him in his imprisonment with great reuerence (for hee and the chiefe of his company laid burdens on their shoulders, and so entred into his presence, lifting vp both his hands to the Sunne, with thankes to him for this sight of his Lord, and then with much crouching, kissed his hands and feet) told the Spaniards, that QuisquizHe kept Cusco with 30000. Indians. another chiefe Captaine had conueyed away those Treasures of Guaynacapa, or Cusco, the elder, as hee cals him: and being forced by torments of fire put to him,They after burnt him. confessed where Atabaliba had a Tent full of Plate and Treasure. The Spanish Captaine which reports this, saith, that he saw a great house full of Vessels of Gold, and other pieces (as a Shepherd and his Sheepe all of Gold as great as the liuing) which were not shared amongst them: and he saw 10080. Pezos of the Emperours fifth part, ouer and aboue that which Pizarro sent by his Brother; so that both Caesar and  Souldier were deceiued. He heard Atabaliba say, that in an Iland in a Riuer of Collas was a
 very great House all couered with Gold; and the beames with all whatsoeuer in the house, was couered with plates of Gold, yea, and the pauement also. But in such a diuided State, where were so many Indian Captaines of the Two Brethren Inguas, the Spaniards being but a handfull, and iealous of each other, the Countrey being so wide and rich, that they could not so much as see and take view of the same in short space: there was easie opportunitie offered to conuey away the greatest part of their Treasures: especially Religion adding a helping hand both to conuey and to conceale from them which thus spoyled their Temples, Idols, and Altars. The Spaniards so abounded with Gold, that they would giueF. Xeres and P. Sancto. Of their treasures see inf @. 3. and c 9. @. 3 c. 11. @ 1 etc. 1300. (one gaue 1500.) Castilians or Pezos for a Horse 60. for a small Run^let of Wine; forty for  a paire of shooes; likewise a Sword, and other things after the same rate: and Debters sought out their Creditors, with Indians laden with Gold, from house to house to pay them: They carried into Spaine one Vessell of Gold, another of Siluer, each sufficient wherein to boyle a Kow, besides a huge Eagle, and other like Images, as an Idoll of Gold as bigge as a Childe of foure yeeres old: D^ums of Gold: and at the conquest of Cusco, Xeres tels of many Images of women of Gold, and as great, which they worshipped, and diuers like of Siluer; Sheepe also in like pourtrature, of fine Gold; all well wrought.


 @. III. The Kings of Peru, their originall proceedings and treasures.
THe quarrell betweene the two Brethren, grew about their Inheritance: Guascar succeeding his Father in the rest; and Quito being assigned to Atabaliba, who seizing on Tumebamba, a rich Prouince, prouoked his Brothers forces against him, which tooke him prisoner. But he escaping to Quito, made the people beleeue that the Sun had turned him into a Serpent, and so he escaped thorow a hole in the Prison: and on conceit of this miracle drew them into armes against Guascar, with which hee made such slaughter of his Enemies, that to this day there are great heapes of bones of the slaine: he slue 60000.  of the Canari, destroyed Tumebamba, and conquered as farre as Tumbez and Caximalca: hee sent a great Army with Quisquiz and Calicucima, two valiant Captaines, with such successe as you haue heard, against Guascar, whom they tooke, and by his direction slue.
Gomara attributeth the death of Atabaliba to Philippillus the Spanish Interpreter, who to enioy one of his Wiues, accused him of conspiracie against the Spaniards; but BenzoBenzo. l. 3. c. 5 with more likelihood affirmeth, that Pizarro from his first taking had intended it. For hee might haue sent him into Spaine as Atabaliba requested, if he had feared such secret practices: but his request and purgation were reiected, and foure Negro's which hee vsed for that purpose, strangled him at his command. He had many Wiues, whereof the chiefe was his Sister, named Pagha. He seeing the glasses of Europe, maruelled much (as before is said) that they hauing so faire a thing, would go so farre for Gold. His Murtherers dyed the like bloudie ends;  Almagro was executed by Pizarro; and he slaine by young Almagro; and him, Vacca de Castra did likewise put to death. Iohn Pizarro was slaine of the Indians. Martin another of the Brethren was slaine with Francis. Ferdinandus was imprisoned in Spaine, and his end vnknowne; Gonzales was done to death by Gasca. Soto dyed of thought in Florida; and Ciuill Warres ate vp the rest in Peru.
Before the times of the Ingua's, their GouernmentAcost. l. 6. c. 19. 20. 21. 22. in these parts was (as still it is in Arauco, and the Prouinces of Chili) by Cominalties, or the aduice of many. The Gouernment of the Ingua's continued betweene three and foure hundred yeeres, although for a long time their Signiorie was not aboue fiue or sixe leagues compasse about the Citie of Cusco,  where the originall of their conquests began, and extended from Pasto to Chili, almost 1000 leagues in length, betweene the Andes and the South Sea.
The Canaries were their mortall Enemies, and fauoured the Spaniards, and at this day if they fall to comparisons, whether the Ingua's or Canari were the more vali^nt, they will kill one another by thousands, as hath hapned in Cusco. The practice which they vsed to make themselues Lords, was a fiction, that since the generall Deluge (whereof all the Indians haue knowledge) the World had beene preserued, peopled and restored by them: and that seuen of them came out of the Caue of Pacaricambo, and that they also were the Authors of the true Religion. The first of these Ingua's was Mangocapa,Originall of the Ingua^. which came out of the Caue of Tambo, six leagues from Cusco. Of him came two Families, the Hanancusco, of whom came  these Lords; and the Vrincusco: Ingaroca the first Lord was no great Lord but was serued in Vessels of Gold and Siluer. And dying, he appointed that all his treasure should be employed for the seruice of his bodie, and for the feeding of his Family. His Successor did the like:
 and this grew to a generall custome, that no Ingua might inherit his Fathers goods; He built a new Palace.
Their Kings.In the time of Ingaroca, the Indians had Images of Gold. Yaguaraguaque succeeded Virococha, the next successor was very rich. Gonzale Pizarro with cruell torments forced the Indians to confesse where his body was, for the report of the treasures buried with him: the body he burnt, and the Indians reserued and worshipped the ashes. They tooke it ill that this Ingua called himselfe Viracocha, which is the name of their God; but hee to satisfie them, said, that Viracocha appeared to him in a Dreame, and commanded him to take his name.
Pachacuti Ingua Yupaugui succeeded him, who was a great Conquerour, Politician, and Author of their Ceremonies; he raigned 70. yeeres, and fained himselfe sent of Viracocha, to  establish his Religion and Empire.
After him followed Guaynacapa the Father of Guascar and Atabaliba, which brought this Empire to the greatest height. The Indians opened him after his decease, leauing his heart and entrailes in Quito, the body was carried to Cusco, and placed in the Temple of the Sunne. He was worshipped of his Subiects for a God, being yet aliue, which was not done to any of his Predecessors. When he dyed, they slue a thousand persons of his houshold, to serue him in the other life, all which dyed willingly for his seruice, insomuch that many offered themselues to death, besides such as were appointed. His treasure was admirable. Hee vsed alwayesGom. c. 120. Mariana l^b. 26. Guaynacapa prophesied by ^euelati^n of his Oracles of the comming of bearded men, commanding at his death that they should yeeld subiection to them, hauing a better law, customes, etc. then they: as Atahuallpa in his answer to Valle viridi his oration ap. Veg. to haue with him many Oregioni, which were his men of Warre, and ware shooes and feathers, and other signes of Nobilitie: he was serued of the eldest Sonnes and Heires of  all his chiefe Subiects, euery one clothed after his owne Countrey Rite; he had many Counsellours and Courtiers in differing degrees of honour. Euery one at his entrance into the Palace put off his shooes, and might not looke him in the face when they spake to him.
All the Vessels of his House, Table, and Kitchin, were of Gold and Siluer, and the meanest of Siluer and Copper for strength and hardnesse of Metall. He had in his Wardrobe hollow Statues, which seemed Gyants, and were of Gold: and the figures in proportion and bignesse of all the Beasts, Birds, Trees, and Herbs, in his Kingdome, and of the Fishes likewise. He had Ropes, Budgets, Troughs, and Chests, of Gold and Siluer: heapes of Billets of Gold, that seemed Wood cut out for the fire. There was nothing in his Kingdome, but he had the counterfeit in Gold. Yea they say, That the Ingua's had a Garden of pleasure in an Iland  neer Puna, which had all kind of Garden herbs, flowres, and trees of Gold and Siluer. He had also an infinite quantitie of Siluer and Gold wrought in Cusco, which was lost by the death of Guascar, which the Indians concealed (as is said) from the Spaniards. Xeres saith, hee had three houses full of pieces of Gold, and fiue full of Siluer: and a 100000. Plates or Tiles of Gold, euery of which weighed fifty Castlins. What honors were done to him after his death, appeares by that his golden Temple or Chappell where he was buried, where hee had continuall attendance of Dancers and Musicians, and such as stood with Fans to scarre away the Flyes. When any came to see the Cacique, they came first to performe their Ceremonies to this Image. He had 200. children by diuers women. AcostaAcost. l. 6. c. 22. 23. sayth, That he had (descended from his owne loynes) aboue 300. children and grand children.  
When his Sonnes Guascar and Atibaliba were dead, another of his Sonnes called Mangocapa,His Son Sayri Tupac was baptised by the name of Diego Amaru was his Brother. continued the wars a while with the Spaniards, and after retyred himselfe to Villa Bamba, where he kept in the Mountaynes, and there the Ingua's raigned vntill Amaro was taken and executed in Cusco. Some remnants of them haue since binOne of which hath written a generall History of the Indies in two parts: in the former of the Peruuian Antiquities and Acts: in the later of the Spanish: viz. Garcilasso de la Vega Naturall of Cusco: his Mother was Palla Isabel daughter of Huallpa Topac Inga, one of the Sons of Topac Inga Yupangui and of Palla Mama Ocllo his lawfull ife, His Father was Garcilasso de la Vega one of the Conquerors of Peru, a Captaine, who went thither with Pedro de Aluarado 1531. and there continued till his death 1559. Francisco de Toledo being Viceroy entred Processe against the Ingas and all the Mestizos of that bloud: but would not execute them. Instead whereof he sent and dispersed them (lest by their Fathers conquests or mothers bloud they should challenge that Empire) into Chili, Pinama, New Granada, Nicaragua, and into Spaine. 36. Indians of that bloud they sent to Loy Reyes there to remayne, of which 35. dyed in little more then two yeares with griefe, etc. Others also elsewhere dyed. Don Carlos had a Son in Spaine  which there dyed 1610. of griefe: and soone after a little Infant which he left, and so all Guaynacapas prophesie touching his Posterity was accomplished. In Mexico they tooke not that course, because the Kingdome passed by Election, not Succession. The present Inga they presently sentenced to lose his head: who desired to be sent into Spaine, protesting his innocency; and that if his Father could do nothing against 200. Spaniards in Cusco with 200000. Indians, what could they feare of him so poore? He appealed to the King and to Pachacamac: was baptised also by the name of Philip his Inga as he called him: moued pitie in the Spaniards, who would haue besought for him to be sent into Spaine, there to remayne exiled, but might not be suffered on paine of death to speake to the Viceroy. Thus was Amaru or Philip brought forth on a Mule, his hands fastned (the Cryer proclayming him a Tyrant and Traytor) with a halter about his necke. 300000. were gathered together in the streets and wayes to this sad spectacle with much teares and cryes, the Priests desired him to enioyne them silence, whereupon hee lifted vp his hand, and laying it on his eare, and thence by degrees to his thigh, there followed such silence as if there had not beene a man in the Citie. And thus with protestation of his innocencie hee sustayned their crueltie with great magnanimitie: the last of that race, which had continued as Blas Valera reckons almost 600. yeeres in that Soueraigntie. After his death followed that dispersion before related of his children and kindred. The Viceroy returned with 500000. Pezos gotten in his gouernment,  which was arrested, and himselfe discountenanced by the King, who told him that he was sent into Peru to serue Kings, not to kill Kings: wherewith agrieued hee dyed in few dayes. Garcia Loyola which tooke Amaru, married his Neece the Daughter of Sayn Tupac, and was made Gouernour of Chili: who one night was slaine with all his Company by the Araucos. He left only one Daughter which was married to Don Iuan Enriquez de Boria in Spaine, whom the King entituled Marquesse of Oropesa a Towne founded by Toledo in Peru. christened. The other
 Family of the Ingua's, which descended of the first Mangocupa called Vrincusco, had their successions also and Gouernment; which here to discourse of, were to my proposed scope impertinent. Leauing therefore the Conquerours and Conquest of Peru, let vs consider the Countrey it selfe, with such obseruations as we shall there find touching their Religions.



CHAP. IX. Of the Countrey of Peru, Naturall, Oeconomicall, and  Politicall Obseruations.

@. I. Of the Scite, Windes, Hils, Plaines; Lakes, Raines, Seasons.
THe Kingdom of Peru extendethP de Cieza part. 1. c. 36. seuen hundred leagues in length, in breadth a hundred in some places, in some threescore, in others fortie: more or lesse, according vnto the difference of places. Quito and Plata are the vtmost Cities  thereof, the one bordering on Popayan, the other vpon Chili. It is not heere meant of that spacious Kingdome of the Ingua's, for that reached twelue hundred leagues, whereof this of Peru was but a part. AcostaAcost. l. 3. c. 20 numbreth diuers strange specialties, excepted from the generall Rules of Natures wonted course.
The first,The winds and weather. that it blowes continually on all that Coast with one only winde (and that also differing from that which vsually bloweth betweene the Tropikes) namely, the South and Southwest. The second, that this winde (in other places vnhealthfull) is here so agreeable, that otherwise it could not be habitable. The third, that it neuer Raines, Thunders, Snowes, nor Hailes in all this Coast: And yet (which is a fourth wonder) a little distance  from the Coast, it Snowes and Raines terribly. Fifthly, there are two Ridges and Mountaynes, which both runne in one altitude; and the one in view of the other, almost equally, aboue a 1000. leagues: and yet on the one part are great Forrests,The Hils. and it Raines the greatest part of the yeere, being very hot; the other is all naked, and bare, and very cold. So that Peru is diuided into three parts, which they call Llanos Sierras, and Andes: the first runne alongst the Sea Coast; the Sierras be Hils with some Valleyes; and the Andes bee steepe and craggie Mountaynes. The Llanos or Plaines on the Sea Coast haue ten leagues in breadth, in some parts lesse, and in some a little more. The Sierra contayneth with equall inequalitie twentie leagues: and the Andes as much, sometimes more, and sometimes lesse. They run in length from North to South, and in breadth from East to West: and in this so small a distance it  raines almost continually in one place, and neuer in the other: In the Plaines neuer; on the Andes in a maner continually, though somtimes it be more cleere there then other. The Sierra in the midst are more moderate, in which it Raines from September to April, as in Spain, but in the other halfe yeere, when the Sunne is further off, it is more cleere. The Sierras yeeld infinite number of Vicagues, which are like wild Goats; and Pacos, a kinde of sheepe-asses, profitable for fleece and burthen: the Andes yeeld Parrots, Apes, and Monkeyes. SomeBotero. report that monstrous births doe sometimes proceed (as by Natures vnwilling hand) from the copulation of these Barbarians and these Monkeyes. The Sierre opening themselues, cause Valleyes, where are the best dwellings in Peru, and most plentifull of Maiz and Fruits. It isCieza p. 1. c. 72 strange that in the Valley of Pachacama, neyther the higher Element yeeldeth  Raine, nor the lower any streame, and yet there is plenty of Roots, Maiz, and Fruits. They haue large and deepe Ditches, in which they sow or set, and that which groweth is nourished with the deaw: and because the Maiz will not grow, except it first die, they set one or two Pilchards heads (which fish they take with their nets very plentifully in the Sea) therewith, and thus it groweth abundantly. The water which they drinke, they draw out of deep pits.Acost l. 3. c. 21. Comming from the Mountaines to the Vallyes, they do vsually see (as it were) two Heauens, one cleere and bright, the other obscure, and (as it were) a gray veile spread vnderneath, which couers all the Coast: and although it raines not, yet this mist is wonderfull profitable to bring forth grasse, and to rayse vp and nourish the Seed: and where they haue plenty of water, which they draw from the Pooles and Lakes, yet if this moysture faileth,  there followeth great defect of grain. And (which is more worthy of admiration) the d^y and barren sands in some places, as in the sandy Mountaine neere the City de los Reyes, are by this dew beautified with grasse and flowres. In some places they water their fields out of the riuers.

L^kes.Beyond the Citie of Cusco the two ridges of Mountaynes separate themselues, and in the middest leaue a plaine and large Champaine, which they call the Prouince of Callas, where there are many Riuers and great store of fertile pastures. ThereAc^st. ib. c. 16. Cieza p. 1 c. 103. is also the great Lake of Titicaca, which contayneth fourescore leagues in compasse, and robbeth ten or twelue great Riuers of their waters, which they were carrying to the Sea, but here are drunke vp (by the way) of this Lake. They sayle in it with Shippes and Barques. The water is not altogether sowre nor salt, as that of the Sea, but is so thicke, that it cannot be drunke. Vpon the Bankes of this Lake are habitations as good as any in Peru. The great Lake passeth by a Riuer into a lesse Lake, called Aulagas, from whence it hath no manner of passage, except there be any vnder the Earth. There are many other Lakes in the Mountaines, which seeme to arise  rather from Springs then from Raines or Snowes, and some of them yeeld Riuers. At the end of the Valley of Tarapaya neere to Potozi, there is a round Lake, whose water is very hot, and yet the Countrey is very cold: they bathe themselues neere the bankes, for further in it is intolerable. In the middest is a boyling aboue twentie foote square: it neuer encreaseth nor decreaseth, although they haue drawne from it a great streame for Metall Mils.
No raine: the cause.But to returne from this plenty of water in Lakes, to that want thereof in the Plaines of Peru. The naturall reason which some yeeld of this want of Raine, is, partly their sandie and dry q^alitie, which of themselues can yeeld no further exhalations, then to produce those mists or deawes: partly the height of the Hils, which shadow the Plaines, and suffer  no wind to blow from the Land vpon them, but intercept them wholly with their vapours and Cloudes; so that their winde is onely from the Sea, which finding no opposite, doth not presse nor straine forth the vapours which rise to engender Raine. This seemeth the rather to be probable, for that it raines vpon some small Hils along the Coast which are least shadowed. In the same Coast also, where the Easterly or Northerly winds be ordinary, it raineth as in Guayaquill. The South winde in other places isTellus Nubibus assiduis plisuiaque madescit ab Austro. Ouid. accounted a causer of Raine, which here reigneth without rayning.
As strange is the difference of seasons, after the Indians account. For in theCieza c. 59. Sierras their Summer beginneth in Aprill, and endeth with September: October beginneth their Winter, which not the absence, but the presence of the Sunne doth cause. Contrariwise in the  Plaines, iust by in site, they haue their Summer from October to Aprill, the rest their Winter. (The like is noted in the East Indies at the Hils of Balegate, where that Ridge parteth Winter and Summer in the same neernesse to the Sunne, at the same time, and a few miles distant.)
The Raines in the Hils are cause why they call it Winter, and the deawes or mysts in the Plaines, so that when the Raines fall most in the Hils, it is cleere weather in the Plaines, and when the deaw falleth in the Plaines, it is cleere on the Hils: and thus it commeth to passe, that a man may trauell from Winter to Summer in one day, hauing Winter to wash him in the morning, and ere night a cleere and dry Summer to scorch him. Yea in some places (sayth Alexandro Vrsino) within sixe miles space both heate and cold are intolerable,  and enough to kill any man. From Saint Helen to Copiapo it neuer raineth, which Coast extends forty miles, in some places fiftie, in breadth, and twelue hundred leagues in length.


@. II. Of the first Inhabitants, their Quippos, Arts, Marriages.
ABout the point of Saint Helena in Peru, theyCieza c. 25. tell that sometimes there liued  Giants of huge stature, which came thither in Boates, the compasse of their knee was as much as of another mans middle: they were hated of the people, because that vsing their women they killed them, and did the same to the men for otherThe like doth Apolodorus, and the Poets tell of Typhon, and other Giants. Ap. de Ded. Orig. l. 1. and Hyginus fab. 152. causes. These Giants were addicted to Sodomie, and therefore as the Indians report, were destroyed with fire from Heauen. Whether this be true or no, in those parts are found huge and Giantlike bones. Cieza writes that Iohn di Holmos at Porto Vicio digged and found teeth three fingers broad, and foure long. Contrariwise, in the Valley of ChinchaCieza. c. 74. they haue a Tradition that the Progenitors of the present Inhabitants destroyed the natiue people, which were not aboue two Cubits high, and possessed their roomes: in testimonie whereof  they alledge also that bone-argument.
Concerning the Indians conceit of their own originall: we haue mentioned their opinion
 of a floud, and the repeopling of the World by them, which came out of a Caue.Acost. l. 1. c. 25 They haue another Legend, that all men being drowned, there came out of the great Lake Titicaca, one Virococha, which stayed in Traguanaco, where at this day is to bee seene the ruines of very ancient and strange buildings, and from thence came to Cusco, and so beganne Mankinde to multiply. They shew in the same Lake a small Iland, where they faine that the Sunne hid himselfe, and so was preserued:Cieza. p. 1. c. 103. and for this reason they made great Sacrifices vnto him in this place, both of Sheepe and Men. They held this place sacred, and the Inguas built there a Temple to the Sunne; and placed there Women and Priests with great treasures.
 SomeAcost. ibid. learned men are of opinion, that all which the Indians make mention of is not aboue foure hundred yeeres; which may bee imputed to their want of writing. In stead of writing they vsed their Quippos.Quippos. These Quippos are Memorials or Registers made of cords, in which there are diuers knots and colours, signifying diuers things: these were their Bookes of Histories, of Lawes, Ceremonies, and accounts of their affaires. There were officers appointed to keepe them, called Quipocamayos, which were bound to giue account of things as Notaries and Registers. They had according to the diuersitie of businesse, sundry cords and branches, in eue^y of which were so many knots little and great, and strings tyed to them, some red, some greene, and in such varietie, that euen as wee deriue an infinite number of words from the Letters of the Alphabet, so doe they from these kinds and colours.  And at this day they will keepe account exactly with them. I did see (sayth Acosta) a handfull of these strings, wherein an Indian woman did carrie (as it were) written a generall confession of all her life, and thereby confessed herselfe, as well as I could haue done in written paper, with strings for the circumstances of the sinnes. They haue also certaine wheeles of small stones, by meanes whereof they learne all they desire by heart. Thus you shall see them learne the Pater-noster, Creed, and the rest: and for this purpose they haue many of these wheeles in their Church-yards. They haue another kinde of Quippos, with grains of M^ys, with which they wil cast hard accounts, which might trouble a good Arithmetician with his Pen in the Diuisions. They were no lesse wittie,Id. ibid. c. 26. if not more, in things whereto they apply themselues, then the men of these parts. They taught their young children  all Arts necessary to the life of men, euery one learning what was needfull for his person and family, and not appropriating himselfe to one profession; as with vs, one is a Tayler, another a Weauer, or of other Trade. Euery man was his owne Weauer, Carpenter, Husbandman, and the like. But in other Arts, more for ornament then necessitie, they had Gold-smiths, Painters, Potters, and Weauers of curious workes for Noblemen, and so of the rest. No man might change the fashion vsed in his owne Countrey, when hee went into another, that all might be knowne of what Countrey they were.
For their Marriages, they had many Wiues, but one was principall, which was wedded with Solemnitie, and that in this sort: The Bridegroome went to the Brides House, and put Ottoya, which was an open Shooe, on her foot: this, if shee were a Mayd, was of wooll,  otherwise, of Reeds, and this done, he led her thence with him. If she committed Adulterie, shee was punished with death: when the Husband dyed, shee carried a mourning Weed of blacke a yeere after, and might not marry in that time, which befell not the other Wiues. The Ingua himselfe with his own hand gaue this woman to his Gouernours and Captaines, and the Gouernours assembled all the young men and Mayds in one place of the Citie, where they gaue to euery one his Wife, with the aforesaid Ceremonie in putting on the Ottoya: the other Wiues did serue and honour this. None might marry with his Mother, Daughter, Grandmother or Grand-childe: and Yapangui, the Father of Guaynacapa was the first Ingua that married his Sister, and confirmed his fact by a Decree, that the Inguas might doe it, commanding his owne children to doe it, permitting the Noblemen also to marrie their Sisters  by the Father side. Other Incest, and Murther, Theft, and Adulterie were punished with death. Such as had done good seruice in warre, were rewarded with Lands, Armes, Titles of honour, and Marriage in the Inguas Linage.
They had Chasquis or PostsPosts. in Peru, which were to carrie tidings or Letters: for which purpose they had houses a league and a halfe asunder, and running each man to the next, they  would runne fifty leagues in a day and night.



@. III. The Regall Rites, Rights, Workes, and of RVMINAGVI and ALVARADO.
WHen the Ingua was dead, his lawfull heire borne of his chiefe Wife succeeded. And if the King had a legitimate Brother, he first inherited, and then the Sonne of the first. Hee inherited not the goods (as is sayd already) but they were wholly dedicated to his Oratorie or Guaca, and for the mayntenance of the Family he left: which, with his Off-spring, was alway busied at the Sacrifices, Ceremonies,  and Seruice of the deceased King: for being dead, they presently held him for a God, making Images and Sacrifices to him. The Ensigne of Royaltie was a Red Rowle of Wooll finer then Silke, which hung on his forehead, which was a Diadem that none else might weare in the middest of their forehead; at the eare the Noblemen men might. When they tooke this Roll, they made their Coronation Feast, and many Sacrifices with a great quantitie of vessels of Gold, and Siluer, and many Images in the forme of Sheepe of Gold and Siluer, and a thousand others of diuers colours. Then the chiefe Priest tooke a young Child in his hand of the age of sixe or eight yeeres, pronouncing these words with the other Ministers to the Image of Viracocha; Lord, wee offer this vnto thee, that thou mayest mayntaine vs in quiet, and helpe vs in our Warres: mayntaine our Lord the Ingua in his Greatnesse and estate,  that hee may alway increase: giuing him much knowledge to gouerne vs. There were present at this Ceremonie, men of all parts of the Realme, and of all Guacas and Sanctuaries. It is not found that any of the Inguas Subiects euer committed Treason against him. Hee placed the Gouernours in euery Prouince, some greater, and some smaller. The Inguas thought it a good rule of State to keepe their Subiects alway in action, and therefore there are seene to this day long Causeys of great labour, diuiding this large Empire into foure parts.
Hauing conq^ered a Prouince, they presently reduced them into Townes and Communalties, which were diuided into Bands: one was appointed ouer tenne, another ouer a hundred, and another ouer a thousand, and ouer tenne thousand another. Aboue all, there was in euery Prouince a Gouernour of the House of the Inguas, to whom the rest  gaue accounts of what had passed, and who were eyther borne or dead. At the Feast called Raymar, the Gouernours brought the Tribute of the whole Realme to the Court at Cusco. All the KingdomeCieza pag. 1. cap. 29. was diuided into foure parts, Chinchasuyo, Collosuyo, Andesuyo, and Condesuyo, according to the foure wayes which went from Cusco, East, West, North and South.
WhenAcost. l. 6. c. 15 the Ingua conquered a Citie, the Land was diuided into three Parts, the first for Religion, euery Idoll and Guaca hauing his peculiar Lands appropriated to their Priests and Sacrifices; and the greatest part thereof was spent in Cusco, where was the Generall and Metropolitan Sanctuary, the rest in that Citie where it was gathered, which all had Guacas, after the fashion of Cusco, some being thence distant two hundred leagues. That which they  reapt on the Land, was put into Store-houses built for that purpose.
The second part of that diuision was for the Ingua for the mayntenance of his Court, Kinsmen, Noblemen, and Souldiers: which they brought to Cusco, or other places where it was needfull.
The third part was for the Communaltie for the nourishment of the people, no particular man possessing any part hereof in proper. As the Family encreased or decreased, so did the portion. Their Tribute was to till and husband the Lands of the Ingua, and the Guacas, and lay it vp in Store-houses, being for that time of their labour nourished out of the same lands. The like distribution was made of the Cattel to the same purposes, as that of the lands, and of the wooll, and other profits that thence arose. The old men, women and sicke folkes,  were reserued from this Tribute. They payed other Tributes also, euen whatsoeuer the Ingua would choose out of euery Prouince. The Chicas sent sweete Woods; the Lucanas, Brancars to carrie his Litter; the Chumtilbicas, Dancers: others were appointed to labour in the Mines: and all were slaues to the Ingua. Some hee employed in building of Temples, Fortresses, Houses, or other Workes, as appeareth by the remnants of them, where are found stones of such greatnesse, that men cannot conceiue how they were cut, brought and layed in their places, they hauing no Iron or Steele to cut, Engines to carrie, nor Morter to lay them: and yet they were so cunningly layed, that one could not see the ioynts. Some of eight and thirtie foot long, sayth Acosta, eight broad, and sixe thicke, I measured; and in the walles of Cusco are bigger; none so little (sayth Sancho) in some  buildings there, as three Carts might carrie, and some thirty spannes square. Iohn Ellis
 which lately was there, sayth some of them are twentie tunne weight, strangely ioyned with^ut morter.
They built a Bridge at Chiquitto, the Riuer being so deepe, that it will not admit Arches: they fastened bundles o^ Reedes and Weedes, which being light, will not sinke, which they fasten to eyther side of the Riuer, they make it passable for man and beast: it is three hundred foot long. CuscoGom. c. 124. their chiefe Citie standeth in seuenteene degrees: it is subiect to cold and Snow, the Houses are of great and square stone. It was besieged by Soto, and by Pizarro, and by him entred, where they found more treasure then they had by the imprisonment of Atabaliba. QuitoGom. c. 125. 126. is said to haue beene as rich as Cusco. Hither  Ruminagni fled with fiue thousand Souldiers; when Atabaliba his Master was taken by the Spaniards, and slue Illescas his Brother, that withstood his Tyrannicall proceedings, flayed him, and made a Drumme of his skinne; slue two thousand Souldiers that brought the bodie of Atabaliba to Quite to be interred, hauing in shew of Funerall pompe and honour, before, made them drunke; and with his Forces scoured the Prouince of Tamebamba: hee killed many of his Wiues for smiling, when hee told them they should haue pleasure with the bearded men, and burnt the Wardrobe of Atabaliba: that when the Spaniards came and entred Quito, which had almost dispeopled Panama, Nicaragua, Cartagena, and other their Habitations in hope of Peruuian spoyles, they found themselues disappointed of their expected prey, and in anger set fire on the Towne. Aluarado with like  newes came from Guatimala into those parts, with foure hundred Spaniards, but was forced to kill his Horse, to feede his famished Company (although at that time Horses were worth in Peru aboue a thousand Ducats a piece) was almost killed with thirst, was assaultedNot far from Lima, on the South Sea. Oliuer Noort was bemisted two dayes on the Sea, with such a showre of ashes, which made them seeme as they had bin sprinkled with Meale. The Spaniards say, they are there common. with showres of Ashes, which the hote Vulcane of Quito dispersed two hundred and fortie myles about (with terrible Thunders and Lightnings, which Pluto had seemed to steale from Iupiter, and here to vent them) and after with Snowes on the colde Hils, which exacted seuenty Spaniards for Tribute in the passage, found many men sacrificed by the Inhabitants, but could finde no Gold, till Pizarro bought his departure with an hundred thousand Duckets. Hee gaue, Thankes, (hee sayd) to God for his deliuerance, by that Tract, by which hee had passed, to the Deuill. This was hee that afterward being  bruised with the fall of his Horse, (wherof hee dyed) and asked where hee was most pained, sayd,Benzo. l. 2. c. 17 in his Soule, as guilty to himselfe of his former cruelties and couetousnesse. This is the profit of vnsanctified and ill-sanctified Gold: the one whereof we see in these Peruuian Temples thus spoyled by the Spaniards, who (in the other respect) were more spoyled by this spoyle and purchase. What golden dayes these were to the Spaniards, this History in diuers places sheweth. From one Palace of Cusco (sayth Xeres) they tooke seuen hundred plates of Gold, each whereof weighed fiue hundred Castlins: from another House the weight of two hundred thousand. Two Houses of Gold hee speakes of, the very thatch being counterfeit in Gold, the strawes with the eares artificially wrought.F. Xeres. Ortel. Theat. But euery where are these Relations wrought and embrodered with Cusco Gold. Aluarados Armie,  which he brought into Peru, had perished, as Cieza relateth, with drought, but for certaine Canes as bigge as a mans legge, which betweene the knots contayned a pottle of water,Strange Canes extracted from the dewes; for there fell no raine in those parts.
Giraua sayth that the Inhabitants of Anzerma were in their Warres armed with complete Harnesse of Gold: and that about Quito there were Mynes, whence more Gold was taken then Earth. I tye no mans credit to these reports, but sure it is, that they had these Metals in abundance, which the Spanish warres haue made our European World to feele, more managed and mayntayned by Indian wedges, then Spanish Blades.
But let vs come from their Mynes, to their Minds, which for heauenly things were as ful   of drosse, as the other were of purer Metals.




CHAP. X. Of the many Gods of Peru, their opinions of the Creation, Floud, and end of the World.

@. I.  Of their Gods.
THe Peruuians acknowledged a Supreme Lord and Authour of all things,Acost. l. 5 c. 3. Viracocha. which they called Viracocha, and gaue him names of great excellencie, as Pachacamas, or Pachayachachis, which is, the Creator of Heauen and Earth, and Vsapu, that is, admirable, and other the like. Him they did worship as the chiefest of all, and honoured him in beholding the Heauens. Yet hadNo name in the Culcan or Mexican tongues to signifie God. they no proper name for God, no more then the Mexicans, but such as in this sort might signifie him by his attributes or workes, and therefore are forced to vse the  Spanish name Dios.Which they pronounce Tius wanting the letter d in their Language, Veg. l. 1. c. 40. In the name of Pachacamac, or Creator, they had a rich Temple erected to him, wherein they worshipped notwithstanding the Deuill and certaine figures. The name of Viracocha was of the greatest sound in their deuotions, and so they called the Spaniards, esteeming them the Sonnes of Heauen. BenzoBenzo. l. 3. c. 21 alledgeth another cause of that name giuen to the Spaniards. It signifieth (saith he) the froth of the Sea (Vega saith they called the Spaniards Viracah because they resembled a spectrum which appeared to Inga Viracocha with a beard, etc. They therefore thought them sent fro^ Heauen to doe iustice on Atabaliba for his tyrannie. And were further confirmed in this errour by their Harquebuzes and Ordnance which they called Yllapa, thu^der, and Hatun Yllapa great thunder, the proper weapo^s of the Sunne. They called them also Inca or Ingua. But after experience of their wickednesse they forbeare to call them so any longer: and ca^led them Cupay 1. Deuils. The people were so loyall and subiect, as they held the Spaniards their conquerours as Gods, and obserued them as they vsed their Idols. Vira is froth, Cochie the Sea) because they thought them ingendred of Sea froth, and nourished therewith, in regard of their couetousnesse and crueltie deuouring all things: applying that name to them in respect of their wicked practices, and not for Diuine Originall. Yea, they curse the Sea, which sent such a cursed brood into the Land. (The Spaniards came thither by Sea, as you haue heard.) If I, sayth Benzo, asked any of them for any Christian by that Title, they would neyther looke on me, nor answere: but if I enquired for them by the name of Viracochie,  they would presently make answere. And there (would the Father point to the child) goes a Viracochi. In this they agreed with the ancient Grecian Ethnikes, which termed the most inhumane Monsters of humanitie, and the cruellest Tyrants, the Sonnes of Neptune, as procreated of the Sea. Such wereA. Gel. l 15. 21. I. Hygin Fab. Procrustes Polyphemus, and others.
To reconcile these two wholly, is impossible; not so, to shew some reason why the same name might bee giuen both to their Idoll, and the Spaniards. These might bee so termed, as comming thither at first by Sea: and haply, because at the first they thought somewhat more then humane to be in them; and that which at first they gaue for honour, may now bee continued in an Ironie, or Antiphrasis, whiles they thought them better then Men, and found them little inferiour to Deuils.  
Viracocha their great Authour of Nature, may bee called by this Sea nameSee c. 12. for some especiall Sea Rites obserued in his honour, or for the same cause that the Mythologians ascribe to VenusOrta salo, suscepta solo, patre edita Coelo-Venus. Ansonius. her Sea-generation. For they pictured Venus swimming on the Sea (as AlbricusAlbricus de Imag. deorum. affirmeth) and the Poet singeth Venus Orta Mari: which the Mythologians apply to the motion and moysture required to generation, and to that frothy nature of the Sperme. So sayth Phornutus:Phornuti de Nat. dier. Speculum. Vid Im. de. i Dai. Vinc. ^artan. Venus e Mari nata perhibetur, quod ad omnium generationis causam motu and humiditate opus sit, Et forte quod spumosa sint animantium semina: therefore (sayth^ulgentij Mytholog. l 2. Fulgentius) she is called Aphrodite: for Aphros is Froth; and so is Lust, in regard of the vanitie, and so is Seed in regard of naturall qualitie. Perhaps also the first Master of Viracochas Mysteries, which taught them first in Peru, came thither by Sea.  
But to returne to Acosta,Ac. l. 6. c, 21. he telleth that the Ingua Yupangui (to make himselfe more respected) deuised, that being one day alone, Viracocha the Creator spake to him, complayning, that though hee were vniuersall Lord and Creator of all things, and had made the Heauen, the Sunne, the World, and Men, and ruled all, yet they did not yeeld him due obedience, but did equally honour the Sunne, Thunder, Earth, and other things: giuing him to vnderstand, that in Heauen where hee was, they called him Viracocha Pachayachachia, which signifieth vniuersall Creator: promising also that hee would send men inuisibly to assist him against the Changuas, who had lately defeated his Brother.  

Vnder this colour he assembled a mightie Armie, and ouerthrew the Changuas: and from that time commanded that Viracocha should be held for vniuersall Lord, and that the Images of the Sunne and Thunder, should doe him reuerence. And thenceforth they set his Image highest: yet did he not dedicate any thing to him,So haue some reasoned, In Templis quid facit aurum? Pers saying, that hee being Lord of all had no need. As for those inuisible Souldiers (a conceit like that which wee haue mentioned of the Turkes) he said that no man might see them but himselfe: and since they were conuerted into stones: and in that regard gathered a multitude of stones in the Mountaynes, and placed them for Idols, sacrificing them. He called them Pururaucas, and carried them to the warres with great deuotion, making his Souldiers beleeue that they had gotten the victory  through their helpe. And by this meanes he obtayned goodly victories.
Next to Viracocha they worshipped the Sunne: and after him the Thunder, which they called by three names, Chuquilla, Catuilla, and Intijllapa, supposing it to be a man in Heauen with a Sling and a Mace, in whose power it is to cause Raine, Haile, Thunder, and other effects of the ayrie Region.
This Guaca (so they called both their Idols and Temples) was Generall to all the Indians of Peru: and in Cusco they sacrificed to him children, as they did to the Sunn. These three, Viracocha, the Sunne, and Thunder, had a more especiall worship then the rest: they put as it were a Gantlet or Gloue vpon their hands, when they lifted them vp to worship them. They worshipped the Earth in the name of Pachamama, and esteemed her the Mother of all  things: the Sea also, and called it Mamacocha: and the Rain-bow, which with two Snakes stretched out on each side, were the Armes of the Inguas. They attributed diuers offices, to diuers Starres, and those which needed their fauour, worshipped them: so the Shepheard sacrificed to a Starre, by them called Vrcuhillay, which they hold to be a sheepe of diuers colours, and two other Starres called Catuchillay and Vrcuchillay, which they fayned to bee an Ewe and a Lambe: others worshipped a Starre which they name Machaeuay, to which they attributed the power ouer Snakes and Serpents, to keepe them from hurting them. To another Starre called Chugninchinchey (which is as much as Tigre) they ascribed power ouer Beares, Tigres, and Lions. They haue generally beleeued of all the Beasts in the earth there is one like vnto them in heauen, which hath care of their procreation and encrease. Many  other Starres they worshipped, too tedious to rehearse. They worshipped also Riuers, Fountaines, the mouthes of Riuers, entries of Mountaynes, Rockes or great stones, Hils and the tops of Mountaynes, which they call Apachitas. They worshipped all things in Nature, which seemed to them remarkeable and different from the rest.
They shewed me (it isAcost. l. 5. c. 5 Acostas speech) in Cazamalca, a Hill or Mount of Sand, which was a chiefe Idoll or Guaca, of the Ancients. I demanded what Diuinitie they found in it; they alledged the wonder, it beeing a high Mount of Sand in the middest of the thicke Mountaynes of stone. In the Citie de los Reyes, for the melting of a Bell, wee cut downe a great deformed Tree, which for the greatnesse and Antiquitie thereof had beene their Guaca. They attributed the like Diuinitie to any thing that was strange in t^i^ kind, as Stones,  or the Roots Papas and Lallatrecas (which they kissed and worshipped:) Beares also, Lions, Tigres and Snakes, that they should not hurt them. And such as their Gods be, such are the things which they offer vnto them in their worship. They haue vsed, as they goe by the way, to cast in the crosse wayes on the Hils and tops of Mountaynes, olde shooes, feathers, and Coca chewed. And when they had nothing else, they cast a stone as an offering, that they might passe freely and lustily; hence it is, that they find in the high wayes great heaps of stones offered, and such other things. They vsed the like ridiculous offering in pulling off their haires of the eye-browes to offer to the Sunne, Hils, Winds, or any other thing which they feare. They report of one of the Inguas, that said he did not take the Sunne to be a God, because he laboureth so much in his daily iourny. In fine,Gom. 1^1. euery one worshipped what liked  him best. The Fishers worshipped a Sharke or some other Fish: the Hunter, a Lion, Fox, or other Beast; with many Birds; the Countriman, the Water, and Earth. They beleeued that the Moone was Wife to the Sunne. When they sweare, they touch the Earth, and looke vp to the Sunne. Many of their Idols had Pastorall Staues, and Mitres like B shops, but the Indians could tell no reason thereof: and when they saw the Spanish Bishops in their Pontificalibus, they asked if they were Guacas of the Christians.
They worshipped also (as before is said) the dead bodies of the Inguas, preseruing them with certaine Rosin, so that they seemed aliue. The body of Yupangui, the Grandfather of Atabaliba, was thus found, hauing eyes made of a fine cloth of Gold so artificially set, as they seemed naturall, hauing lost no more haire then if he had died the same day, and yet he  had beene dead seuenty eight yeeres. There also the Spaniards found his Seruants and Mamacomas, which did seruice to his memory.
In some ProuinceCieza. c. 50. they worshipped the Image of a Bull, in another of a Cocke, and in
 other, others. In the Principall Temple of Pachicama, they kept a shee Fox and worshipped it. The Lord of Manta kept a great and rich Emerald, as his Ancestors also before him had holden it, in great veneration: on some dayes it was brought forth in publike to be worshipped. They which were sicke, came in Pilgrimage to visit it, and there offered their gifts, which the Cacique and Ministers turned to their owne profit. The Deuill in many places did appeare vnto them, and he indeed was Author of all these Superstitions.
They haue a Tradition concerning the Creation,Gom. hist gen. cap 122. Apollon. l. 1. that at the beginning of the World there came one from the North, into their Countrey, called Con, which had no bones, went very light and swift, cast downe Mountaines lift vp the Hils only with his Will and Word: He said he was the Sonne of the Sunne, and filled the earth with men and women which  they created, giuing them fruits and bread, and other things necessary for humane life. But being offended with some, he countermanded all that former good, and turned the fruitfull Lands into barren Sands, as they are now in the Plaines, and tooke away the water that it should not raine (hence it came that it raines not) only leauing them the Riuers, of pure compassion, that they should maintayne themselues with labour. AfterwardsCalueto in Benz l. 3. c. 28. came another from the South, called Pachicama, the Sonne also of the Sunne and Moone, who banished Con, and turned his men into Cats, Monkeyes, Beares, Lions, Parrots, and other Birds, and created the Progenitors of the present Indians, and taught them to husband the Earth and the Trees. They againe, to gratifie him turned him in their imaginations and superstitions vnto a God,Cieza c. 72. and named the Prouince foure leagues from Lima of his name. He t continued  till the Christians came to Peru. He was their great Oracle, and as some Indians affirme, he still continueth in secret places with some of their old men, and speaketh to them. Of this Temple we shall after speake.
They hold opinionGom. vbi sup. also, that on a time it rained so exceedingly, that it drowned all the lower Countries, and all men; saue a few, which got into Caues vpon high Hils, where they shut vp themselues close; that no raine could get in: there they had stored much prouision and liuing creatures. And when they perceiued that it had done raining, they sent forth two Dogges, but they returning all myrie and foule, they knew that the waters had not yet ceased: after that, they sent forth more Dogges, which came backe againe dry, then did they goe forth to people the Earth: but were mightily afflicted with multitudes of great  Serpents, which had sprung vp out of those mirie Reliques of the Floud:This is like Guid^ tale of Tython, etc. ^^el. 1. but at last they killed them. They beleeue also that the World shall haue an end, but before the same, shall goe a great drought, and the Sunne and Moone, which they worship, shall be consumed: and therefore they make grieuous lamentations when there is any Eclipse, especially of the Sun, fearing the destruction of it and the World. They beleeue the immortalitie of the Soule, as as we shall more fitly see when we come to their Buriall Rites.



CHAP XI. Of the Religious Persons, and Places, Confessions, and Sacrifices in Peru.

@. I. Of their Priests, Oracles and Temples.
NO man might come to theApollon. l. 1. Guacas, or Idols, but Priests. These were clothed  in white, and when they came to worship, they prostrated themselues on the ground, and holding in their hands a white cloth, did speake to their God in a strange Language, that the people should not vnderstand. These haue the authoritie in their holies, and consecrate both the things liuing, and the offerings of other things. In the Sacrifices they diuined by inspection of the inward parts, especially by view of the heart, if it were of a man. And if they find not signes answerable to their expectation, they neuer cease off from sacrificing till they doe find them; beleeuing, and making the people beleeue, that God is not till then pleased with their Sacrifices. They bare incredible shew, and were had in great reputation, of holinesse. When they were to sacrifice, they abstained from women, and if they had committed any trespasse,  they did expiate and purge the same with fasting: in sacrificing they did binde, and blinde their eyes, and were sometimes so transported with Zeale, that with their nayles they
 scratched or pulled out their eyes, as hath beene seene. Neyther did the people alone admire their holinesse, but the Princes also, who would doe nothing of moment without their aduice. They also without feare or flattery, declared vnto them what they had receiued from their Oracles. The manner of their Deuils consultation was this: InAcost. l. 5. c. 12 the night time commonly) they entred backward to their Idoll, and so went bending their bodies and heads after an vgly manner, and thus consulted with him, The answere he made, was for the most part like vnto a fearefull hissing, or to a gnashing, which did terrifie them. These Oracles are now ceased.
ApolloniusLeu Apoll. l. 1 speakes of two mighty Princes, not farre from Chili, one of them named Lychengorme;  they are able to bring into the field two hundred thousand men, and are very rich: but the cause why I heere mention them, is that number of Priests, which hee sayth are reported to belong to one of their Temples, to the number of two thousand. Cieza writeth, that the doores of their Temples were Eastward: that in euery Temple were two Images of the bignesse and likenesse of Goats, before which they burnt sweet wood: there were also Images of Serpents. Euery profession had their seuerall God. In some Temples were hanged the dead carkasses of men sacrificed.
In euery Prouince of Peru, there was one principall house of adoration. The ruinesGom. c. 121: of the Temple of Pachacama are still to be seene. That, and the Temples of Collao, and Cusco, were lined within with Plates of Gold and Siluer; and all their seruice was of the same, which  proued great riches to the conquerours. In Pachacama the Sun was worshipped with great deuotion. There were kept in the same many Virgins. Francis PizarroCieza cap. 72. sent his Brother Hernando (when he had taken Atabaliba) to spoyle this Temple, but the Priests and chiefe men had carried away aboue foure hundred burthens of Gold before he came, and none doth know what became of it. Yet did he find there some quantitie of Gold and Siluer remayning. They sacked the Sepulchres also, and thence drew abundance of the said Metals. From that time hitherto, the Temple went to ruine.
The Temple of CuscoAcost. l. ^. c. 12 was very sumptuous, the pauement and stones yet remayne witnesses of the ancient splendour and magnificence. This Temple was like to the Pantheon of the Romans: for that it was the house and dwelling of all the Gods. For the Inguas did there  behold the Gods of all the Nations and Prouinces they had conquered, euery Idol hauing his proper place, whither they of that Prouince came to worship it, with excessiue charge for the same. And thereby they supposed to keepe safely in obedience those Prouinces which they had conquered, holding their Gods as it were in hostage. In this House was the Pinchao, which was an Idoll of the Sunne, of most fine Gold, wrought with great riches of Stones, the which was placed to the East with so great Art, as the Sunne at his rising did cast his beames thereon, which reflected with such brightnesse, that it seemed another Sunne. They say, that at the spoyle of this Temple, a Souldier had for his part this goodly Pinchao, and lost the same in a night at play, whence grew a Prouerbe of Gamesters in Peru. They play the Sunne before Sun-rising. This Temple towards the East (if our Spanish Captaine in Ramusio  deceiues not) was couered with Gold, which the Spaniards (Religion forbidding Indian helpe) tooke away. There were many boyling pots and other Vessels of Gold. In the houses of the Citie was great store of Gold. In one house or Temple where they sacrificed, was a seat of Gold which weighed nineteene thousand Pezos, in which two men might sit. The house wherein old CuscoGuaynacapa. lay buried, the pauement and wals were couered with Gold and Siluer, many Pots and Iarres were couered with like metal. Xeres also reporteth the same, who was Pizarros Secretary, and his Relation subscribed by Pizarro, and other Chieftaines: that this Temple was on the pauement, wals, and roofe, couered with plates of Gold and Siluer, wrought one into another: and that there were twenty other houses in that Citie, the wals whereof within and without were couered with plates of Gold.
 Both these Authors, eye-witnesses, report, that at Caximalca was a Temple of the Sunne, (into which they entred vnshod) walled and planted with trees round about: the like is also in euery great Towne: here were many other Temples besides. In the middest was the stately Place of Atabaliba, with pleasant Gardens and Lodgings, in one of which was a Golden Cisterne, whereto were by two Pipes from contrary passages brought both cold water and hot, to vse them mingled, or asunder at pleasure. The Towne had about two thousand houses, seuered by streets as straight as a line, about two hundred pases long, with wals of stone. Ten dayes iourney from hence, Atabaliba told the Spaniards, that in the way toward Cusco, was a Temple generall to all the Countrey, which was very rich with Offerings of Gold and Siluer, much honoured by his Father and himselfe: other Temples  had their particular Idols; this Idoll was generall, and that the custodie thereof was committed to a wiseman, which they thought could foretell things future, by reuelation of the said Idoll.

The Citie of Pachacama was famous for Peruuian deuotions. Their Idoll was placed in a darkesome painted Roome, stinking and close shut, made of filthy wood, hauing at his feete many Offerings of Gold: none but the Ministers of his Holies durst enter, nor touch the wals of the House. Three hundred leagues they came thither on Pilgrimage with rich Offerings: first speaking to the Doore-keeper, who went in and consulted with the Idoll concerning them, and returned his answere. His Priests were of his owne appointment, and might not approch to him without preparations of fasting, and abstinence from their wiues, Thorow all the streets of the Citie, and on the principall Gates, and round about the Temple, were many Idols of Wood which they worshipped. All the Countrey about payed a yeerely tribute hereunto. The Spaniards told them this their God was a Deuill, and taught  them to defend themselues from him with the signe of the Crosse. Neere to this Temple was an House or Oratorie of the Sunne, on an high place, engirt about with fiue wals. At Tichicasa was a Temple and Oracle of the Sunne, which had aboue sixe hundred men and a thousand women that did seruice therein, and made Chica there. Much Gold and wealth was here offered.
In some part of Peru,Cieza. c. 64. Sodomites. as at Old Port and Puna, they vsed the detestable sinne against Nature: yea, the Deuill so farre preuayled in their beastly Deuotions, that there were Boyes consecrated to serue in the Temple: and at the times of their Sacrifices and Solemne Feasts, the Lords and principall men abused them to that detestable filthinesse. And generally in the Hill-countries, the Deuill vnder shew of holinesse, had brought in that vice. Euery Temple  or principall house of adoration kept one man or two or more, which went a tired like women, euen from the time of their child-hood, and spake like them imitating them in euery thing. VnderTantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. pretext of holinesse and Religion, their principall men, on principall dayes, had that hellish commerce. A Frier dealt with two of these Ganimedes, about the filthinesse of this Vice: and they answered that they held it no fault; for from their childhood they had beene placed there by their Caciques, both for that employment, as also to bee P^iests and to keepe the Temple. Thus farre had they banished Nature, to entertaine Religion, and thus farre had they exiled the soule of Religion, retayning onely a stinking Carkasse.
At Ganada inCieza. c. 77: and 80. Caximalca the Inguas built a Temple in honour of the Sunne. There were  Virgins kept, which intended nothing but to weaue, and spi^ne, and dye clothes, for their Idolatrous seruices. The like was in other places. In Guanuco was a stately Palace of great stones, and a Temple of the Sunne adioyning, with a number of Virgins and Minist^rs, which had thirtie thousand Indians for the seruice thereof. The seruice which most of them did, is like to be the tilling of the ground, feeding of Cattell, and such like before mentioned, which they were bound to doe for the Inguas, and also for the Guacas, that is, Idols, and Idol-houses. But it were a wearisome Pilgrimage to goe and leade my Reader with mee, to euery of their Temples, which for the most part had the same Rites, according to that proportion of mayntenance which belonged to them.  


@. II. Of their Nunnes, Sorcerers, Confessions and and Penances.
GOmar^^Gom. c. 121. reporteth, that their houses of women were as Cloysters or Monasteries, enclosed, that they might neuer goe forth. They gelded Men, which should attend on them, cutting off also their Noses and Lips, that they should haue no such appetite.  It was death for any to be found false and incontinent. The men that entred into them, were hanged vp by the feet. These made Robes for the Idols, and burned the ouerplus with the bones of white sheepe, and hurled the Ashes into the Ayre towards the Sun. If they proued with childe, and sware that Pachacama did it, the issue was preserued.
Of these Monasteries or Nunneries, thus writeth Acosta. There were in Peru, many Monasteries of Virgins,Acost. lib. 5. cap. 15. (but not any for men, except for the Priests and Sorcerers) at the least one in euery Prouince. In these were two sorts of women; one ancient, which they called Mamacomas, for the instruction of the young; the other of young Maydens, placed there for a certaine time, after which they were drawne forth, eyther for the Gods, or for the Ingua. They called this House or Monastery Aclaguagi, that is, the House of the Chosen. Euery  Monastery had his Vicar, or Gouernour, called Appopanaca, who had libertie to chuse whom he pleased, of what qualitie soeuer, being vnder eight yeeres of age, if they seemed
 to be of a good stature and constitution. The Mamacomas instructed these Virgins in diuers things needfull for the life of man, and in the Customes and Ceremonies of their Gods. Afterwards they tooke them from thence, being aboue fourteene, sending them to the Court with sure Guards, whereof some were appointed to serue the Idol^, and Idol-Temples, keeping their Virginitie for euer: some other were for ordinary Sacrifices that were made of Maydens, and other extraordinary Sacrifices they made for the health, death, or warres of the Inguas: and the rest serued for Wiues and Concubines to the Ingua, or such as hee gaue them to. This distribution was renued euery yeere. These Monasteries possessed rents, for the maintenance of these Virgins. No Father might refuse his Daughter, if the Appopanaca required  her: yea, many Fathers did willingly offer their Daughters, supposing it was a great merit to be sacrificed for the Ingua. If any of these Mamacomas orThe young Vi^gin Nun^. Aollas were found to haue trespassed against their honour, it was an ineuitable chastisement to bury them aliue, or to put them to death, by some other cruell torment.
The Inguas allowed a kindAcost. l 5. c. ^0 Sorcerers. of Sorcerers or Sooth-sayers, which (they say) tooke vpon them what forme and figure they pleased, flying farre thorow the Ayre in a short time. They talke with the Deuill, who answered them in certaine stones, or other things, which they reuerence much. They tell what hath passed in the furthest parts, before newes can come. In the distance of two or three hundred leagues, they would tell what the Spaniards did or suffered in their ciuill warres. To worke this diuination, they shut vp themselues vp into a  house and became drunke, till they lost their senses: a day after, they answered to that which was demanded. Some affirme they vse certaine vnctions. The Indians say, that the old women doe commonly vse this office of Witchcraft, especially in some places. They tell of things stolne or lost. The Anaconas (which are the seruants of the Spaniards) consult with them, and they make answere, hauing first spoken with the Deuill in an obscure place: so as the Anaconas heare the sound of the voyce, but vnderstand it not, nor see any body. They vse the Herbe Villea with their Chica, (drinke made of Mayz) and therewith make themselues drunke, that they may bee fit for the Deuils conference. The conference with these Witches is one of the greatest lets to the proceeding of the Gospel amongst them.
Among their Religious persons, I may reckon their Confessors. TheyIdem. c 25. Conf^ssions lik^ the Popish held opinion that  all Aduersities were the effects of sinne: for remedie whereof they vsed Sacrifices. Moreouer, they confessed themselues verbally almost in all Prouinces, and had Confessors appointed by their Superiours to that end, with some reseruation of Cases for the Superiours. They receiued Penance, and that sometimes very sharply, when they had nothing to giue the Confessor. This office of Confessor was likewise exercised by women. The manner of the YchuyriYchuyri. was most generall in the Prouinces of Collasuio. They discouered by lots, or by the view of some beasts, if any thing were concealed, and punished them with many blowes of a stone vpon the shoulders, vntill they had reuealed all: after that, they enioyned them Penance, and did sacrifice. They likwise vsed Confession, when their Children, Wiues, Husbands or Caciques were sicke, or in any great exploit. When the Ingua was sicke, all the  Prouinces confessed themselues, chiefly those of Collao. The Confesso^s were bound to hold their Confessions secret, but in certaine cases limited. The sinnes which they chiefly confessed, were, killing one another out of warre, stealing to take another mans Wife, to giue poyson, or Sorcery to doe any harme, to be forgetfull in the reuerence of their Guacas, not to obserue Feasts, to speake ill of, or to disobey the Ingua. They accused not themselues of secret sinnes. The Ingua confessed himselfe to no man, but to the Sunne, that hee might tell them to Viracocha, of him to obtayne forgiuenesse: which done, hee made a certaine Bath to clense himselfe in a running Riuer, saying, I haue told my sinnes to the Sunne, receiue them then, Riuer, and carrie them to the Sea, where they may neuer appeare more. Other that confessed, vsed likewise those Baths. When any mans children dyed; hee was holden for a grieuous  Sinner, saying, that it was for their sinnes, that the Sonne dyed before the Father. Such therefore, after they were confessed, were bathed in the said Bath, and then came a deformed person, to whip them with certaine Nettles. If the Sorcerers or Inchanters, by their lots or diuinations affirmed that any sick bodie should dye, the sicke man makes no difficultie to kill his owne Sonne, though he had no other, hoping by that meanes to escape death, saying that in his place he offered his Sonne in Sacrifice. The Penances enioyned them in Confessions, were, to fast, to giue apparell, Gold, or Siluer, to remayne in the Mountaynes, and  to receiue many stripes vpon the shoulders.



@. III. Of their Sacrifices.
THe Sacrifices of the Indians may be reducedGom ^. 1^1. Acost. l. 5. c. 18. into three kinds; of insensible things; of Beasts; of Men. Of the first sort were their Sacrifices of Coca (an Herbe of much esteeme) of Mayz, Feathers, Gold and Siluer, in figures of little Beasts, or in the forme of that which hee sought for: also of sweet Wood, and diuers other things,S^^rifi^es and Off^^ings. whereby their Temples became so rich. They made these Offrings to obtayne a good winde, health, faire weather, and the like.
Of the second sort of Sacrifices, were their Cuyes, which are like Rabbets, and for rich  men in matters of importance, Pacos (the great Camel-fashioned sheepe) with curious obseruation of the numbers, colours, and times. The manner of killing their Sacrifices is the same which the Moores now vse, hanging the beast by the right fore-legge, turning his eyes toward the Sunne, speaking certayne words, according to the qualitie of the Sacrifice. For if it were coloured, they directed their words to the Thunder, that they might want no water; if white, to the Sunne, that he might shine on them; if gray, to Viracocha. In Cusco they did euery yeere kill and sacrifice with this solemnitie a shorne sheepe to the Sunne, and did burne it, clad in a red Wastecoate, casting small baskets of Coca into the fire. They sacrificed also small Birds on this manner: they kindled a fire of Thornes, and cast the small Birds in, certaine Officers going about with round stones, wherein were carued or painted, Snakes, Lions,  Toads, Tigres, and saying, Vsachum, that is, Let the victory bee giuen vs, with other words. They drew forth certaine blacke sheepe, called Vrca, which had beene kept certaine dayes without meate, and therefore vsed these words: So let the hearts of our Enemies bee weakened, as these Beasts. And if they found, that a certaine piece of flesh behind the heart were not consumed by fasting, they tooke it for a bad signe. They sacrificed also blacke Dogges, which they slue and cast into a Plaine, with certayne Ceremonies, causing some kind of men to eate the flesh, which they did, lest the Ingua should bee hurt with Poyson. And for this cause theyFasting. fasted from morning till the Starres were vp, and then glutted themselues. This was fitting to withstand their Enemies Gods. They offered shels of the Sea to the Fountaines, saying, that the shels were the Daughters of the Sea, the Mother of all waters. These shels they vsed (in manner) in all Sacrifices. They offered Sacrifice of  whatsoeuer they did sowe, or rayse vp. There were Indians appointed to doe these Sacrifices to the Fountaynes, Springs, and Riuers, which passed through their Townes or by their Farmes, that they might not cease running, but alwayes water their grounds. GomaraGom. quo sup. saith, that their Priests married not, went little abroad, fasted much, although no fast lasted aboue eight dayes; and that was in their Seed-time, and in Haruest, and in gathering of Gold, and making Warre, and talking with the Deuill: yea, some of them (I thinke) for feare, because they are blind-folded when they speake with him, put out their eyes; they enter into the Temples weeping and lamenting, which the wordGuaca signifieth mourning Guaca signifieth. They touch not their Idols with their hands, without cleane and white Linnen, they bury in the Temples  the Offerings of Gold and Siluer, in their Sacrifices they cry aloud, and were neuer quiet all that day nor night: they anointed with bloud the faces of their Idols, and doores of their Temples; they sprinkle also their Sepulchres. TheAcost. quo sup. Sorcerers did coniure, to know what time the Sacrifices should be made: which being ended, they did gather of the contribution of the people what should be sacrificed, and deliuered them to such as had charge of the Sacrifices.
In the beginning of Winter, at such time as the waters increased by the moysture of the weather, they were diligent in sacrificing to the Fountaynes, and Riuers which ranne by their Cities and Farmes. They did not sacrifice to the Fountaines and Springs of the Desarts. And euen to this day continueth this their respect to these Springs and Riuers.  They haue a speciall care to the meeting of two Riuers, and there they wash themselues for their health, first anointing themselues with the flowre of Mayz, or some other things, adding thereto diuers Ceremonies, which they doe likewise in their Baths.
Their third kind of Sacrifices was the most vnkind and vnnaturall, namely, of Men. Wee haue shewed before of their Butcheries, at the Burials of their great Lord. Besides this, they vsed in Peru to sacrifice yong Children, from foure or sixe yeeres olde to ten: the greatest part of Sacrifices were for the affaires that did import the Ingua, as in sicknesse for his health, for victory in warre, at the Coronation or giuing him the Royall Roll. In this solemnitie they sacrificed two hundred Children. The manner of Sacrifice, was to drowne and bury them with certayne Ceremonies: sometimes they cut off their heads, anointing themselues with  the bloud from one eare to another. They did likewise sacrifice Virgins, of such as were
 brought from their Monasteries. The common sort (as you haue heard) being like to dye, would sacrifice their owne Sonne to the Sun, or Viracocha, desiring him to be so content, and spare th^ Fathers life.
XeresXeres. relateth that they sacrificed their Children, and with their bloud anointed their Idols faces, and their Temple-doores, and sprinkled the same also on the Sepulchres of the dead; and that those which are sacrificed, goe thereunto voluntarily with Dances, Songs, and Mirth.
When they sacrificed, theyGomara. obserued the heart, and other the inward parts for diuination, and if they saw a good signe (after their bad construction)Sansouin. and Selua, p. 5. they danced and sung with  great merriment; if a bad, they were very heauy, but, good or bad, they would bee sure to drinke deepe. They eate not their humane Sacrifices, but sometimes dryed them, and preserued them in Coffins of Siluer.
It were an endlesse toyle, to reckon vp all the Superstitions of Peru, in which were so many Nations agreeing in disagreeing from truth, yet disagreeing in their diuersified errours. To let passe Paucura, which fat, Sacrifice, and eate their Captiues, and euery Tuesday offer two Indians to the Deuill: and the drunken Prouince of Carapa, where they eate little, and drinke much, at once drinking in, and pissing out; the Mitimaes which are early at their meate, and make but one drinking in the day (which lasts from morning till night) by Bacchus Priuiledge, enioying without controll any woman they like: The Canari put their  Wiues to the drudgery abroad, whiles themselues spin, weaue, tricke vp themselues, and performe other womanish functions at home: The Galani make their Captiues drunke, and then the chiefe Priest cutteth off their heads, and sacrificeth them. Generally, in the Mountaines they were more cruell, but all obserued bloudy, beastly, Diabolicall Ceremonies, the recounting whereof must needs weary the patientest Reader.



CHAP XII. Of their Feasts, Sepulchres, and other Peruuian Superstitions.

@. I. Of their Kalender and Holy-dayes.
BEfore we speake of the Peruuian Festiuall times, it is not amisse to take  some more generall view of their Kalender. TheyAcost. l 6. c. 3. diuided their yeere into so many dayes iust as we doe, and into so many Moneths or Moones. To make the computation of their yeere certaine, they vsed this industrie: Vpon the Mountaynes about Cusco there were twelue Pillars set in order, and in such distance, as euery moneth one of these Pillars did note the rising and setting of the Sunne. They called them Saccanga; by meanes whereof, they taught and shewed the Feasts, and the Seasons fit to sowe, and reape, and for other things. They did certaine Sacrifices to these Pillars of the Sunne. Euery Moneth had his peculiar name and Feasts. They sometimes began the yeere in Ianuary: but since, an Ingua called Pachacuto, which signifieth a Reformer of the Temple, began their yeere in December, by reason, as it seemeth, of the  Sunnes returne from Capricorne, their neerest Tropicke. I reade not of any weekes they obserued: for which they had not so certaine a rule, as the Sunnes course was for the yeere, and the Moones for the Moneth.
They obserued in Peru two kinds of Feasts: some ordinary, which fel out in certain moneths of the yeere, and others extraordinary, which were for certaine causes of importance. Euery Moneth of the yeere they made Feasts and Sacrifices: and had this alike, the offering of a 100. Sheepe, but of vnlike colour and forme, according to the Moneth. In the first Moneth they made their first and principall Feast, therefore called Capacrayme, that is to say, a rich and principall Feast. In it they offered a great number of Sheepe and Lambes in Sacrifice, and burnt them with sweet wood: then they caused Gold and Siluer to bee brought vpon certaine  Sheepe, setting vpon them three Images of the Sunne, and three of the Thunder, the Father, the Sonne, and the Brother. In these Feasts they dedicated theKnights of Peru. Inguas Children, putting the Guaras or Ensignes vpon them, and they pierced their eares: then some old man
 did whip them with Slings, and anoint their faces with bloud, in signe that they should be true Knights to the Ingua. No stranger might remayne in Cusco during this moneth, and this Feast, but at the end thereof they entred, and were made partakers of the Feasts and Sacrifices after this manner.Acost. l. 5. c. 23. The Mamacomas or Nunnes of the Sunne made little loaues of the flower of Mays, dyed and mingled with the bloud of white Sheepe, which they did sacrifice that day:A rare resembling the Christians Communion in a Deuillish Apishnesse. Then they commanded that all strangers should enter; who set themselues in a certaine order: and the Priests which were of a certaine Linage, descending from Liuqui Yupangui, gaue to euery one a morsell of these small loaues, saying that they gaue it them to the end they should bee vnited and confederate with the Ingua: and that they aduised them not to speake or thinke any euill against the Ingua, but alwayes to beare him good  affection: for that this piece should be a witnesse of their intentions, and if they did not as they ought, would discouer them. They carried these small loaues in great Platters of Gold and Siluer, appointed for that purpose; and all did receiue and ate those pieces thanking the Sunne and the Ingua. This manner of Communicating they vsed likewise in the tenth moneth called Coyarayme, which was September, in the Feast called Cytua. They likewise sent of these loaues to all the Guacas of the Realme, whither the people assembled to receiue them: to whom they said, that the Sunne had sent them that, in signe that hee would haue them honour Him, and the Caciques. This continued from the time of Ingua Yupangui, whom we may call the Peruuian Numa, till the Spaniards substituted in place thereof their Masse, a masse ofCorruptio optimi pessima. more monstrous absurdities (in their Transubstantion, Bread-worshipping, God-eating,  which they can also vse to combine Subiects, not to their Inguas or lawfull Princes, but against them, as our Powder-traytorsPowder-traitors. did) then the former, notwithstanding the fairest p^etexts of Christian and Catholike Titles.
Vega pag. 2. lib. 8. c. 1. tels of the Corpus Christi Solemnities in Cuzco obserued by the Spaniards carrying in Procession sumptuous Herses with Images in them of Christ, our Lady, etc. attended by the Indians, their Caciques and Nobles honouring the Feast after their wonted Pagan Rites: viz. Some clothed with Lions skins, their heads enclosed in those of the beasts, because (they say) the Lion was beginner of their stocke; others with the wings of the great Bird Condore or Cuntur (as Angels are painted) from which they suppose themselues descended; Others with other deuises, painted with Riuers, Fountaynes, Lakes, Hils,  Mountaynes, Caues, because their first Progenitors came forth of such. Others with strange deuises of apparell plated with Gold and Siluer, others with Garlands thereof, others in monstrous shapes with vizors with skinnes of diuers beasts with strange gestures, and fayning themselues Fooles, etc. One counterfeiting Riches another Pouertie: and euery Prouince with that which seemed to them the best inuention with greatest varietie they could imagine ^o giue content. Thus had they vsed to solemnize the Feasts of their Kings, and thus in my time, sayth Vega, they solemnized the Feast of the most holy Sacrament, the true God our Redeemer and Lord, euery diuision of the Indians singing in their owne Languages and not the generall of the Court with Flutes and Musical Instruments, some hauing their wiues also to helpe them sing prayses, to God and the Spanish Priests and Seculars for their Conuersion:  after they ascend seuen or eight steps to worship the Sacrament, each squadron diuision or company seuered from the rest ten or twelue pases, descending another way, each Nation according to their antiquitie, as they had beene conquered by the Ingas, the last first, and the Ingas themselues last of all. These went before the Priests in the least and poorest company, as hauing lost their Empire and Inheritance. These squadrons being gone, the Canaries succeeded in a squadron with their Herses, etc. The Ingas and they being ready to quarrell, and the Spanish Officers forced to quiet them, by reason the Canarie carried a head of an Indian which he had slaine in a Duell, in a battle betwixt the Spaniards and the Indians, which the Inga said was not by his owne force but by the power of our Lord Pachacamac here present, and the Spaniards blessing, etc. The Iustice was faine to take away the  head from the Canaries, the other crying Auca, Auca, against them. The Couent of Saint Domingo in Cuzco, was sometimes the Temple of the Sunne: of a Procession from thence on Saint Markes day with a tame Bull. See cap. 2. seq. which tooke vp an excommunicate person, and cast him forth of the Church, etc. 1556. The Indians called the Sacrament Pachacamac.
But to returne to our Capacrayme, it is strange, that the Deuill had not only brought in an Apish imitation of Christian Sacrments, but of the Trinitie also in their Pagan Rites. For the Father, Sonne, and Brother, called Apompti Churunti, and Intiquacqui, that is Father Sunne, Sonne Sunne, Brother Sunne, had some shew of that great Myste^y. In like manner they named the three Images of the Chuquilla, or God of the Aire, whence a^e thunders, raines and Snowes. They had one Guacs, where they worshipped an Idol called Tangatanga, which  they said, was One in Three, and Three in One. Thus doth the Deuill despite the truth,
 which he would seeme to imitate. In the second moneth, called Camey, besides the Sacrifices which they made, they cast the ashes into the Riuer, following fiue or six leagues after, praying it carrie them into the Sea, for that the Viracocha should there receiue this present.
In the third, fourth, and fifth moneth, they offered a hundred Sheepe, black, speckled, and gray, with many other things. In the sixt moneth they offered a hundred Sheepe more, of all colours: and then made a Feast; bringing Mayz from the fields into the house, which they yet vse. This Feast is made, comming from the Farme to the House, saying certaine Songs, and praying that the Mayz may long continue. They put a quantitie of the Mayz (the best that groweth in their Farmes) in a thing which they call Pirua, with certaine Ceremonies,  watching three nights. Then doe they put it in the richest garment they haue, and being thus wrapped and dressed, they worship this Pirua, holding it in great veneration, and saying, It is the Mother of the Mayz of their Inheritances, and that by this meanes the Mayz augments, and is preserued. In this moneth they make a particular Sacrifice, and the Witches demand of this Pirua, if it hath strength enough to continue vntill the next yeere. And if it answeres no, then they carrie this Maiz to the Farme whence it was taken, to burne, and make anothe Pirua as before: and this foolish vanitie still continueth. In the seuenth moneth they made the Feast Intiraymi, and sacrificed an hundred Guanacos in honour of the Sunne: they made many Images of Quinua-wood carued, all attired with rich garments, they danced, and cast flowres in the high-wayes, and thither came the Indians painted and singing.
 In the eighth moneth they burned an hundred Sheepe, all gray of the colour of Viscacha, with the former Solemnities. In Yapaguis their ninth month, they burnt a hundred Sheepe of Chesnut colour; and likewise a thousand Cuyes (a kind of Rabbet) to the end the Frost, Ayre, Water, and Sunne, should not hurt their Farmes. In the tenth moneth called Coyarami, they burnt a hundred white Sheepe that had fleeces; and then they made the Feast Situa in this manner: They assembled together the first day of the Moone before the rising thereof, carrying Torches in their hands: and when they saw it, they cryed aloud, saying,They which did this, were called Panconcos. Let all harme goe away, striking one another with their Torches: which being done, they went to the common Bath, to the Riuers and Fountaynes, and euery one to his owne Bath, setting themselues to drinke foure dayes together. In this moneth also the Mamacomas made their  Loaues (as is said) of communicating with the Sunne, and the Ingua. The Bathes, Drunkennesse and some reliques of this Feast Situa remayne still, with the Ceremonies a little different, but very secretly. In the eleuenth moneth they offered also three hundred Sheepe. And if they wanted water, to procure raine, they set a black Sheepe tyed in the midst of a Plaine, powring much Chica about it, and giuing it nothing to eat till it rayned.Chica, what it is. ThisAcost. l. 4. c. 16. Chica is a drinke or wine made of Mayz, steeped and boyled, and will sooner make one drunke then Wine of Grapes: they haue another way to make it, by champing the Maiz, which they hold then best, when it is done (after the beastliest manner) by olde withered women. This drunken people will spend whole dayes and nights in drinking it, and it is therefore forbidden by the Law. But what Law can preuaile against the Deuill and the Drunkard?  We need not goe to Peru to proue this.
The twelfth and last moneth they sacrificed a hundred Sheepe, and solemnized the Feast called Raymacantar Rayquis. In this moneth they prepared what was necessary for the children that should be made Nouices: the moneth following the old men made a cer^aine shew, together with the children, in rounds and turnings, which they commonly doe, when it raineth too much, or too little, and in the time of Plague.
Among the extraordinary FeastsFeasts extraordinary. (which were many) the most famous was that which they call Ytu. This had no time prefixed, but by Necessitie or Distresse. And then the people prepared themselues thereto, by fasting two dayes; during which, they did neyther company with their wiues, nor eat any meate with Salt or Garlicke, nor drinke any Chica. All did  assemble together in one place, where no Stranger, nor any beast might be admitted; they had Garments and Ornaments which serued onely for this Feast. They marched very quietlyProcession. in Procession, their heads couered with their veiles, sounding of Drummes, without speaking one to another. This continued a day and a night: The day following, they danced and made good cheere for two dayes and two nights together, saying, that their Prayer was accepted. Euen still they vsed one which is somewhat like this, called Ayma, with Garments onely seruing to that end, and make Procession with their Dummes, hauing fasted before, concluding with good cheere. And although the Indians forbear Sacrifices because of the Spaniards, yet they vse many Ceremonies still, which had their beginning from their ancient  Superstitions.



@. II. Of the Funerals in Peru, and the places adioyning; and somewhat of the present estate of those parts.
THe IndiansAcost li. 5. c 7. of Peru beleeued commonly, that the Soule liued after this life, and that the good were in glory, and the bad in paine. They vsed a wonderfull careFunerals. to preserue the bodies, which they honoured after death: their Successors gaue them garments, and made Sacrifices to them, especially of the Inguas, of whom wee haue  spoken before. In their bloudie Funerals the Women he loued best were slaine, and multitudes of other Attendants of all sorts for his new Family in the other World, and that, after many Songs and drunkennesse. They sacrificed to them many things, especially young children, and with the bloud they made a stroke on the dead mans face, from one eare to another. This crueltie is common through a great part of the East and West Indies, as in their places this History doth shew you: wittily auoyded once by aWittie escape Portugall, who was a Captiue, and to be slaine at the Funerals of his Lord, and hauing but one eye, saw better to saue his life then if hee had both. For he told them, that such a deformed and maymed fellow would be a disgrace to his Master in the other life, and so perswaded the Executors, or Executioners (if you will) to seeke a new choice. The Indians haue another Ceremony more generall,  which is, to set meate and drinke vpon the graue of the dead, imagining they did feed thereon. At this day, many Indian Infidels doe secretly draw their dead out of the Church-yard, and bury them on Hils, or vpon passages of Mountaynes, or else in their owne houses. They haue also vsed to put Gold and Siluer in their mouth, hands, and bosome, and to apparell them with new garments, durable, and well lined. They beleeue, that the soules of the dead wander vp and downe, induring cold, thirst, hunger, and trauell: and for this cause they vse their Anniuersaries, carrying them clothes, meate, and drinke.
Pedro de CiezaCieza, p. 1. c. 62 reporteth, that in Cenu in the Prouince of Cartagena (which we here mention for proximitie of Rites, rather then of place) neere to a Temple built in honour of the Deuill, there was taken forth an innumerable quantitie of Sepulchres, more then a Million  of them, old and new. Himselfe was there present. Much treasure was found in the Graues. Iuan de la Torre tooke forth of one SepulchreRich Sepulchres. more then fiue hundred thousand Pezoes. The Great Men adorned their Sepulchres with Vaults and Towres, and had with them interred their Women, Seruants, Meate, Chicha, Armes and Ornaments. He addeth, that the Deuill (in the shape of some principall person deceased) would sometimes appeare, and shew them newes out of that other World, how he liued and fared there. And hence (it seemes) came that spoyle of so much wealth, and so many persons for their Funerals. But take heed (Reader) that you doe not beleeue it was the Deuill that was wont to appeare in some habit of afflicted soules, and demanded Dirges and Masses for their manumission out of Purgatory!Purgatorie. Alas, the Deuill was confined to the Indies, and would neuer haue beene so good  a Purueyor for the Popes Kitchin. And certes, if our Christian Ancesters had not their wiues and goods buried in their graues, with Food, Rayment, and Ornaments: yet these things were also buried with them, whiles the feares of Purgatory made them willing to endow the Priests and Monasteries, and bestow on Lights and other Rites, that which should haue maintayned their Houses, their Wiues, and Children. But how come we from Peru to Rome? Nay, how comes Rome, if not from Peru, as more lately discouered, yet with Peru, and with, and from, other Heathen Nations in the World, in her manifold Ceremonies and Superstitious Rites? as this Relation of Peru, for their Confessions, Processions, and many other Rites will shew: And one day I hope more fully to acquaint the World, when wee come in our Pilgrimage to visit Christian-Antichristian Rome. Worse Sepulchres then the former (to returne  to our American Historie) were those which Herera mentions within fifty leagues of Popayan, where the Husband hath bin seene to eate the Wife; Father and Son, Brother and Sister haue renewed a neerer proximitie and butcherly incorporation: where Captiues are fatted and brought forth with Songs; his members by piece-meale cut off and eaten, whiles himselfe liueth and seeth it. Since the inhabiting of Saint Iames of Arma, they haue eaten more then eight thousand Indians and some Spaniards.
This our Author testifieth (let vs a little view the present state of Peru) that Los Reyes in twelue degrees consisteth of three thousand housholds: it is one of the best Climates in the World, not subiect to plagues, hunger, raine, thunder, but alwayes cleere. It is the Seat of the Viceroy and Royall Councell and Inquisition. Iohn Ellis, which was partaker of Sir Richard  Hawkins his Aduentre s, saith, that Lima is neere as big as London within the Wals: the Houses are of Lome there are nigh an ^undred thousand Neg^os: it raineth not there, but
 it doth within twelue leagues. There are maintayned a hundred1000. Duckets a yee^e a piece. Horsemen, and an hundred Carbines. At Paricauo it is as cold as in England, in Winter. They passed to Cusco in those wayes before mentioned, made by Guainacapa. Cusco is now without a Wall, as large as Bristoll. At Potossi there worke neere an hundred thousand Indians, brought in courses thither to the Mynes by the Casiques. Betweene Cusco and Potossi is continuall Trade; the Lords by the way will entertaine men with abundance of Plate, and Guard (if they like) them with three or foure hundred Indians. Imperiall Village of Potosi is in nineteene degrees, it hath fiue hundred housholds of Spaniards, and about fifty thousand Indians going and comming. Alexandro Vrsiuo,Al. Vrsiuo. who sayth he liued in Peru thirty and foure yeeres, and had  trauelled thorow all the Kingdome, hath written, that in Potosi and Porto are three hundred Mynes of Spaniards, and fiue thousand of Indians; and that the Kings part there is two Millions of Siluer; in Chili one, and one and a halfe of Gold; all the Gold and Siluer which yeerely comes to Lima is twelue Millions. This Lima is the sameOrtel. Theat. with Los Reyes before mentioned, and is an Archiepiscopall See; and hath vnder it the Bishops of Quito, Cusco, Guamanga, Arequipa, Pax, Plata, Trugillo, Guanuco, Chachapoia, Portas Vetus, Guaiaquil, Popaian, Carchi, Saint Michael, and Saint Francis.


 @. III. Obseruations of American Rites out of IERONYMO ROMAN.
IEronymo Roman a Spanish Fryer,De la Repub. de las Indias Occident l. 1. c. 2. He hath written 3. whole Bookes of Ame^i^an Rites and customes. hath written somewhat largely of the Indian Ceremonies, in his second Tome of the Common-wealths of the World; especially of New Spaine and Peru: but therein and in other his Relations differs from other, perhaps more vnderstanding Writers. From Florida to Panama, hee affirmes, there was little Religion or Politie; that they acknowledged One True God Immortall and inuisible, reigning in Heauen, whom they called Yocahuuaguamaorocoti: which,  they said, had a Mother named Atabex, and a Brother called Guaca. He tels of their Images, that an Indian, going through a Wood, saw the tree shake, which striking him in feare, hee approched to that which made most noyse, and asked what hee would haue, and who hee was. The tree (the Deuill, or the Lyer) made answere, That hee should first goe call a Bohique or Priest; which comming to the tree demanded, Why hee was sent for; and was by the tree instructed how to make thereof an Image and Temple, and ordayned Sacrifices and Ceremonies; which by cutting of that tree was presently effected, and the Dedication yeerely solemnized. The truth of the History I know not; of the Mystery is plaine, that they which make them, are like vnto them; and such Blocks may best be taught of Blocks their blockish Deuotions.
 In New Spaine the Sunne (he sayth) was their chiefe God, and they erected to him the most sumptuous Temples in the World; besides other artificial Deities innumerable, in matter and forme infinitely diuersified like Birds, Beasts, Serpents (one kind like the Picture of Eue with the Serpent) like the Grecian Bacchus, like their mitred Bishops, like Frogs,Degrees of P^iests. In Cholola was a Metropolis which had as many Temples as were dayes in the yeere: One the most famous (he saith) in the World, the foot or foundation of the Spire contayning a Crosse-bow shoote in breadth and much more in height, the Spire it selfe being a league or a Lie, in height, etc. or other naturall or imaginary formes. Any thing which could eyther hurt or benefit them, they obserued as Gods. In Mexico they had (hee sayth) diuers degrees of their Priests: the first of the High Bishop or Pope, in the Mexican Language called Ilchuatecotl, in the Totona tongue Papa (as also we haue before obserued) the second was as a Bishop, and had other inferiour Priests subordinate. When the Spaniards erected their Deuotions in Mexico; they did not pray for the Papa (lest they might be interpreted of this Ethnike Pope) but called him the  High Bishop. Their Bishop they called Hupixe, which signifies the Great Minister of God; Their Priests Tetuy Pixque that is, Gods Officers. Other Functions bare name of their particular Offices, Treasurer, Vestry-keeper and the rest. Some Prouinces in New Spaine had sixe Priests, which were as it were Patriarkes or Archbishops, all vnder the Pope aforesaid: all addicted to Abstinence and Chastitie, not drinking strong drinke, and casting their eyes to the ground if they saw a woman; professing much grauitie and mortification; esteemed as Saints, and of great authoritie and sway in the S ate.
The eldest Sonnes of Lords succeeded in their temporall estates, the second was made a Priest; and the Pope was Sonne to the King or some chiefe Lord in the Countrey: after whose death the most Ancient succeeded, being solemnely anoynted by the Priests, with an  Oyntment mixed with the bloud of circumcised Infants.
The Temples were all called Tehutlamacax, a word compounded of Tehu, which signifies God and Tlamacax, a House or Mansion. Many inferiour Offices in the Temple were executed


 by Citizens or honourable persons, and others which liued neere the Temple, vnder a speciall Master of Ceremonies called Telpuchitlato. Many other things he writes of the Relig^on of New Spaine, partly agreeing with our former Relations, partly diuers, or contrarie. The like also of Peru: where the chiefe Priest (he sayth) was stiled Vilaoma: the Temples were most magnificent, which they erected on high grounds or Hil tops, making foure round Mou^ts of earth, higher each and lesser then the former; in the middest building the Temple in foure squares like Cloysters of Monasteries, within which were Altars, and in the most eminent place the rich and pompous Image of the Sunne. Their Temples had two doores, to which they ascended by thirty steps. They were rich on the inner side, being for the most part Gold, Siluer, or other rich Metals. On the Easterne part was an Oratorie or  Chancell against the Sun-rising, ascended by six steps with a thicke wall, and a hollow part therein, which contayned the Image of the Sunne with rayes of Gold (as we paint it) by reflexion of the Sun-beames yeelding a Sun-like lustre. Of all their Temples those of Pachicama and Cusco were most famous: to which were Pilgrimages from the Prouinces (as to Saint Iames, our Lady, and other famous Holies in Christendome) three hundred leagues distant. If I should follow this Fryer in his large Obseruations of the American Rites, I might soone out-goe your patience, and somewhere perhaps the Truth: contenting my selfe therefore with that before obserued out of the most indicious Authors (if your Author bee iudicious) I remit those that would further know his Relations to himselfe; hauing chosen a little, and that here by it selfe inserted.
And thus we take our leaue of this Continent, and must into the adioyning Sea, to obserue  matters of principall note we shall there find.



CHAP XIII. Of the Seas and Ilands adioyning to America.

@. I.  Of the Ladrones, Margarita, and Cubagua, and the Seas betwixt them.
Ben. l. 3. c. 22ANd now I must obey the Spaniards Law, which will admit no strangers trafficke in Peru, and are iealous of any Corriuall, which shall hold longer and more familiar Discourse with America, although they haue rather forced her to their lusts, then wooed her to their loues. I also beginne to grow wearie of this trauell in another World,To Leigh and London too. Siluest. in Du Bartas. willing to looke homewards; and therefore am  now embarqued on the Peruuian Coast, where the Peaceable Sea may free me of those former dangers whereto my Pilgrimage was subiect in passing along snowie and fierie Hils; deceitfull, vnwholsome Bogs; scorching sandy Plaines; Wildernesses inhabited with wild beasts; Habitations peopled with wilder and more beastly Men; and now by this commoditie of my Paper-barke, I may both direct my course homewards, and yet walke, as intending another contrary, or diuers Voyage. And euen as those Heauenly PlanetsPlaneta signifies a Wanderer. in their Wandering and yet most constant course, are guided by the generall motion of that Vniuersall Wheele, and yet forget not their owne peculiar: so I, in my wandering Discoueries propound all and euery place of the World, to be the place of my Exercise, and subiect of my labour, but yet the smoke of IthacaIthaca was the place wher V^ysses dwelt: which (after many yeeres trauell) he so much desired to see. is sweetest, and my knowing all, would bee but a melancholy  Maze, if I should not come home to fill English eares with the newes. The Reader also, by this time wearied, will be glad to heare of an end.
In this Sea we may see many Ilands which Nature hath seemed to set, as Centinels along the Coast, to hold their watch, as Skowts to espie, and as Garrisons to defend their Souereigne, Earth, lest the Ocean (by secret vndermining, or by violent and tempestuous force) should be too busie an encrocher.
The Earth also on thisThe Tides are stronger on the South Sea, then on the North and higher by many degrees. Pet. Mart. Dec. 3 lib. 2. side, finding her selfe more strongly assayled then on the other, hath summoned them all home to her borders, and placed them for her better defence in stations neere her, not suffering them to stay abroad, as in other Seas is vsuall: so that there are almost no Ilands in this widest of Seas, the Peaceable, but neere the mayne. If there bee any,  they are obscure, small, and not worthy our Relation: as for those of Salomon and New
 Guinea, with their Neighbours, they are reckoned toTerra Australis. another C^ntinent, if they bee not continent themselues; and for the Arcipelago of Saint Lazaro, these Ilands may be reckoned vnruly Borderers, which, while it is vncertaine whether they should acknowledge the Souereigntie of Asia, Terra Australis, or America, are loyall to none; and therefore, where they are best knowne, are knowne by the name ofThe Ladr^nes or Ilands of The^ues. Theeues; a name fitting their nature and disposition. Thus did MagellaneA Pigafetta. Pet. Mart. Dec. 5. lib 6. find them, from whom (besides other things) they stole his Boat, which by force he was forced to recouer. Such did our CountrimenNauig Thom. Cand sh ap. Hak. in Master Candishes renowmed Voyage find them, who saw also their Images of Wood in the head of their Boats, like the Images of the Deuill; Temple, and Saint, best fitting their deuotions:  and such didNauig Ol N. in Additament. 9. p. Americ. Oliuer Noort find them, who came crying about him, Iron, Iron, offering him, Fruits in exchange for pieces of Iron; and if any opportunitie offered it selfe, stealing closely, or openly, any thing they could lay hold on. They shot at them in vaine, so actiue were they in diuing vnder the water, and continuing there, as if they had beene fitted alike to both Elements. The women also, no lesse then the men. They are a beastly people, polluting themselues in promiscuous lusts, and branded (many of them) with the markes of their intemperance; the Pockes hauing eaten their noses and lips. They are browne, fat, long of stature: the men goe naked; the women weare a leafe before them, so that they beare some resemblance to the Pictures of Adam and Eue. Their Boats are twentie foot long, and but a foot and halfe broad, cunningly wrought. They  are extremely greedie of Iron, of which metall the Hollanders cast fiue pieces into the Sea, to try them, and one of them fetcht them all out. But lest these Theeues rob vs of our intended Deuotions, and our Reader of patience in longer stay heere, wee will looke backe towards the Straits, and so compasse the other side of America. Many Ilands wee may see heere neere the shore, all along as wee passe. But what should wee trouble the Reader with names? I haue small deuotion to them, vnlesse I had some intelligence of some Deuotion in them, further then that wherein they agree with the Peruuian Rites, wherewith you were last tired.
In the Straits are some Ilands of small quantitie, of smaller dignitie: and who would stay there, where the PengwinsCertaine Fowles which breed on the Ilands. are your best Hosts? the rest are Giants or Man-eating Sauages:  and in the next out of the Straits, but Seales, who all can yeeld but an inhospitall hospitalitie. Neyther hath prouident Nature in all those Coasts of Chica, or Brasill, beene prodigall of her Iland store, fore-seeing that they would, eyther bee vsurped by Seales and Sea Monsters, or other more vnnaturall and monstrous inhumane shape, of Deuillish inhumanitie, from the Land. It seemes she hath beene the more sparing in the numbers, noblenesse, or quantitie of Ilands, in all those Seas, which wee haue most swiftly furrowed, that shee might in the great Bay more bountifully impart her plentie, and shew her excellence in that kind. This is a great field, as it were, sowne with Ilands of all sorts; the Earth seemes a louing Mother, which holds open her spacious lap, and holds out her stretched armes betweene Paria and Florida: the Ocean also, as iealous of the Earths more na^ural Inheritance and claime  vnto them, seemes to neglect his course to the Southward, and heere sets in with a violent current, alway forcing his watery forces to walke (or rather to runne and flie) these rounds, to see that the Continent keepe her hand off, and not once touch his conquered possessions; that though (like Tantalus) she seemeth alwayes to bee closing her open hands and mouth vpon them; yet are they kept by this officious watchfulnesse of the Sea, that shee can neuer incorporate and vnite them to her selfe. Easily can they vnfold this Mystery, that are acquainted with the scite of the Earth,Pet. Mart. Dec. 3. l. 6. and the swiftnesse of the current in this vast space of Earth and Sea, setting in at Paria, and after out againe at Florida, with admirable and incredible violence.
To begin then at Paria: (for of Orenoque and his mouth full of Ilands, a^d of Trinidad,  that hath escaped the Riuer, and betaken her selfe wholly to Neptunes Loues, we haue alreadie spoken.) Heere two rowes and rankes of Ilands make shew and muster of themselues: the one extending East and West, the other North and South. Of the former is Margarita, which (like many a Gallant, whose backe robbeth his belly, whose bowels emptie of necessaries, alway are croking and complayning of superfluitie in ornament and fashion) so hath shee aMundus m^liebris. World of Pea^les to adorne her, but wanteth water to satisfie her thirst: store of Pearles shee can communicate of her plentie; water shee is faine to borrow of her Neighbours.
The like we may say of Cubagua, her next Neighbour, that by her store of Pea^les, hath wonne Suiters from our, and the American World, whom she can neyther bid eate or drinke  of her Land-hospitalitie, where Grasse and Water are wanting. But as it vsually comes to passe with these Fashion-mongers, which neglecting necessaries, must at last be neglected of their ornaments too: So this Iland, which sometimes was so rich, notwithstanding all her
 Pearles she pawned for her dyet (in so much that the KingsBotero del Isole, l. 3. fift amounted ordinarily to fifteene thousand Duckets a yeere) yet now seemes almost beggered, her Pearle-fishes, and Pearle-fishers, most of them gone; and now it is time for vs to be gone from her too.
Yet let vs heare this Relation of HereraDescription of the Indies. before we goe, of an Earth-quake which hapned there the first of September 1530. which raysed the Sea foure fathome, ouerthrew the Fortresse, opened the Earth in many places, whence issued much Salt-water, as blacke as Inke, stinking of Brimstone. The Mountayne of Cariaco remayned open. Many died of feare, and some were drowned. Captaine William Parker Anno 1601. hauing taken Puerto Bello, and Melendes the Gouernour, landed in Margarita, and receiued fiue hundred pound in Pearle, for ransome of Prisoners: tooke a ship which came from Angola with three hundred  and seuentie Negros. Ouiedo hath written in his nineteenth Booke of the Iland of Cubagua. It hath no trees, and but little grasse. There is a Fountaine on the East part thereof, neere the Sea, which casteth forth a bituminous substance like Oyle, which is said to be profitable for medicine, and may be found two or three leagues floting in the Sea.


@. II. Of the Caniball Ilands; the Whale, Thresher, Sword-fish, Sharke, and other fishes, and Obseruations of those Seas.  
LIttle businesse can we find any further, in following that Westerne ranke, Orchilia, Oruba, and the rest, and therefore will looke Northwards, to that other ranke we spake of: where leauing Tobago on the right hand, wee see before vs Granata, Saint Vincent, Saint Luciae, Dominica; and then circling to the Northwest Desiderata, Saint Christopher, Holy Crosse, and others, whose names, without other matter of Historie, would be but tedious to the Reader. These, and a multitude of others vnmentioned, are called the Ilands of the Caribes, or Canibals. The InhabitantsPet. Mart. Dec. 8. l. 6. eate mans flesh, and passe to other Ilands with their Boats to the hunting of Men, as other Hunters doe for Beasts. Carib signifieth Stranger, for so the more innocent Indians esteeme them.  
At home they onely couer their priuities, but in time of Warre they vse many ornaments. They are nimble, beardlesse (vsing little Pincers to pull out the haires) shoote poysoned Arrowes, bore holes in their eares and nostrils for elegancie, which the richer sort decke with Gold, the poorer with Shels. From the tenth or twelfth yeere of their age they carrie leaues, to the quantitie of Nuts, all the day in eyther cheeke, which they take not out, but when they receiue meate or drinke. With that Medicine they make their teeth blacke: they call other men, Women, for their white teeth, and Beasts for their haire. Their teeth continue to the end of their liues without ache or rottennesse.
When the men went on man-hunting (which they did sometimes in long and farre Expedions) the women manfully defended the Coast against their Enemies: and hence it is in  MartyrsPet. Mart. Dec. 3. l. 9. iudgement, that the Spaniards tell of Ilands inhabited only with women: which may bePalephatus fab. l. 1. saith the Amazones were Thracian men, close shauen, in long garments, and therefore called women: but denieth, that there was euer any such Amazonian Expedition, as Histories speake of. the true interpretation, happily, of I know not how many places in America, besides those of Asia and Africa, reported Amazonian. PontiusPet. Mart. Dec. 1. l. 2. Ouied. ge. hist. l. 3 would warre vpon the Canibals, but on the Iland of Guadalupea, his women were taken, his men slaine, himselfe forced to depart from that, both place and enterprise. Columbus in his second Voyage landed on this Iland, where he saw their round houses, hanging beds of Cotton, and certaine Images which he had thought had beene their Gods: but by Interpreters after learned, that they were but for ornament, and that they worshipped nothing but the Sunne and Moone, although they make certaine Images of Cotton, to the similitudes of such phantasies as (they sayd) appeared to them in the night. They found Earthen Vessels, like ours, also in their  Kitchins, Mans flesh, Duckes flesh, and Goose flesh, all in one pot, and other on the Spits, readie to be laid to the fire. Entring into their inner Lodgings, they found Faggots of the bo^es of mens armes and legges, which they reserue to make heads for their Arrowes. They found in their Villages one Hall, or Palace, to which they assemble, as to their Theatre, or Playing place.
The Inhabitants at the sight of the Spaniards were fled. In their houses they found about thirtie children Captiues, which were reserued to bee eaten, but they tooke them for their Interpreters. Here they had Parrots bigg^r then Phesants, with backes, brests, and bellies of Purple colour. They vsed to prey on Hispaniola, and Saint Iohns Ilands, or Buriquen: and if these, in their warres with the Canibals, tooke any of them, they were sure to goe to pot (^u^n in the first sense) and to be eaten. Master Percy saith in Guadalupa they found a Bath  so hot, that it boyled them piece of Porke in halfe an houre. In Menis also they found a Bath
 like ours in England. In Mona they killed two wilde Boares, and saw a wilde Bull, which was an ell betweene the hornes. Three leagues from thence is Monetta, where the Fowles flew ouer them as thicke as haile, and made them deafe with their noyse: they cannot set foot on the ground, but shall tread on Fowles or Egges, wherewith they laded two Boates in three houres. Master ChalengeM H. Chalenge. saith, that in the seuen Antiles of Saint Vincent, Granado, Lucia, Matalina, Dominica, Guadalupa, and Ayscy, are not aboue one thousand Indians. They brought away a Frier, named Blaseus, which had beene sixteene monethes Slaue in Dominica, whom they saued, his fellowes beeing slaine, because hee taught them to make Sayles.
 A little before Master Hawkins was there, in the yeere 1564.Nau. M. Iohn Hawkins ap. Hak tom. 3. a Spanish Carauell comming to water at Dominica, one of the Caniball Ilands, the Sauages cut her cable in the night, and so she draue on shore, and all her company was surprised and eaten by them.
Master George Peercie relateth of the Dominicans (which they visited in their Virginia Voyage) that they paint themselues to keepe off the Muskitas: that they weare the haire of their heads a yard long, platted in three plaits, suffer none on their faces, cut their skinnes in diuers Workes or Embroderies: they eate their Enemies; lap spittle spit into their mouthes like Dogges; worship the Deuill; poyson their Arrowes. When they were heere, they had sight of the chiefe game which Nature yeeldeth, the fight of the Whale with the Sword fish and Thresher, which killed him in two houres fight. The Sword-fish is notS R. Hawkins. great, but  strong-made: his Sword groweth vpright out of his neck, like a bone, foure or fiue inches broad, and aboue a yard long (sometimes they are greater) with prickles on both sides. The Thresher hath a broad and thicke tayle. Both these hold a naturall conspiracie against this Grant of Nature, the one on the topThe like Sea-hawking is betweene the flying f^sh (which hath as it w^re Bats wings) and the Bird Alcatraz, and the Boni^o, the one in the Aire, the other in the Sea, pu^suing him. of the water threshing him vpon the head with violent blowes, that sound as a peece of Ordnance, and may be heard two leagues; forcing him to hide his head in his Mothers lap, which yet betrayeth him there to the Sword-fish* who is readie to receiue him on his Naturall Blade, and stayneth the Sea with his bloud. The Whale hath no remedie, but with bellowing grones, heard further then the Threshers blowes, to seeke to the shore, and there embayed to make his part good without danger of an Vnderminer: otherwise becomming prey to these his Aduersaries. Thus we see Greatnesse not  alway exempt from dangers, yea perishing by fine force of weaker Enemies. This our Author (for we cannot passe from Iland to Iland but by Sea, and may not be wholly idle by the way) telleth, that betwixt the Tropikes, they were attended continually with three kinds of Fishes, Dolphins, Bonitos, and Sharkes; the first like to the Rain-bow, his head differing from other fishes, being halfe a span straight vp erected from his mouth, the greatest foure foot long: a scole of these followed them neere one thousand leagues, knowne to bee the same, by some hurts wherewith they had marked them.
The Bonitos are like Mackrils, but greater, some as bigge as a man could lift. The Sharkes haue their mouthes vnder their bellies, that they cannot bite their prey without a halfe turne, and the helpe of his tayle. These are the most rauenous, and some hold, ominous: they  haue found in their bellies, Hats, Caps, Shooes, Ropes ends, and whatsoeuer hanged by the Ships sides: they haue thirteene rowes of teeth: They spawne not, but whelpe, like the Dogge, or Wolfe, and at night or towards stormes, receiue their young into their mouthes for safetie. I haue seene them (sayth Sir Richard) go in and out, being aboue a foot and halfe long. Little fishes alway accompany them, and feed on the scraps: they are lesse then a Pilchard, streaked blacke and white (as in coloured Liueries) keeping on the head, fins, and backe of the other.
Another obseruation of this our Author, is the Scuruie or Scorbute,Oranges, Limons, and the like are excellent remedies to this disease, whereunto they are much subiect in Nauigations neere the Line; the cause he ascribeth, the weaknesse of the stomacke in immoderate heate; salt meates, specially fish, Calmes and the Sea-water, which  could not but infect the World, if it were not otherwise affected and moued with Windes, Tides, and Currents: an instance whereof he sheweth in the Queenes Nauie, in the yeere of our Lord 1590. at the Asores many moneths becalmed, the Sea thereby being replenished with seuerall sorts of Gellies and formes of Serpents, Adders, and Snakes, Greene Yellow, Blacke, White, and some partie-coloured, whereof many had life, being a yard and halfe, or two yards long. And they could hardly draw a Bucket of water, cleere of some corruption withall. In twentie yeeres, wherein he vsed the Sea, hee could giue account of two thousand consumed with this disease.
In this Voyage, they were forced for want of fresh Water, to distill Sea-water, which they found wholsome and nourishing. I might follow our Authour in his Obseruations of  these Seas (which he sayth, vnder the Line, is best to crosse in Ianuary, February, and March) and of the Ilands of Cape VerdeThe flames of Fuego, hee saith, are seene twenty leagues in the Night. (elsewhere by vs obserued) being in the height of these Ilands, where now we are discouering: which he sayth, are the most vnwholsome in the
 World, and had halfe his people on this Coast sicke of shaking, burning, frenzie-feuers: a man can scarcely goe on the Earth, though well shod, when the Sun shineth: and the Breeze, which in the afternoone cooles them from the North-east, pierceth them also with sudden cold; so that the Inhabitants goe thicke clothed with Caps and Kerchers, besides their Hats, their Suites of thicke cloth, and Gownes well lined or furred to preuent danger. Sleeping in the open Ayre, or in the Moone-shine, is there very vnwholsome: The Moone shining on his shoulder on the Coast of Guinee, left him with such paine, that for twentie houres space he was like to run mad. But what Moone-shine hath made mee lunatike, to run from these American Ilands, to those, and the Coast of Africa? Patience, Reader, and I will bring thee backe in a fresher pursuit.  
In Dominica (where we were last on shore) it is related by one which wrote the Earle of Cumberland his Voyage to Port Rico, that they haue their seuerall Houses to other vses priuate, but haue a common Hall or Dyet for to eate in together, as Lycurgus instituted to preuent Riot, amongst his Spartans. The Maydes in this Iland are said to weare no Garters, and the first night of their Marriage they tye them so hard, that the flesh hangs ouer. In Tortuga they tolled certaine Spaniards ashoare, vnder pretence of Traffique, and then ate them.


@. III.  Of Boriquen, Iamaica, Cuba, and the Lucayae.
BOriquenBotero, vol. 2. or Saint Iohns is three hundred miles long, and seuenty broad, trauersed with a rough Mountayne, which yeelds many Riuers. The Spaniards haue there some Townes. The Earle of Cumberland in the yeere 1597. hauing by his Sea forces stayed the going of fiue Carikes to the Indies, whereby the King of Spaine lost three Millions, and the Merchants foure times as much; sayled to Saint Iohn Port Rico in this Iland, and tooke it with diuers Forts; here was a Bishops SeeOuied. l. 6. c. 1. mentions this Bishopricke and Monasterie. and Cathedrall Church with a Fryery, foure hundred Souldiers in pay, besides three hundred others: It was  accounted the Mayden Towne and inuincible, and is the Spanish Key and their first Towne in the Indies. He brought from thence neere fourescore cast Peeces, and much other wealth. This Iland was first conquered by Iohn Ponce and by him inhabited: the Naturals were altogether like in Religion and manners to the Inhabitants of Hispaniola: and so were the Plants and Fruits also. Ouiedo hath written hereof largely in his sixteenth Booke. There growes the Tree called Legno Santo, more excellent then Guaiacan for the Neapolitan and many other diseases: there is also white Gumme good for Ships in stead of Pitch, and there are Bats, which the Inhabitants did eate. These Ilands are not so well peopled as in former times: and many of them are retyring places of Rebels and Fugitiues, which take this shelter against the Spanish cruelties. Hispaniola is the next Iland of name, but shall haue a place  by it selfe, as a Map and Summarie of all the other.
Iamaica is almost as large as Boriquen.Of it reade Ouied. l. 18. It is extremely subiect to the Vracani, which are such terrible gusts of Winde, that nothing can resist them. They turne vp Trees, ouer-turne Houses, transport the Ships from Sea to Land, and bring with them a most dreadfull and horrible confusion. They raigne, or tyrannize rather, in August, September, and October.Mar. Dec. 1. l. 2 The Inhabitants are of quicker wits then the other Ilands.
Cuba is more Northerly, andOf this Iland read Ouied. l. 17 part. tot. extendeth it selfe three hundred leagues in length, and twentie in bredth, full of Mountaynes, Woods, Fennes, Riuers, Lakes, both salt and fresh. ThisOrtel. Thea. Iland hath had many names giuen by the Spaniards: Fernandina, Ioanna, Alpha and Omega. The Woods are replenished with Swine and Kine; the Riuers yeeld Golden Sands.  It hath sixe Spanish Colonies. Saint Iago, a Bishops See, is the chiefe Towne in the Iland; and Hauana is the chiefe Port of the Indies. Ouiedo reckons two things most admirable therein: one a Valley, trending betweene two Hils three leagues, which produceth abundance of stones, enough to lade many Ships, of a perfect round forme, like Bullets: The other a Fountaine, whence Bitumen, or a certaine Pitchie substance floweth and floteth euen to the Sea, excellent for pitching of Ships. In this Iland the common people were prohibited the eating of Serpents, as being reserued for Royall Dainties, and the Prerogatiues of the Kings Table.
ColumbusMar. Dec. 1. l. 2 sayling by this Iland, lighted into a Nauigable Riuer, the water whereof was so hot, that none might endure his hand long therein. He espied also a Canoa of fishermen, which after a strange fashion vsed to hunt fish, and take them by the helpe of another fish,  which they kept tyed in a cord by the Boats side, and when they espied a fish, loosed the cord; this hunting fish presently layes hold on the prey, and with a skinne like a Purse growing
 behind her head, graspeth it so fast, that by no meanes it can be taken from her, till they draw her vp aboue the water, and then not able to abide the Aire, she resigneth her prey to the fishers, which leape out into the water, and take it; in recompence whereof they giue her part of her purchase. He found also in this Coast Waters, for the space of fortie miles, white and thicke like Milke, and as though Meale had beene strewed through that Sea: other waters he foundBotero. spotted with white and blacke, and others all blacke. An old man of fourescore yeeres being a Gouernour in Iland, came to Columbus, and with great grauitie saluted him, and counselled him to vse his victories well, remembring, that the soules of men haue two Iournies, after they are departed from their bodies: The one foule and darke, prepared  for iniurious and cruell persons: the other pleasant and delectable, for the peaceable, and louers of quiet.
Many other Ilands might be heere mentioned, and but mentioned: little to our purpose I finde in them. Of Acusamil, neere Iucatan, is alreadie spoken. Of the Lucatae or Iucatae, the greatest thing is their great number, which someP. M. Dec. 7. 1. esteeme aboue foure hundred. Lucaio is a generall or collectiue name, as Zeland, Lequio, Malucco. The Spaniards haue carried the Inhabitants, as Martyr signifieth, into seruitude, to satisfie their insatiable desire of Gold. The women of these Ilands were so faire, that many of the bordering Countries, forsooke their owne Countrie, and chose this for their loue. These women ware nothing till the time of their menstruous purgation, at which time the Parents made a Feast, as if shee were to  be married; and after that, she weareth before those parts Nets of Cotton, filled with leaues of Hearbs. They obey their King so strictly, that if he command them to leape downe from an high Rocke, alledging no other reason then his will, they performe the same. But they are now, and were long since desolate,Dec. 7. 8. being wasted in the Mines of Hispaniola and Cuba, or by Diseases and Famine, to the number of twelue hundred thousand.
But I am loth to wilder my selfe further in this Wildernesse of Ilands (for so haue the Spaniards made them:)Dec. 1. l. 2. Columbus in one Voyage gaue names to seuen hundred Ilands; of which I can report little fitting this our Pilgrimage. Hispaniola is the Lady and Queene of them all, and (as it were) the common Store-house of all their excellencies: and therefore  we will there make some longer stay.



CHAP XIIII. Of Hispaniola: and a touch homewards at Bermuda.

 @. I. The Names, naturall Rarities, and Creatures thereof.
HIspaniola or SpagniolaOrtel. Theat. is Eastward from Cuba, it was of the first Inhabitants called Quisqueia, afterwards Haiti, and by ColumbusColumbus called it Cipanga, thinking it to be that Iland which Marcu^ Paulus cals by that name in the East. Ens. l. 2 He called it also Ophir, thinking it to bee that whence Salomon had his Gold. Mart. Dec. 3. l. 7 Cipanga and Ophir. The Spaniards call it as we first mentioned, and also Saint Dominike or Domingo of the chiefe Citie an Archiepiscopall See. It contayneth in compasse fiue hundred and fiftie leagues. They called the Iland Quisqueia, which  signifieth Great and All, thinking that the Sunne gaue light to no other World then this, and the other Ilands adioyning. Haiti signifieth Craggie, and such is the Iland in many places, with high Craggie Hils, ouerlooking the deepe and darke Valleyes. But in many places it is most beautifull and flourishing. It seemeth to enioy a perpetuall Spring, the trees alway flourishing, and the Medowes clothed in greene. The Ayre and the Waters are wholesome. It is in manner equally diuided with foure great Riuers descending from high Mountaynes, whereof Iunna runneth East; Attibunicus, West; Nabiba, to the South; and Iache, Northward. Some diuide it into fiue Prouinces, Caizcimu, Hubaba, Caibabo, Bainoa, Guaccaiarima. In the first of these there is a great Caue, in a hollow Rocke, vnder the root of a high Mountayne about two furlongs from the Sea; the entrie is like the  doores of a great Temple. Many Riuers stole their waters from the sight of the Sun, the vse of men, and the ordinary Officers of Neptunes Custome-house, and by secret passages came and hid themselues in this Ca^e. So the Ilanders imagined, seeing diuers riuer^ swallowed vp
 of the earth, after they had runne fourescore and ten miles, and such a sinke or channell of waters in the Caue.
The Ilanders beleeued, that the Iland had a vitall spirit, and that there it doth breathe: and a hole therein is the female nature thereof (for of that sexe they deeme it) euen as Antiquitie conceited the ebbing and flowing of the Sea to be the breath of Demogorgon.
Dec. 7. 8.Andreas Moralis entred in with his ship, which was almost swallowed with the Whirle-pooles, and boyling of the water. Clouds engendred of those watery conflicts, and darknesse, layed hold on his eyes; terrible noyse, as of the fals of Nilus, made deare his eares, that when with labour he had gotten out, he seemed to haue escaped the barkings of Cerberus, and the obscure Vaults of Hel. Vpon the tops of high Mountaynes, the same Moralis saw a Lake,  three miles in compasse, into which many little Riuers ran, without any other apparant issue.
In Bainoa is a Lake of S^lt water, notwithstanding it receiueth foure great fresh Riuers from the East, West, North, and South, and twenty smaller: and within a furlong of the Lake, on the Northside, are two hundred fresh-springs. It is thought to haue a large entercourse with the Ocean, because they are Sharkes (great Sea-fishes, which deuoure men) in the same. Here are stormes and tempests, which seeme to bee the Caters and Purueyors for those fishes, in drowning many. Diuers other Lakes are mentioned in this Iland; one whereof partly Salt, partly fresh, is fiue and twenty miles long, and eight broad. They are all in a large Plaine 120. miles in length and bredth, betweene 18. and 25. There is another Vale 200. miles long, and broader then the former: another as broad as that, which is 180. miles long.  
Bart. de las Casas telleth of a Kingdome in Hispaniola, called Magua, which signifieth a Plaine, compassed about with Hils, which watered the same with 30000. Riuers and Brookes; twelue of them were very great: and all which come from the West (twenty thousand in number) are enriched wit^ Gold.
Cotobris a Plaine on the ^ops of Hils, so high, that it is subiect to the foure seasons of the yeere. There is also another Region of the same name, most barren, and yet most rich; full of Mynes, otherwise vnfruitfull; a thing common in Nature, that great Mynes vndermine fertilitie; and not strange amongst men, that the greatest hoorders of Treasures are the most vnfruitfull, and barren in good workes. The Gold (they say) is as a liuing tree, which rooting in the centre of the Earth, sendeth forth branches vnto the vppermost face of the earth,  and there sheweth forth certaine beautifull colours in stead of flowres, round stones of Golden Earth in stead of Fruits, and thinne Plates in stead of Leaues. From this IlandDec. l. 4. was yeerely brought foure or fiue hundred thousand Duckets of Gold. They imagine some Diuine Nature to bee in Gold, and therefore neuer gather it, but they vse certaine Religious expiations, abstayning from women, delicate meates and drinkes, and all other pleasures.
There is an Iland a little from Hispaniola, which hath a Fountaine in it, comming by secret passages vnder the Earth and Sea, and riseth in this Iland: which they beleeue, because it bringeth with it the leaues of many trees, which grow in Hispaniola, and not in this Iland; the Spaniards call the Ile Arethusa.L. 6. C. 12. Ouiedo mentions a little Iland betweene this and Iamaica, called Nauazza, halfe a league from which are many Rockes in the Sea about fiue  foot couered with water: out of which issueth and spouteth, aboue the water of the Sea, a spout of fresh water as great as a mans arme, that it may bee receiued and taken sweet and good. This was seene by Stephano della Rocca a man of good credit.
The IleR. Tomson. ap. Hak. tom. 3. of Hispaniola is much infested with Flyes, or Gnats, whose pricking causeth wonderfull swelling: also there is a Worme called Nigua, which creepeth into the soles of mens feet, and makes them grow as bigge as a mans head, with extremitie of paine; for which they haue no remedy, but to open the flesh sometimes three or foure inches, and so digge them out. The GnatsMart. dec. 7. 9. Ouied. l. 15. c. 8. are so troublesome, that the Inhabitants doe therefore build low Houses, and make little doores, which they keepe close, and forbeare to light Candles. Nature hath to this disease ordained a remedy, namely, certaine Creatures, called Cucuij,  which is a kind of Beetles. These haue foure lights, which shine in the night; two in the seate of his eyes, and two which he sheweth when hee openeth his wings. The people get these and bring them to their houses, which there doe them a double seruice: they kill the Gnats, and giue so much light, that men may see to reade and write Letters by the light of one; and many of them seeme as so many Candles. They had but three sorts of foure-footed Beasts, and those very little. Now men are exhaust, and Beasts multiplyed, in so strange manner,Encrease of Kine and Dogs. that one which was Deane of the Conception, carrying a Cow thither, shee was aliue six and twentie yeeres after, and her fruitfull generation was multiplyed in the Iland to eight hund^ed. They are now growne wild, as their Dogges also. They kill their Kine for the Hides: fiue and thirtie thousand were transported to Spaine when Acosta returned, in  the yeere of our Lord 1587.Ants hurtfull. Ouied. l. 5. c. 1. 1 Ants haue beene as noysome to Hispaniola, as Grashoppers in many parts of the World: in the yeere 1519. and two yeeres after they ruined their Farme-houses,
 and spoyled their Oranges, Cannafistula, and their fruit-trees. They could keepe nothing in their houses which was fit to be eaten, from them: and if they had continued in like quantitie, they would haue dishabited the Iland and left it desolate. But they chose by lot a Saint, to whose tuition they might commit themselues in that extremitie, which fell vpon Saturninus, who was faine to become their Patron against the Pismires. These Ants were little and blacke: another sort were enemies to these, and wrought against them and chased them out of their holds, and were not hurtfull, but as good Benefactors (if Ouiedo say true of them) as I can beleeue of Saturninus. Other sorts there are many of which some become winged and fill the Aire with swarmes: which sometimes happens in England. On  Bartholomew day 1613. I was in the Iland of Foulenesse on our Essex shore, where were such cloudes of these flying Pismires, that we could no were flie from them, but they filled our clothes; yea the floores of some houses where they fell, were in a manner couered with a blakee Carpet of creeping Ants; which they say drowne themselues about that time of the yeere in the Sea. Ouiedo tels of other Ants with white heads, which eate through wals and timbers of houses and cause them to fall. There are some Caterpillers a span long, and others lesse, but more venemous. There are Wormes which doe so much harme in Timber, that a house of thirty yeeres in this Iland would be ruinous, and seeme as old as one of a hundred in Spaine; and those which could not be old when hee wrote this, seemed as if they had stood 150. yeeres. Many other small creatures this our Author mentions, but my Rela^ions would  be too great if I should follow him.


@. II. Of their Idols, Songs and Dances, Priests, Oracles, Superstitious Opinions and Customes.
BEfore the Discouerie of this Iland by Columbus and the Spaniards, these Ilanders of  Hispaniola were forewarned thereof by Oracle. TheirMar. dec. 1. l. 9 Ouied. gen, hist. lib. 5. Cacikes and Buhiti (that is, their Kings and Priests) reported to Columbus, that the Father of Garionexius, the present King, and another Cacike, would needs be importunate demanders of their Zemes, or Gods of future euents, and therefore abstayned fiue dayes together from all meate and drinke, spending the time in continuall mourning. The Zemes made answere, That there would come, not many yeeres after, vnto that Iland, a strange Nation, clothed, bearded, armed with shining Swords, that would cut a man asunder in the middle; which should destroy the ancient Images of their Gods, abolish their Rites, and slay their children. To remember this Oracle, they composed a mournfull Dittie, which they call Areito, which on some solemne dayes they vsed to sing. Their Priests were Phisicians and Magicians, or  Diuinours.
Ouiedo sayth, that they danced at singing of their Areiti or Ballads, which word I vse because it hath that deriuation which argueth dancing aswell as singing. These dances are generall thorow America. In this Iland they danced, sometimes men alone, and sometimes women alone, but in great Solemnities they were mixed, and danced in a circle, one leading the dance; the measures whereof were composed to the Areito, of which one sang a Verse, and all the rest followed singing and dancing, and so thorow euery Verse of the same till it was ended, which sometimes continued till the next day. Anacaona the widow of the Cacique Caonabo, entertained the Spaniards with a dance of three hundred Maids. Thus these Areitos were their Chronicles and Memorials of things passed, as we read of the Bards  in these parts. They vsed sometimes Drummes or Tabers to these dances, made onely of wood, hollow, and open right against that place where they did strike. In some places they couered them with Deere skins, but here were no beasts in this Iland that could yeeld any for such purpose. They had Tobacco in Religious estimation, not onely for sanitie, but for sanctitie also,Non solament^ cosa sana, ma santo ancho. as Ouiedo writeth, the smoke whereof they tooke in at the Nose with a forked Pipe fitted to both nosthrils, holding the single end in the smoke of the hearbe burning in the fire, till they became senselesse. Their Priests most vsed this, which comming to themselues after this sleepie fume, deliuered the Oracles of their Zemes or Deuils, which sometimes spake by them.
Now concerning the Zemes (which could foretell that which they could not auert) and  the Superstitions of Hispaniola,Mart. ibid. the Spaniards had beene long in the Iland before they knew, that the people worshipped any thing butThey worshipped the Sunne. and prayed to it at Sun-rising. the Lights of Heauen; but after, by further conuersing and liuing amongst them, they came to know more of their Religion, of
 which, one Ramonus, a Spanish Heremite, writ a Booke, and Martyr hath borrowed of him to lend vs. It is apparant by the Images which they worshipped, that there appeared vnto them certaine illusions of euill Spirits. These Images they made of Gossampine Cotten hard st^pped, sit^ing, like the Pictures of the Deuill, which they called Zemes; whom they take to be the Mediators and Messengers of the great God, which they acknowledge, One, Eternall, Infinite, Omnipotent, Inuisible. Of these they thinke they obtayne raine, or faire weather; and when ^h^y goe to the warres, they haue certaine little ones which they bind to their fore-heads. Euery King hath his particular Zemes, which he honoureth. They call the eternall God by these two names, Iocanna, and Guamanomecon, as their Predecessors taught them affirming, That he hath a Father called by these fiue names, Attabeira, Mamona Guacarapita,  Liella, Guimazoa.
They make the Zemes of diuers matter and forme some of Wood, as they were admonished by certaine Visions appearing to them in the Woods: others, which had receiued answere of them among the Rocks, make them of Stone: some of Roots, to the similitude of such as appeare to them when they gather the Roots whereof they make their bread, thinking that the Zemes sent them plenty of these Roots. They attribute a Zemes to the particular tuition of eue^y thing; as sometimes the Pagan, and now the Popish Romanes: some assigned to the Sea, othe^s to Fountaynes, Woods, or other their peculiar charges. When the Boitij consult with the Zemes, they goe into the House dedicated to him, and with the powder of the herbe Cohobba, snuffed into their nosthrils, are distracted; after which, returning  as ou^ of a tran e, he telleth, That the Zemes had spoken to him, and vttereth his Reuelations. They say, That a certaine King, called Guamaretus, had a Zemes, whose name was Corochotum, wh ch often vsed to descend from the top of the house, where Guamaretus kept h m close boun^: the cause of his breaking loose was either to hide himselfe, or to goe seeke for ^eate, o^ else ^or th^ act of generation: and that sometimes being offended, that the Ki^g Guamaretus had not honoured him diligently, hee was wont to lie hid for certaine dayes. In this Kings Village were some children borne with two Crownes, which they supposed to be the issue of this Zemes. And when this Village was burned by the Enemie, this Zemes brake his band, and was found a furlong off, without any harme. He had another Zemes called Epileguanita, made of wood, being in shape like a foure-footed Beast, which  went often from ^he place where he was honoured, into the woods. When they perceiued that he was gone, a great multitude gathered together to seeke him, with deuout Prayers: and when they had found him, brought him home religiously on their shoulders, to the Chappell dedicated vnto him. But after the Spaniards comming into the Iland, hee fled for altogether; and could neuer be found; whereby they diuined the destruction of their country.
They honoured another Zemes, in the likenesse of a woman, on whom waited two other, like men. One of these executed ^he office of a Messenger to the Zemes, that had authoritie of Clouds, Winds, ^nd R^ine, and are at command of this woman: the other performed the like to the Zemes of the waters that fall from the Hils, that being loosed, they might breake into flouds, and ouerflow the Countrey, if the people doe not giue due honour to her Image.  
Let vs adde to this Relation of the Zemes of HispaniolaMart. Dec. 2. lib. 6. an accident in Cuba. A Mariner being sicke, was there left on sho^e, who recouering, grew into fauour with the King, and was employed in his warres wit^ great successe against the Enemie. He attributed his victories ^o the Virgin Mary, whos^ Picture hee had in his bosome. The King by his perswasion reiected his Zemes, and dedicated a Chappell and Altar to this Picture, whither hee and all his Family resorted a little before the Sun-set, bowing their heads, and saying, Aue Maria, Aue Maria; further they could not say. They beset the same with Iewels, and many Earthen pots, some with sundry meates, some with water, round about the Tabernacle, which they offered in stead of sacrifice, as before they had done to their Zemes. Being demanded, why they did thus, they answered, Lest it should lacke meate. For they beleeue, that Images may  hunger, and doe eate and drinke.
They told of this Picture, That being carried with them into the warres (as they vse to bring their Zemes with them into the battle.) This made the Zemes of the enemy turne his backe; yea, a woman (a lye, or a Deuill) descended in the sight of them all to play the Bellona for her followers; and in a contention betwixt them, whether the Zemes or this Ladie were more excellent, two young men of each side were bound, and whether Deitie should loosen her party, that should be their God. Both inuoke: the Deuill appeared in vgly shape, and by and by a faire Virgin, whereat the Deuill vanished (doe you beleeue it?) and the Virgin with touch of a Rod loosed her mans hands, which were found on the other aduerse party, being now double bound. Thus can the Deuill transforme himselfe into an Angell of Light, at Loretto, in Hispaniola, and where else soeuer hee can bee entertained; the name of  Saints, and promise of Heauen, shall further his Hellish designes.

They had festiuall Solemnities in HispaniolaDec. 7. 10. to their Zemes, whereunto the Kings summoned their Subiects by publike Cryers: and they, neatly dr^ssed after their manner, painted with diuers colours of hearbs, resorted thither, with their armes, thighes, legs, adorned with shels, to make Musicke in their dancing. Thus they presented themselues before the King, who sate drumming at the entrance of the Gate. When they were to sacrifice,Sacrifices. they purged themselues first, thrusting downe a sacred hooke into their throat, and by vomit emptied their bodies. After, they went into the Kings Court, and all sate in a Ring about the Idoll, crosse-legged like Taylors, and wry-necked for reuerence, praying, that their Sacrifice might be accepted. The women in another place, when the Priests gaue warning, fell  to dancing and singing (in manner as is before expressed) the prayse of their Zemes, and offered Cakes in baskets, concluding with Songs in prayse of their ancient Kings, and Prayers for future prosperitie. After this, both Sexes kneeled downe, and offered their Cakes; which the Priests receiuing, cut in pieces, giuing to euery man a portion, which hee kept vntouched the whole yeere, for a holy Relique, esteeming that house in danger of Fire and Whirle-winds, that is not preserued with this reserued piece of Cake. They seemed sometimes to heare a voyce from their Zemes, (whether by the illusion of the Priests, or the Deuill) which the Priests interpreted by their behauiour: for if they danced and sung, all was well: but if they went sorrowfully, the people went forth sighing, and gaue themselues to fasting, euen to extreme faintnesse with weeping, vntill they thought their Zemes reconciled.  In this Iland they hadOuied. gen. hist. l 5. c. 3. as many wiues as they were able to sustaine: the Cacique Beheccius had thirtie, two of which were buried with him perforce. Some of them were addicted to lusts of Sodomie, and others more (if more may be) vnnaturall. Generally they were very luxurious, both men and women: yet they abstained from Mother, Sister, and Daughter (other degrees they spared not) thinking that such Incest would bring them to an euill death. In their buying and selling they weighed not the worth of things, but onely their owne fancie, as we see in Children. Theeues they cruelly punished, empaling them on sharpe stakes aliue.
Touching the originall of man, thus they fable. There is in the Iland a Region called Caunana, where they faine that Mankind came first out of two Caues of a Mountayne called  Cauta: and that the biggest sort of men came forth of the mouth of the biggest Caue, and the least sort out of the least Caue: this Caue they name Amaiauna, the greater, Cazibaxagua. Before men might come out of the Caue, the mouth thereof was kept and wa ched nightly, by a man whose name was Machochael, who departing further to looke abroad, was by the Sunne (the sight of whom he was forbidden) turned into a stone. They faine the like of others turned into trees; for going so farre a fishing in the night, that they could not returne before the rising of the Sunne. A certaine Ruler also, called Vagoniona, sent one forth of the Caue a fishing, who by the Sunnes surprisall, was turned into a Nightingale, which therefore in the night bewayleth his misfortune. Vagoniona sore troubled with this losse, leauing the men in the Caue, brought forth the women and sucking children, and leauing  the women in an Iland of that Tract, called Mathinino, carried the children away with him, which being oppressed with famine, fainted; and remayned on the bankes of a certaine Riuer, where they were turned to Frogs, and cryed toa, toa, as children with them vse to cry for the dugge. And hence also come those pittifull cryings of the Frogs in the Spring-time. As for Vagoniona, he by speciall priuiledge was not transformed: wandering in diuers places, he descended to a certaine faire woman, whom he saw in the bottome of the Sea, and receiued of her bright plates of Laten, and a kind of stones which their Kings greatly esteemed. Another Caue they had (for the former tale is endlesse, as Superstition commonly is) called Iouanaboina, adorned with Pictures of a thousand fashions. In the entrance were two grauen Zemes, whereof one was called Binthaitel, and the other Marohu. Out of this Caue  they say the Sunne and Moone first came to giue light to the World. They made as Religious concourse to these Caues, as they which goe on Pilgrimage to Rome, Compostella, or Ierusalem.
They had a superstitious conceit of their dead: who (they thought) walked in the night, and eate the fruit Guannaba (which is like to a Quince) and that they would deceiue women, in taking the shape of men; making, as though they would haue to doe with them, and suddenly vanish away. If any feeling a strange thing in his bed, made doubt whether it were a dead bodie, he might be resolued by feeling on his belly, because these Ghosts could take all other members of mans bodie, but not the nauell (as some with vs imagine that the Deuill can take the whole shape of a man, onely his clawes excepted:) these dead men, they say,  often met them by the way, and if a man were not afraid, they vanished; but if hee were afraid, they would assault him, and many hereby haue beene taken with the losse of their limbes, These Superstitions were left them by tradition in Rithmes and Songs from their
 fore-fathers, which it was lawfull for none to learne, but onely the Kings Sonnes. They sung them before the people on solemne Feasts, playing on an instrument like a Timbrel. Their Boitij or Priests instruct them in these Superstitions: these are also Physicians, making the people beleeue that they obtaine health for them of the Zemes. They tye themselues to much fasting, and outward cleanlinesse and purging; especially where they take vpon them the cure of great men: for then they drunk the powder of a certayne herbe, which brought them into a furie, wherein they said they learned many things of their Zemes.
Much adoe they make about the sicke partie, deforming themselues with many gestures, breathing, blowing, sucking the forehead, temples, and necke of the patient; sometimes also saying that the Zemes is angry for not erecting a Chappell, or dedicating to him a Groue  or Garden, or the neglect of other holies. And if the sicke partie dye, his Kinsfolkes by Witchcraft enforce the dead to speake, and tell them whether he dyed by naturall destinie, or by the negligence of the Boitij, in not fasting the full due, or ministring conuenient medicine: so that if these Physicians be found faulty, they take reuenge of them. They vsed in ministring their Physicke, to put certayne stones or bones in their mouthes, which if the women can get, they keepe religiously, beleeuing them to be profitable for them in trauell, and honour them, as they doe their Zemes.
When their Kings dyed, they bu^ied the best beloued of their Concubines with them, who also had other women buried for their attendants, together with their Iewels and Ornaments. They had in the Sepulchre beside them a cup full of water, and some of their  Cassaui-bread. Hispaniola is (sayth Herera) in 19. degrees and an halfe, hath ten Spanish Townes, and hath sometime had in it fourteene thousand Castilians. Ouiedo reporteth of a Huricano or Tempest, which, 1508. threw downe all the houses, except some which were built of stone in Domingo: and the whole Towne of Buona Ventura changed his name into Mala Ventura, being hereby q^ite ouerthrowne. Twentie Sayle and more were lost in the Harbour of Domingo. Many men were lifted vp and carried in the Ayre many Bowshots, some being thereby miserably bruised. In Iuly the next yeere happened another more terrible then the former. But now, sayth hee, these Huracanos are nothing so fierce since the Sacrament is placed in the Churches.  


@. III. Of the Bermudas, or Sommers Ilands.
HAuing thus wearied you wi h this long stay in Hispaniola (by which yee may guesse of the neighbouring Ilands) we will haste homeward, and not touching in any Iland by the way (for we could but touch and away) we may aduenture, notwithstanding the wonted dang^r, vpon Bermuda. Danger hath made it now not so dangerous: nocuments haue beene documents. For while some haue  beene wracked there, they haue made vertue of N^cessitie, and so well obserued the Coast, that skill hath almost secured that, which Nature had seemed to set there in defiance both of Habitation and Nauigation, to both which it is now subiected by our Nation. It was called Bermuda, asOuiedo lib. 2. del. Hist. Ind. Ouiedo sayth, of Iobn Bermudez which first discouered it, and Garza, of the ships name wherein hee then sayled: Ouiedo writeth that hee was iust by it, and had thought to haue sent some Hogs on shore there to haue multiplyed, but by force of tempest was driuen thence: and others eyther of like purpose, or by force of shipwracke haue since done it. ItBotero. is also called the Iland of Deuils, which they suppose inhabit there; and the Inchanted Iland: but these are inchanted conceits. IobIob Hortop ap. Hak. Hort^p r^lateth, That in the height of Bermuda they had sight of a Sea-monster, which three times shewed himselfe from the middle  vpwards, in shape like a man of the complexion of a Mulato or tawny Indian. But this name was giuen it not of such Monsters, but of the monstrous tempests which here they haue often sustayned. Sir G. Sommers hath deserued that it should beare his name, by his indeuours thereabouts testified in life and death. Hee with Sir Thomas Gates, as before is said, were wrackt on the Iland, which losse turned to some gaine, as if God would giue them this into the Virginia-bargaine. Before, Anno 1593. HenryHenry May ap Hak. tom. 3. May, an Englishman, in a French ship was wracked thereon, and hath giuen vs some Discourse thereof: more fully hath SyluesterSyl. Iourdan. Iourdan, one of that Virginian Company, one of the company of those worthy Knights, in a Treatise of that shipwracke, and th^ Discouerie of Bermuda. The Commodities whereof, he reckoneth, varietie of fishes, plentie of Hogges (which it seemeth haue  escaped out of some wrackes) diuers Fruits, Mulberries, Silke-wormes, Palmitos, Cedars, Pearles, Ambergrise: But the most strange thing seemes the varietie of Fowle, of which
 they tooke a thousand of one sort in two or three houres, being as bigge as a Pidgeon, and laying speckled Egges, as bigge as Hens Egges, on the sand, where they come and lay them daily, although men sit downe amongst them. When Sir Thomas Gates his men haue taken a thousand of them, Sir George Sommers men haue stayed a while by them, and brought away as many more. Another Fowle there is, that liueth in holes, like Cony-holes; their Egges like in q^antity and qualitie to Hen-egges. Other Birds were so gentle, that whistling to them, they would come and gaze on you, while with your sticke you might kill them. Other Egges they had of Tortoyses, a bushell in the belly of one very sweet: they tooke forty of them in a day: and one would serue fiftie men at a meale. Two were there borne, and other  two married, to make the most naturall possession thereof for our Nation; which now in hope of good successe hath there planted an habitation. That wracked Company built there a Ship and a Pinnasse, and set saile for Virginia.
William StrachieW. Strachie. in a large Discourse, with his fluent and copious pen hath described that tempest which brought them to this Iland, affirming that there was not an houre in foure dayes, in which they freed not out of their almost captiued Ship, twelue hundred Barricoes of water, each contayning sixe gallons, and some eight: besides three Pumps continually going: euery foure houres they bestowed an hundred tuns of water on the cruell Sea, which seemed the more hungry after their bodies, or thirstie for their bloud from Tuesday noone till Friday noone, they bayled and pumped two thousand tunnes, and were ten foot deepe; nor  could haue holden out one day longer, when they first had fight of the Bermudas. These (he sayth) are an Archipelagus of broken Ilands, not fewer then fiue hundred, if all may be so called which lye by themselues: the greatest (which lyeth like an halfe moone) is in 32. degrees 20. minutes. At their first landing they killed with Bats seuen hundred Fowles, like to Guls, at one time. The Ilands seeme rent with tempests of Thunder, Lightning, and Raine, which threaten in time to deuoure them all: the stormes in the full and change keepe their vnchangeable round Winter and Summer, rather thundring then blowing from euery corner, sometimes 48. houresMy friend Master Barkley a Merchant, reports better of the Bermudas seasonablenesse, etc. and the Plantation it selfe testifieth the health and wealth thereof. together; especially when the Halo (or circle about the Moone) appeareth, which is often, and there foure times as large as with vs. The North and Northwest winds cause Winter in December, Ianuary, and February: yet not such, but then  young Birds to be seene. Without knowledge a Boat of ten tuns cannot be brought in, and yet within is safe harbour for the greatest Ships. They found there for their sustenance wild Palmitos, the tops of which trees rosted did eate like fried Melons, sodden, like Cabbages: with the leaues they couered their Cabins: Berries blacke and round, as bigge as a Damson, ripe in December, and very luscious: in the Winter they shed their leaues. No Iland in the World had more or better Fish. Of Fowles was great varietie. They killed a wild Swan. Some there are which breed in high Ilands in holes, to secure them from the Swine. They haue their seasons, one kind succeeding another. Besides this reliefe of Fowles, they had plenty of Tortoise Egges, which they lay as bigge as Goose Egges, and commit to the Sun and Sands hatching nurserie. They had sometimes fiue hundred in one of them. Euen heere  (lest the Iland should lose that former name of Deuils) some entred into Deuillish conspiracie three seuerall time. Some were banished, and after reconciled. Henry Paine was shot to death. Some fled to the Woods, but all reduced, except Christopher CarterHe continued there til the Colonie was planted. and Robert Waters. But these Ilands haue now beene possessed diuers yeeres by an English Colonie; and my friend Master Barkley (which hath beene there, and is nowAnno 1614. onwards on a second Voyage thither) seemeth rauished with the naturall endowments, both for health and wealth, of these Ilands: which now are to be shared amongst the Aduenturers, and fortified against all inuasions; Nature it selfe being herein readie to further their securitie against the greatest forren force, mustering winds (which some say are violent further off, but calmer neere the Ilands) and Rockes many leagues into the Sea, for their defence: which now yet they are  gone to strengthen, both with men and munition. The Colonie that is there, haue not onely sent verball, but reall commendations of the place: as may appeare by a TreatiseNewes from Bermudas, or Sommer Ilande. There is report of some English this Winter come home, which came from Bermuda to Ireland in a little Boat, etc. which I write not, for want of certaine intelligence neither (for that cause) of the present state of the Colonie, which (some say) are neere 701. English, etc. thereof lately set forth by one, which in the Shippe called the Plough, sayled thither Anno 1612. wherein is declared the Commodities there found, as Mullets, Breames, Lobstars, and Angel-fish, Hog-fish, Rock-fish, etc. as before is said. The Ayre is very healthfull, as their experience (the best argument) hath found, and agreeing well with English bodies: the ground as fertile as any (they say) in the World: Ambergreece, Pearle, Cedars and other vnknowne Timbers: store of Whales and other Commodities, which would bee tedious to rehearse: which I hope and pray, may further prosper, to the profit of this and the Virginia Plantations. From hence and thence, I am now passing in an English Ship for England, where to passe  away tediousnesse of the Voyage, I will entertayne my Reader with a Discourse of the more then tedious and fastidious Spanish cruelties.




CHAP. XV. Of the Spanish cruelties in the West Indies: and of their peruerse Conuersion of the Indians vnto Christianitie.
FOr as much as the Papists doe vsually glory in the purchase of a New World vnto their Religion, and would haue men beleeue, that since this Scripture-Heresie  hath made new Rome to tremble now, no lesse then Hannibal did her Pagan-mother, they haue a newAlan. Cop. vel potius N. Harpsfield, Dialogi, vt testatur Io. Hart. supply with much aduantage in this Westerne World of America; and they make this their Indian Conuersion, one of the Markes ofBellar. de Not. Ecclesia, lib. 4. Costeri Enchirid. Posseuin. Apparat. l. 16. c. 6. Hill. Reason 5. the truenesse and Catholicisme of their Church, which hath gained (if Posseuine lye not) an hundred times as much in the New World towards the West, South, and East, by new Conuerts, as it hath lost in the North parts by Heretickes: where through both the Hemispheres (saith Hill) these thousand yeeres, nay as farre as the Sunne shineth, there is no tongue, nor people, nor climate, which hath not in some measure (such a measure perhaps as he measured his truth and wit withall in this assertion) the Catholike Roman Religion: I would we could borrow the height of this Hill, whereon to stand and  ouer-view so many parts of the World yet vnknowne, and learne of this Giant Atlas (how easily may this Mute become a Liquid?) which beareth thus the Hemisphere of his Roman Heauen on his mounting shoulders,Archbishop Abbot. a new Geographie. But his impudencie is already sufficiently whipped and exposed to the Worlds derision, by Him, the neerenesse of whose presence doth now so much glad me after so long and farre a Pilgrimage. His learned Pen hath shewed the like bold brags of Bristow and Stapleton his Masters, and prooued them Fables. For further confutation whereof, it shall not be amisse to obserue the proceedings of the Spaniards in these parts. And herein we will vse the witnesse of men of their owne Romish Religion. IosephusAcosta l. 4. de procurand. Ind. salute, c. 3. Acosta, a Iesuite, writeth, that the Indians conceiue an implacable hatred against the Faith, by the scandall of the Spaniards cruelties: and that they haue baptized  some by force. VegaAnd. Vega de f. and operibus. quast. 3. accuseth them of baptizing without making them know the faith, or taking knowledge of their life. And how could it otherwise be, whenEd. Brerewood of Religion and Lang. c. 10 and lit. Mart. de Valentia. N. di G. ap. R^v. 3. Ouied. lib. 17 c. 9 we find it recorded of sundry of their Preachers, that baptized each one of them aboue an hundred thousand, and that in few yeeres? In so much that (as is storied by Surius) it is to be found among the Records of Charles the fift, that some old Priest hath baptized seuen hundred thousand, another three hundred thousand. Some of these were so good Christians, that they still continued (as Nunno de Guzman writeth to the Emperour) the Sacrifices of humane flesh. Ouiedo writeth, that they haue but the name of Christians, and are baptized rather because they are of age, then for deuotion to the faith; and none, or very few of them are Christians willingly.  
He that will read what they lately haue done in Spaine with the remnants of the Moores, may perhaps satisfie himselfe with the reasons ofF. Damiano Fonseca del giusto scacciamento de Moreschi da Spagna. which are also expressed in the Kings Proclamation to be Heresie, Apostasie, Treason, conspiring with the Turk, etc. Frier Fonseca, in defence thereof. But for the poore Indians, Bartholomaeus de las Casas, aBar. Cas. Hispan. Crudelitat. Dominike Frier, of the same Order with Fonseca, and after a Bishop in America, hath written a large and vnanswerable Treatise of the enormous cruelties, and vnchristian Antichristian proceedings in the New World, the summe whereof is this, That the Indians were a simple harmelesse people, loyall to their Lords, and such as gaue no cause to the Spaniards of dislike, till they by extreame iniuries were prouoked: they are also docible and pliant, both to good doctrine and liuing. To these Lambes, sayth he, the Spaniards came as cruell and hungry Tygres, Beares, and Lions, intending nothing those forty yeeres (hee wrote this Anno 1542.) but  bloud and slaughter, to satisfie their Auarice and Ambition: insomuch that of three Millions of people, which were contayned in Hispaniola of the Naturall Inhabitants, there scarce remayned at that time three hundred, and now as Alexandro Vrsino reporteth, none at all: onely two and twenty thousand Negros, and some Spaniards reside there.
Cuba, and the other Ilands had indured the like miserie, and in the firme Land ten Kingdomes, greater then all Spaine, were dispeopled and desolate, and in that space there had not perished lesse then twelue Millions by their tyrannie: and he might truly say that fifty Millions had payed Natures debt.
In the Iland Hispaniola the Spaniard had their first Indian habitations, where their cruelties draue the Indians to their shifts, and to their weake defence, which caused those enraged Lions, to spare neyther man, woman, nor childe: they ripped vp the great bellied women,  and would lay wagers, who could with most dexteritie strike off an Indians head, or
 smite him asunder in the middle: they would plucke the Infants by the heeles from their Mothers brests, and dash out their braines against the stones, or with a scoffe hurle them into the Riuer. They set vp Gibbets, and in honour of Christ and his twelue Apostles (as they said, and could the Deuill say worse?) they would both hang and burne them. Others they tooke, and cutting their hands almost off, bid them carry those Letters (their hands dropping bloud, and almost dropping off themselues) to their Countrimen, which (for feare of the like) lay hidden in the Mountaines. The Nobles and Commanders, they broyled on Gridions: I once (sayth our Author) saw foure or fiue of the chiefe of them thus roasted, which making a lamentable noyse, the nicer Captaine bade they should be strangled, but the cruell  Tormentor chose rather to stop their mouthes, so to preuent their out-cryes, and to continue their broyling till they were dead. They had Dogs to hunt them out of their couerts, which deuoured the poore soules: and because sometimes the Indians, thus prouoked, would kill a Spaniard, if they found opportunitie, they made a Law, that a hundred of them should for one Spaniard be slaine. The King of Magua offered to till the ground for them fifty miles space, if they would spare him and his people from the Mynes. The Captaine in recompence deflowred his Wife, and hee hiding himselfe, was taken, and sent into Spaine; but the ship perished in the way, and therein that admirableP. Mart. men^ioneth this graine of Gold: and likewise the Spanish cruelties, though not so largely as Casas graine of Gold, which weighed in the first finding (being pure) so many thousand Crownes as in the first Chapter of the eight Booke is mentioned.
 In the Kingdome of Xaraqua in Hispaniola, the Gouernour called before him three hundred Indian Lords, which he partly burned in a House, and put the rest to the Sword, and hanged vp the Queene, as they did also to Hiquanama the Queene of Hiquey. Of all which cruelties our Author an eye-witnesse affirmeth, that the Indians gaue no cause by any crime, that had so deserued by any Law. And for the rest that remayned after these Warres, they shared them as slaues. They which should haue instructed them in the Catholike Faith, were ignorant, cruell, and couetous. The men were spent in the Mines, the women consumed in tillage, and both by heauie burthens which they made them carry, by famine, by scourging, and other miseries.
And thus they did in all other parts wheresoeuer they came. In the Iles of Saint Iohn, and  Iamayca, were sixe hundred thousand Inhabitants, whereof then when the Authour wrote this, there were scarcely left two hundred in eyther Iland. Cuba extendeth furthest in length of any of these Ilands. Here was a Cacique named Hathuey, which called his Subiects about him, and shewing them a Boxe of Gold, said, That was the Spaniards God, and made them dance about it very solemnely: and lest the Spaniards should haue it, hee hurled it into the Riuer. Being taken and condemned to the fire, when he was bound to the stake, a Frier came, and preached Heauen to him, and the terrors of Hell: Hathuey asked if any Spaniards were in Heauen? The Frier answered, Yea, such as were good. Hathuey replyed, hee would rather goe to Hell, then goe where any of that cruell Nation were.
I was once present, sayth Casas, when the Inhabitants of one Towne brought vs forth  victuall, and met vs with great kindnesse, and the Spaniards without any cause slue three thousand of them, of euery Age and Sexe. I, by their counsell, sent to other Townes to meet vs with promise of good dealing, and two and twenty Caciques met vs, which the Captaine against all faith caused to be burned. This made the desperate Indians hang themselues (which two hundred did, by the occasion of one mans cruelty:) and one other Spaniard seeing them take this course, made as though he would hang himselfe too, and persecute them in the Regions of death; which feare detayned some from that selfe-execution. Sixe thousand children dyed, sayth our former Author, in three or foure moneths space, while I was there, for the want of their Parents which were sent to the Mynes: they hunted out the rest in the Mountaynes, and desolated the Iland. Neyther did the other Ilands speed better. The Lucaiae  they brought to an vtter desolation: and shipping multitudes of men for the Mynes in Hispaniola (wanting food for them) the third part commonly perished in the way; so that an vnskilfull Pilot might haue learned this way by Sea, by those floting markes of Indian carkasses. This Spanish pestilence spred further to the Continent, where they spoyled the shoares, and the Inland Countries of people. From Dariena to Nicaragua, they slue foure hundred thousand people with Dogs, Swords, Fire and diuers tortures.
Their courseMarke this way of conuerting Infidels. of Preaching was, to send, vnder paine of confiscation of lands, libertie, wife, life, and all, to acknowledge God and the Spanish King, of whom they had neuer heard. Yea, they would steale to some place halfe a mile off the Citie, by night, and there publish the Kings Decree in this sort, being alone by themselues: Yee Caciques and Indians of this  place, or that place (which they named) Bee it knowne to you, that there is one God, one Pope, and one King of Castile, who is Lord of these lands: Come quickly and doe your homage. And then in the night, while they were asleepe, fired their houses, and slue and tooke Captiues at their
 pleasure, and after fell to search for Gold. The first Bishop that came into these parts, sent his men to be partakers of the spoyle. A Cacique gaue the Spanish Gouernour the weight in Gold of nine thousand Crownes; he (in thankfulnes) to extort more, bound him to a post, and put fire to his feet, and forced him to send home for a further addition of 3000. They not satisfied, persisted in their tormenting him, till the marrow came forth at the soles of his feet, whereof he dyed. When any of the Indians, employed by the Spaniards, fayled vnder their heauy ^urthens, or fainted for want of necessaries, lest they should lose time in opening the Chaine wherein he was tyed, they would cut off his head, and so let the bodie fall out. The Spaniard robbed the Nicaraguans of their Corne, so that thirty thousand dyed of Famine, and a Mother ate her owne childe: fiue hundred thousand were carried away into  bondage, besides fiftie or sixtie thousand slaine in their Warres: and now, sayth Casas, remayne foure or fiue thousand, of one of the most populous Regions of the World. Heere did VaschusP. Mart. dec. 3 l. 2. Cortes accustomed himselfe to haue 4. Kings attend on him. Dec. 8. lib. 3. He burned 60. Kings, their heires looking on. giue at one time foure Kings to be deuoured of Dogs.
In New Spaine, from the yeere 1518. to 1530. in foure hundred and eighty miles about Mexico, they destroyed aboue foure Millions of people in their Conquests by fire and sword, not reckoning those which dyed in seruitude and oppression. In the Prouince of Naco and Honduras, from the yeere 1524. to 1535. two Millions of men perished, and scarcely two thousand remayne. In Guatimala, from the yeere 1524. to 1540. they destroyed aboue foure or fiue Millions vnder that Aluarado, who dying, by the fall off his Horse, as is before said, complained (when hee was asked where his paine was most) of his Soule-torment: and  his Citie Guatimala was with a three-fold deluge of Earth, of Water, of Stones, oppressed and ouer-whelmed. He forced the Indians to follow him in his Expeditions, in Armies of tenne or twentie thousand, not allowing them other sustenance, then the flesh of their slaine Enemies, mayntayning in his Army Shambles of mans flesh. In Panuco and Xalisco their state was much like; one made eight thousand Indians wall about his Garden, and let them all perish with Famine. In Machuacan they tortured the King that came forth to meet them, that they might extort Gold from him. They put his feet in the Stockes, and put fire thereto, binding his hands to a Post behinde him; and a Boy stood by, basting his roasted feete with Oyle, another with a Crosse-bow bent to his breast, and on the other hand another with Dogges; of these tortures he dyed. They forced the Indians to deliuer their Idols, hoping they had beene of Gold, but their Golden hope failing, they forced them againe to redeeme them. Yea, where the Fryers had in one place made the Indians to cast away their Images, the Spaniards brought them some from other places to fell them. In the Prouince of Saint Martha, they had desolated foure hundred and fiftie miles of Land. The Bishop wrote to the King, that the people called the Spaniards Deuils, or Yares, for their Diabolicall practices; and thought the Law, God, and King of the Christians had beene authors of this crueltie.
The like they did in the Kingdome of Venezuela, destroying foure or fiue Millions, and out of that firme Land, carried to the Ilands for slaues at times, in seuenteene yeers, a Million of people.  
But why doe I longer trace them in their bloudy steps; seeing our Authour that relates much more then I, yet protesteth that it was a thousand times worse. Or what should I tell their sparing (...) persons? plucking the child from the brest, to quarter it to his Dogs? Torturing Kings with new deuices, borrowed eyther from the Inquisition, or from Hell? Cutting off the nose^ ^nd hands of men and women, that liued in peace with them? Selling the Father, Mother, Child, to diuers places and persons? Lying with the women (as one of them bragged) that being with childe, they might yeeld more money in the sale? How was Nature become degenerate in these prodigious monsters? Euen the nature of things might bee abashed with the sense of this vnnaturall senselesnesse. The Tygre would but deuoure his prey, and not curiously torment it; the Lion sometimes spares it; nay, their Dogges haue  sometime beene lesse dogged, then their doggish Deuillish Masters. How may wee admire that long suffering of God, that rained not a floud of waters, as in Noahs time; or of fire, as in Lots, or of stones, as in Iosuas; or some vengeance from Heauen vpon these models of Hell? And how could Hell forbeare swallowing such prepared morsels, exceeding the beastlinesse of beasts, inhmanitie of wonted Tyrants, and Deuillishnesse, if it were possible, of the Deuils? But these you will say wereNulla fidei pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Lucan. Souldiers: let vs leaue the Campe, and looke to their Temples.
There perhaps you shall see their Priests reading, praying, and (this they most glory of) preaching, to conuert the Indians by their word and workes. Aske Colmenero, a Priest of Saint Martha, who being asked what hee taught the Indians, said that hee deuoted them  with curses to the Deuill, and this sufficed, if he said to them, Per signin Santin Cruces. You haue heard what good Diuinitie the Dominican preached to Atabaliba King of Peru (which
 wanted not her wants of Millions by their cruelties, as well as the former.) They teach them (saithAcost. de Pr^c. Ind. sal. l. 4. c. 4. Acosta) a few Prayers in the Spanish Tongue, which they vnderstand not; and they which are more painfull, a Catechisme without explanation.
Their teaching is but a iest and shadow to get mony: they follow dicing, hunting, whooring; in so much that Baptisme is scorned, and the Indians are forced to it against their wil^: and a sincere andIo. Metall. Seq. praefat. in Osor. vpright Iudge was wont to say, that if hee came into Spaine, hee would perswade the King to send no more Priests into America; such is their dissolutenesse. They had then indeed three Archbishopricks; that of Dominico, which had sixe Suffragane Bishops, the second of Mexico, which had 7. the third of Los Reyes, to which were subiect three  Bishops: yet these teach the people vices, by their practice and ill example; insomuch that the Indians (sayth Casas) are of opinion, that the King of Spaine (which hath such subiects, as the Spaniards shew themselues) is himselfe most cruell, and liues on mans flesh; and that of all Gods, the God of the Christians is the worst, which hath so bad seruants; longing for their owne Gods, of whom they neuer receiued such ill, as now by this of the Christians. The Spaniards cannot endure the Indians to heare a Sermon, thinking it makes them idle (as Pharaoh saidExod. 5.8.17. of the Israelites) and captious: they learne them Vsury, lying, swearing, blasphemie, and things repugnant to their nature. Thus did a CaciqueBenzo, l. 2. c. 16 describe a Christian to Benzo, by the vnchristian course of the Spaniards. Christians! (sayth he, looking Benzo on the face) what are Christians? They imperiously demand Maiz, Hony, Silke, Rayment, an Indian  woman to lye with them; they call for Gold and Siluer, they will not worke; are Gamesters, Dicers, Wicked, Blasphemers, Backbiters, Quarrellers: and concluded that Christians could not be good. Benzo said, that euill Christians did such things, not the good ones: hee replyed, Where are those good, for I neuer saw any but bad? Hee was seuenty yeeres old, and spake Spanish perfectly. Benzo sayth, that they would not looke on the Christians, but curse them and as before is said, called themViracochie. Sea-froth. Hee being very inquisitiue to see what they, thought of our Faith, reporteth, that some of them taking a piece of Gold, will say, Loe, heere the Christians God: for this they kill vs and one another; for this they play, blaspheme, curse, steale, and doe all manner of villanies.Cap. 18. A Franciscan publikely said, that there was neyther Priest, Monke, nor Bishop, good in all India: and the Priests themselues  will say, they came thither for gaine. A Caciques Sonne which was towardly in his youth, and proued after dissolute, being asked the reason thereof, said, Since I was a Christian, I haue learned to sweare in varietie, to dice, to lye, to swagger; and now I want nothing but a Concubine (which I meane to haue shortly) to make me a compleate Christian. These indeed are the Miracles that the Spaniards worke in the Indies, sayth our Author. I asked an Indian once if he were a Christian; he againe asked me, if hee should be the Bishops Groome a doozen yeeres to keepe his Mule. Others of the Indians, saue a little washing and some cold Ceremonies, know nothing of our Religion.
You haue heard what Commerce and conference many of them were wont to haue with the Deuill: andVid. ap. Hak. how the Spaniards haue taught them, now to scarre him away with the  signe of the Crosse. And this is the report of a certaine Spanish Treatise of Prelates, that the Deuill is now frayed away with the presence of the holy Sac^ament of the Eucharist, and of the holy Crosse: weapons spirituall in pretence, carnall in the inuention, but neither preuayling like the spirituall which2. Cor. 10.4. Paul mentions, nor effecting so much as some sayZanch. de Op. Dei, p. 1. of those which are indeed carnall and wholly materiall: Yea these thus vsed (with deniall of the power of the Crosse and godlinesse) are the Scepters of his Empire amongst them. And for those carnall weapons which Paul disclaymed, the Spaniards doe not onely acknowledge, but glory off. NunnoAp. Ramus. vol. 3. di Gusman auerreth in a writing to the Emperor, that howsoeuer some find fault with their wars vpon the Indians so to bring them to the faith, yet he accounts it a most worthy and holy work, and of so great merit, that in the seruice of God none can be greter.
 The Indians haue liued at more quiet with the Spaniards, since the King proclamed them free; yet still hate them: and for their Christianitie, FranciscusF. a Vic. Rel. 5 De Indis. a Victoria protesteth, that it doth not appeare to him, that Christian Religion had beene propounded in meete sort to the Indians: Miracles he heard not of, but on the contrarie, scandals, villanies, and many impieties. This is the Preaching and Conuersion the Romists boast of, and gull our European World with musters of their M^racles, and thousands of their Proselytes which we rather pittie then enuie.
How the case is altered, since that new generation of the Ignatian brood hath taught (especially the Spaniards, whose they are, and whom they serue) a better Catholicisme; let ArnauldusArnauld. against the Iesuits. tell you: he sayth, that they haue indeed wrought Miracles amongst Indians: among  which he reckoneth conuerting the Pagans, by butcherly subuerting and rooting them out. In Hispaniola, by keeping the husbands and wiues in diuers workes asunder, the old generation being thus worne out, and a new preuented. In Peru they had publike places of
 torture within the Marches, wherein they might put a thousand at once, by tortures to draw forth confessions of their hidden treasures: such as escaped, hanged themselues in the Mountaynes, and their wiues by them, with their children at their feete. By their Dogs at land they worried them: and in their Pearle-fishing exposed them to the rauening Sharkes, themselues more dogged and sharking then the brute creatures; by fire and Sword consuming 20. Millions of the people, I would giue the Deuill his due, and therefore would not ascribe all this to those later Locusts, the Iesuits (who are yet accounted the most cunning and zealous Architects, in setting vp the roofe of that aspiring Spanish Monarchie) these and the like bloudie foundations notwithstanding; and therefore may be called Accessories after. As for the Spaniards, we see them by testimonie of their owne, accused of the same  things. And how the Ignatians wash their hands not from, (but in) bloud, our Europe can testifie.
What Deuill brought into America the Inquisition (his faire Daughter much resembling his accursed presence) I know not: our CountrimenMiles Phil. Ioh. Hort. ap. Hak. Philips, Hortop, and others, knew it to their cost. But what should we speake of the Spanish crueltie to others? Looke on their dealing with each other in ciuill broyles: thus dealt they with Columbus, rewarding him with Chaines, and sending him Prisoner to Spaine by that way which he first of all, and for Spaine had discouered. What Roldanus and his rebellious faction did in Hispaniola, and Vaschus in the Continent, Martyr relateth. But the bloudiest butcheries passed in Peru: where Couetousnesse, which before had ioyned, now diuorced the hearts of Pizarro and Almagro; and  after that, that neerer coniunction of the head and body of Almagro,See Gomara, Apollonius, Benzo. etc. of these ciuill warres in Peru. reuenged in the persons of all the Pizarri, which againe retorted the like vengeance vpon the Almagrists; their Ghosts seeming, or some hellish furies rather, to be loosed on that Peruuian stage, and to haue brought like mischiefes to the beholders and actors in this Tragedie. Vengeance seemed to haue broken forth of Atabalibas Tombe, armed with Sword, fire, halters, chaines; yea the Spaniards themselues offered themselues her officious Vassals, to become cruell Executors of her bloudy Will, in mutuall executions vpon themselues. The awfull names of Vice-royes, Gouernours, and Captaines, were no lesse subiected to imprisonment and death, then the poorest Souldier. But for these ciuill vnciuill cruelties amongst themselues, they require a good Orator to describe them: and those former tyrannies vpon the Indians, are  beyond all Oratory and description. Thunders from Heauen had need be the voice to vtter such Hellish and vnheard-of Massacres; Deuils from Hell were fittest Scribes, with the fierie Characters of their infernall work-houses to register them; the reading whereof might astonish the sense of the Reader, amaze his reason, exceed his faith, and fill his heart with horrour and vncouth passions. For mee; I want fit words to paint them in their blacke colours: my Hand with reluctation trembleth at the writing: my Tongue faltereth in the speaking, and wholly I seeme to my selfe surprized with distraction, and not to bee my selfe, whiles the view of this Spanish Medusa transformeth mee into a stone: the rather, when I thinke such should our English Conuersion haue beene, if in that dismall yeere 1588. England had as well succeeded to them as the Indies: or if since, our Catholike Preachers had preuayled in their  Powder-proiects,Powder-treason. in the yeere 1605. Who for a Temple chose a Vault, that their workes of darknesse might be done in the darke, and their Work-house might be neerer to Hell, thence to borrow at hand supplies of Deuillish deuices, and in neerer familiaritie to consult with the Deuill. For words, they had prepared a Sulphurous breath, the smoke whereof might darken the Heauens; the fire might rent the trembling and ashonished Earth; the noyse might make the hearers past hearing, and being together. Once, those Hellish Cerberi by such preaching had intended there to haue opened the mouth of Hell vpon vs, which should haue swallowed our Lawes, our Religion, our Sun, Moone, and Morning Star (the King, Queene, and Prince) Our fairest Skie of fixed and well ordered lights, then shining in their greatest splendour of Parliament-brightnesse. The Giants of old were said to bee the sonnes of the  Earth; but these, as they were engendred of Earth, so had they incestuously violated that their Mother (whether you vnderstand it in a literall or mysticall sense) and begotten in her wombe this Hel-monster of their bloudie Catholicisme; they had designed the time of her Trauell, and themselues would haue beene the Mid-wiues; the Deuils had bidden themselues as Gossips, and at that opening of the Earths wombe in her fierie trauell, would haue sent that way into the World (to attend the Babe) all the black-guard of Hell, Treason, Superstition, Atheisme, Ignorance, Fire, Sword, and all confusion, in a reuolution of a worse Chaos then that b Tohu and Bohu of old could haue effected.The words of Moses, Gen. 1. interpreted, without forme and void. Then should it haue beene no maruell, if Rome, France, Spaine, or any other had exercised tyrannie or crueltie, seeing all must haue come short of the first crueltie, which our English Catholikes had executed, to open the floudgates of bloud vnto them. And all this was the Catholike cause, and these the  Preachers, or the Vshers rather to the Preachers (for the Iesuits will bee angry if wee take
 from them their bloudie priuiledge of this new Catholicisme) which the Deuill (till now he is an older and cunninger Serpent) had neuer learned himselfe, nor could learne others, before he had gotten Ignatian Vshers in his Hellish Schoole.
But whither is your Pilgrime transported? Friend, I draw neere my Port, and leauing America behind mee, still red with this bloud; now also hauing England in sight, which (as from a greater height) was neere to a more dangerous fall: and in this subiect, which is of the Spanish cruelties (not written in hatred of their Nation, because they are Spaniards) but of their Pseudo-catholike Religion, vnder shew whereof, they there did, and heere would haue executed those butcheries: and for thankfulnesse to God for our later deliuerance,  of which the time when I relate these things (being the returne of that very Day,Nouember 5. on this day this in the fi^st Impression came in due order (without any special appointm^nt) to the Presse. wherein those things should haue beene effected) iustly demandeth my testimony: I haue thus told out my Storie.
And now, me thinkes, I see the shoares of England, from which my lingring Pilgrimage hath long detayned me: I heare the Bels, and see the Bon-fires, with publike acclamations of thankfulnesse for that Deliuerance, all singing their Hallelu-iahs, and saying,Psal. 118.24. This is the Day which the Lord hath made, wee will reioyce and bee glad in it. And now I see a better sight then all my Pilgrimage could yeeld; Christian Churches, without Heathenish, Iewish, or Antichristian pollutions: a Royall King, truely entituled Defender of the Faith: a Learned Clergie; wise and Honourable Counsellers; peaceable and loyall Commons: in a word; England  presents it selfe to mine eyes, representing to my mind a Map of Heauen and Earth, in the freedome of Bodie and Soule, yea where our subiection and seruice is Freedome (which I haue not else-where found in all my Perambulation of the World) I feele my selfe herewith rauished, and in a ioyfull extasie cannot but crie out:Matth. 17.4. It is good for vs to bee heere, in the true Church and Suburbs of the true Heauen:) Heere then, Reader, let me rest me, till I see whether thy kind acceptation of this, will make mee willing to accept another and neerer (but harder European) Pilgrimage.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.

